<doc id="748760" wikidata="Q27654" url="?curid=748760" title="History of philosophy">
<text>The history of philosophy is the systematic study of the development of philosophical thought. It focuses on philosophy as rational inquiry based on argumentation, but some theorists also include myth, religious traditions, and proverbial lore.

Western philosophy originated with an inquiry into the fundamental nature of the cosmos in Ancient Greece. Subsequent philosophical developments covered a wide range of topics including the nature of reality and the mind, how people should act, and how to arrive at knowledge. The medieval period was focused more on theology. The Renaissance period saw a renewed interest in Ancient Greek philosophy and the emergence of humanism. The modern period was characterized by an increased focus on how philosophical and scientific knowledge is created. Its new ideas were used during the Enlightenment period to challenge traditional authorities. Influential developments in the 19th and 20th centuries included German idealism, pragmatism, positivism, formal logic, linguistic analysis, phenomenology, existentialism, and postmodernism.

Arabic–Persian philosophy was strongly influenced by Ancient Greek philosophers. It had its peak period during the Islamic Golden Age. One of its key topics was the relation between reason and revelation as two compatible ways of arriving at the truth. Avicenna developed a comprehensive philosophical system that synthesized Islamic faith and Greek philosophy. After the Islamic Golden Age, the influence of philosophical inquiry waned, partly due to Al-Ghazali&#x27;s critique of philosophy. In the 17th century, Mulla Sadra developed a metaphysical system based on mysticism. Islamic modernism emerged in the 19th and 20th centuries as an attempt to reconcile traditional Islamic doctrines with modernity.

Indian philosophy is characterized by its combined interest in the nature of reality, the ways of arriving at knowledge, and the spiritual question of how to reach enlightenment. Its roots are in the religious scriptures known as the Vedas. Subsequent Indian philosophy is often divided into orthodox schools, which are closely associated with the teachings of the Vedas, and heterodox schools, like Buddhism and Jainism. Influential schools based on them include the Hindu schools of Advaita Vedanta and Navya-Nyāya as well as the Buddhist schools of Madhyamaka and Yogācāra. In the modern period, the exchange between Indian and Western thought led various Indian philosophers to develop comprehensive systems. They aimed to unite and harmonize diverse philosophical and religious schools of thought.

Central topics in Chinese philosophy were right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation. In early Chinese philosophy, Confucianism explored moral virtues and how they lead to harmony in society while Daoism focused on the relation between humans and nature. Later developments include the introduction and transformation of Buddhist teachings and the emergence of the schools of Xuanxue and Neo-Confucianism. The modern period in Chinese philosophy was characterized by its encounter with Western philosophy, specifically with Marxism. Other influential traditions in the history of philosophy were Japanese philosophy, Latin American philosophy, and African philosophy.

== Definition and related disciplines ==

The history of philosophy is the field of inquiry that studies the historical development of philosophical thought. It aims to provide a systematic and chronological exposition of philosophical concepts and doctrines, as well as the philosophers who conceived them and the schools of thought to which they belong. It is not merely a collection of theories but attempts to show how these theories are interconnected. For example, some schools of thought build on earlier theories, while others reject them and offer alternative explanations. Purely mystical and religious traditions are often excluded from the history of philosophy if their claims are not based on rational inquiry and argumentation. However, some theorists treat the topic broadly, including the philosophical aspects of traditional worldviews, religious myths, and proverbial lore.

The history of philosophy has both a historical and a philosophical component. The historical component is concerned with how philosophical thought has unfolded throughout the ages. It explores which philosophers held particular views and how they were influenced by their social and cultural contexts. The philosophical component, on the other hand, evaluates the studied theories for their truth and validity. It reflects on the arguments presented for these positions and assesses their hidden assumptions, making the philosophical heritage accessible to a contemporary audience while evaluating its continued relevance. Some historians of philosophy focus primarily on the historical component, viewing the history of philosophy as part of the broader discipline of intellectual history. Others emphasize the philosophical component, arguing that the history of philosophy transcends intellectual history because its interest is not exclusively historical. It is controversial to what extent the history of philosophy can be understood as a discipline distinct from philosophy itself. Some theorists contend that the history of philosophy is an integral part of philosophy. For example, Neo-Kantians like Wilhelm Windelband argue that philosophy is essentially historical and that it is not possible to understand a philosophical position without understanding how it emerged.

Closely related to the history of philosophy is the historiography of philosophy, which examines the methods used by historians of philosophy. It is also interested in how dominant opinions in this field have changed over time. Different methods and approaches are used to study the history of philosophy. Some historians focus primarily on philosophical theories, emphasizing their claims and ongoing relevance rather than their historical evolution. Another approach sees the history of philosophy as an evolutionary process, assuming clear progress from one period to the next, with earlier theories being refined or replaced by more advanced later theories. Other historians seek to understand past philosophical theories as products of their time, focusing on the positions accepted by past philosophers and the reasons behind them, often without concern for their relevance today. These historians study how the historical context and the philosopher&#x27;s biography influenced their philosophical outlook.

Another important methodological feature is the use of periodization, which involves dividing the history of philosophy into distinct periods, each corresponding to one or several philosophical tendencies prevalent during that historical timeframe. Traditionally, the history of philosophy has focused primarily on Western philosophy. However, in a broader sense, it includes many non-Western traditions such as Arabic–Persian philosophy, Indian philosophy, and Chinese philosophy.

== Western ==

Western philosophy refers to the philosophical traditions and ideas associated with the geographical region and cultural heritage of the Western world. It originated in Ancient Greece and subsequently expanded to the Roman Empire, later spreading to Western Europe and eventually reaching other regions, including North America, Latin America, and Australia. Spanning over 2,500 years, Western philosophy began in the 6th century BCE and continues to evolve today.

=== Ancient ===

Western philosophy originated in Ancient Greece in the 6th century BCE. This period is conventionally considered to have ended in 529 CE when the Platonic Academy and other philosophical schools in Athens were closed by order of the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I, who sought to suppress non-Christian teachings.

====Presocratic====

The first period of Ancient Greek philosophy is known as Presocratic philosophy, which lasted until about the mid-4th century BCE. Studying Presocratic philosophy can be challenging because many of the original texts have only survived in fragments and often have to be reconstructed based on quotations found in later works.

A key innovation of Presocratic philosophy was its attempt to provide rational explanations for the cosmos as a whole. This approach contrasted with the prevailing Greek mythology, which offered theological interpretations—such as the myth of Uranus and Gaia—to emphasize the roles of gods and goddesses who continued to be worshipped even as Greek philosophy evolved. The Presocratic philosophers were among the first to challenge traditional Greek theology, seeking instead to provide empirical theories to explain how the world came into being and why it functions as it does.

Thales (c. 624–545 BCE), often regarded as the first philosopher, sought to describe the cosmos in terms of a first principle, or &quot;arche&quot;. He identified water as this primal source of all things. Anaximander (c. 610–545 BCE) proposed a more abstract explanation, suggesting that the eternal substance responsible for the world&#x27;s creation lies beyond human perception. He referred to this &quot;arche&quot; as the apeiron, meaning &quot;the boundless&quot;.

Heraclitus (c. 540–480 BCE) viewed the world as being in a state of constant flux, stating that one cannot step into the same river twice. He also emphasized the role of logos, which he saw as an underlying order governing both the inner self and the external world. In contrast, Parmenides (c. 515–450 BCE) argued that true reality is unchanging, eternal, and indivisible. His student Zeno of Elea (c. 490–430 BCE) formulated several paradoxes to support this idea, asserting that motion and change are illusions, as illustrated by his paradox of Achilles and the Tortoise.

Another significant theory from this period was the atomism of Democritus (c. 460–370 BCE), who posited that reality is composed of indivisible particles called atoms. Other notable Presocratic philosophers include Anaximenes, Pythagoras, Xenophanes, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Leucippus, and the sophists, such as Protagoras and Gorgias.

====Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle====
The philosophy of Socrates (469–399 BCE) and Plato (427–347 BCE) built on Presocratic philosophy but also introduced significant changes in focus and methodology. Socrates did not write anything himself, and his influence is largely due to the impact he made on his contemporaries, particularly through his approach to philosophical inquiry. This method, often conducted in the form of Socratic dialogues, begins with simple questions to explore a topic and critically reflect on underlying ideas and assumptions. Unlike the Presocratics, Socrates was less concerned with metaphysical theories and more focused on moral philosophy. Many of his dialogues explore the question of what it means to lead a good life by examining virtues such as justice, courage, and wisdom. Despite being regarded as a great teacher of ethics, Socrates did not advocate specific moral doctrines. Instead, he aimed to prompt his audience to think for themselves and recognize their own ignorance.

Most of what is known about Socrates comes from the writings of his student Plato. Plato&#x27;s works are presented in the form of dialogues between various philosophers, making it difficult to determine which ideas are Socrates&#x27; and which are Plato&#x27;s own theories. Plato&#x27;s theory of forms asserts that the true nature of reality is found in abstract and eternal forms or ideas, such as the forms of beauty, justice, and goodness. The physical and changeable world of the senses, according to Plato, is merely an imperfect copy of these forms. The theory of forms has had a lasting influence on subsequent views of metaphysics and epistemology. Plato is also considered a pioneer in the field of psychology. He divided the soul into three faculties: reason, spirit, and desire, each responsible for different mental phenomena and interacting in various ways. Plato also made contributions to ethics and political philosophy. Additionally, Plato founded the Academy, which is often considered the first institution of higher education.

Aristotle (384–322 BCE), who began as a student at Plato&#x27;s Academy, became a systematic philosopher whose teachings were transcribed into treatises on various subjects, including the philosophy of nature, metaphysics, logic, and ethics. Aristotle introduced many technical terms in these fields that are still used today. While he accepted Plato&#x27;s distinction between form and matter, he rejected the idea that forms could exist independently of matter, arguing instead that forms and matter are interdependent. This debate became central to the problem of universals, which was discussed by many subsequent philosophers. In metaphysics, Aristotle presented a set of basic categories of being as a framework for classifying and analyzing different aspects of existence. He also introduced the concept of the four causes to explain why change and movement occur in nature. According to his teleological cause, for example, everything in nature has a purpose or goal toward which it moves. Aristotle&#x27;s ethical theory emphasizes that leading a good life involves cultivating virtues to achieve eudaimonia, or human flourishing. In logic, Aristotle codified rules for correct inferences, laying the foundation for formal logic that would influence philosophy for centuries.

====Hellenistic and Roman====
After Aristotle, ancient philosophy saw the rise of broader philosophical movements, such as Epicureanism, Stoicism, and Skepticism, which are collectively known as the Hellenistic schools of thought. These movements primarily focused on fields like ethics, physics, logic, and epistemology. This period began with the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE and had its main influence until the end of the Roman Republic in 31 BCE.

The Epicureans built upon and refined Democritus&#x27;s idea that nature is composed of indivisible atoms. In ethics, they viewed pleasure as the highest good but rejected the notion that luxury and indulgence in sensory pleasures lead to long-term happiness. Instead, they advocated a nuanced form of hedonism, where a simple life characterized by tranquillity was the best way to achieve happiness.

The Stoics rejected this hedonistic outlook, arguing that desires and aversions are obstacles to living in accordance with reason and virtue. To overcome these desires, they advocated self-mastery and an attitude of indifference.

The skeptics focused on how judgments and opinions impact well-being. They argued that dogmatic beliefs lead to emotional disturbances and recommended that people suspend judgments on matters where certainty is unattainable. Some skeptics went further, claiming that this suspension of judgment should apply to all beliefs, suggesting that any form of knowledge is impossible.

The school of Neoplatonism, which emerged in the later part of the ancient period, began in the 3rd century CE and reached its peak by the 6th century CE. Neoplatonism inherited many ideas from Plato and Aristotle, transforming them in creative ways. Its central doctrine posits a transcendent and ineffable entity responsible for all existence, referred to as &quot;the One&quot; or &quot;the Good.&quot; From the One emerges the &quot;Intellect&quot;, which contemplates the One, and this, in turn, gives rise to the &quot;Soul&quot;, which generates the material world. Influential Neoplatonists include Plotinus (204–270 CE) and his student Porphyry (234–305 CE).

=== Medieval ===
The medieval period in Western philosophy began between 400 and 500 CE and ended between 1400 and 1500 CE. A key distinction between this period and earlier philosophical traditions was its emphasis on religious thought. The Christian Emperor Justinian ordered the closure of philosophical schools, such as Plato&#x27;s Academy. As a result, intellectual activity became concentrated within the Church, and diverging from doctrinal orthodoxy was fraught with risks. Due to these developments, some scholars consider this era a &quot;dark age&quot; compared to what preceded and followed it. Central topics during this period included the problem of universals, the nature of God, proofs for the existence of God, and the relationship between reason and faith. The early medieval period was heavily influenced by Plato&#x27;s philosophy, while Aristotelian ideas became dominant later.

Augustine of Hippo (354–430 CE) was deeply influenced by Platonism and utilized this perspective to interpret and explain key concepts and problems within Christian doctrine. He embraced the Neoplatonist idea that God, or the ultimate source, is both good and incomprehensible. This led him to address the problem of evil—specifically, how evil could exist in a world created by a benevolent, all-knowing, and all-powerful God. Augustine&#x27;s explanation centered on the concept of free will, asserting that God granted humans the ability to choose between good and evil, along with the responsibility for those choices. Augustine also made significant contributions in other areas, including arguments for the existence of God, his theory of time, and his just war theory.

Boethius (477–524 CE) had a profound interest in Greek philosophy. He translated many of Aristotle&#x27;s works and sought to integrate and reconcile them with Christian doctrine. Boethius addressed the problem of universals and developed a theory to harmonize Plato&#x27;s and Aristotle&#x27;s views. He proposed that universals exist in the mind without matter in one sense, but also exist within material objects in another sense. This idea influenced subsequent medieval debates on the problem of universals, inspiring nominalists to argue that universals exist only in the mind. Boethius also explored the problem of the trinity, addressing the Christian doctrine of how God can exist as three persons—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—simultaneously.

==== Scholasticism ====

The later part of the medieval period was dominated by scholasticism, a philosophical method heavily influenced by Aristotelian philosophy and characterized by systematic and methodological inquiry. The intensified interest in Aristotle during this period was largely due to the Arabic–Persian tradition, which preserved, translated, and interpreted many of Aristotle&#x27;s works that had been lost in the Western world.

Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109 CE) is often regarded as the father of scholasticism. He viewed reason and faith as complementary, each depending on the other for a fuller understanding. Anselm is best known for his ontological argument for the existence of God, where he defined God as the greatest conceivable being and argued that such a being must exist outside of the mind. He posited that if God existed only in the mind, He would not be the greatest conceivable being, since a being that exists in reality is greater than one that exists only in thought. Peter Abelard (1079–1142) similarly emphasized the harmony between reason and faith, asserting that both emerge from the same divine source and therefore cannot be in contradiction. Abelard was also known for his nominalism, which claimed that universals exist only as mental constructs.

Thomas Aquinas (1224–1274 CE) is often considered the most influential medieval philosopher. Rooted in Aristotelianism, Aquinas developed a comprehensive system of scholastic philosophy that encompassed areas such as metaphysics, theology, ethics, and political theory. Many of his insights were compiled in his seminal work, the Summa Theologiae. A key goal in Aquinas&#x27;s writings was to demonstrate how faith and reason work in harmony. He argued that reason supports and reinforces Christian tenets, but faith in God&#x27;s revelation is still necessary since reason alone cannot comprehend all truths. This is particularly relevant to claims such as the eternality of the world and the intricate relationship between God and His creation. In metaphysics, Aquinas posited that every entity is characterized by two aspects: essence and existence. Understanding a thing involves grasping its essence, which can be done without perceiving whether it exists. However, in the case of God, Aquinas argued that His existence is identical to His essence, making God unique. In ethics, Aquinas held that moral principles are rooted in human nature. He believed that ethics is about pursuing what is good and that humans, as rational beings, have a natural inclination to pursue the Good. In natural theology, Aquinas&#x27;s famous Five Ways are five arguments for the existence of God.

Duns Scotus (1266–1308 CE) engaged critically with many of Aquinas&#x27;s ideas. In metaphysics, Scotus rejected Aquinas&#x27;s claim of a real distinction between essence and existence. Instead, he argued that this distinction is only formal, meaning essence and existence are two aspects of a thing that cannot be separated. Scotus further posited that each individual entity has a unique essence, known as haecceity, which distinguishes it from other entities of the same kind.

William of Ockham (1285–1347 CE) is one of the last scholastic philosophers. He is known for formulating the methodological principle known as Ockham&#x27;s Razor, which is used to choose between competing explanations of the same phenomenon. Ockham&#x27;s Razor states that the simplest explanation, the one that assumes the existence of fewer entities, should be preferred. Ockham employed this principle to argue for nominalism and against realism about universals, contending that nominalism is the simpler explanation since it does not require the assumption of the independent existence of universals.

=== Renaissance ===

The Renaissance period began in the mid-14th century and lasted until the early 17th century. This cultural and intellectual movement originated in Italy and gradually spread to other regions of Western Europe. Key aspects of the Renaissance included a renewed interest in Ancient Greek philosophy and the emergence of humanism, as well as a shift toward scientific inquiry. This represented a significant departure from the medieval period, which had been primarily focused on religious and scholastic traditions. Another notable change was that intellectual activity was no longer as closely tied to the Church as before; most scholars of this period were not clerics.

An important aspect of the resurgence of Ancient Greek philosophy during the Renaissance was a revived enthusiasm for the teachings of Plato. This Renaissance Platonism was still conducted within the framework of Christian theology and often aimed to demonstrate how Plato&#x27;s philosophy was compatible with and could be applied to Christian doctrines. For example, Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) argued that souls form a connection between the realm of Platonic forms and the sensory realm. According to Plato, love can be understood as a ladder leading to higher forms of understanding. Ficino interpreted this concept in an intellectual sense, viewing it as a way to relate to God through the love of knowledge.

The revival of Ancient Greek philosophy during the Renaissance was not limited to Platonism; it also encompassed other schools of thought, such as Skepticism, Epicureanism, and Stoicism. This revival was closely associated with the rise of Renaissance humanism, a human-centered worldview that highly valued the academic disciplines studying human society and culture. This shift in perspective also involved seeing humans as genuine individuals. Although Renaissance humanism was not primarily a philosophical movement, it brought about many social and cultural changes that affected philosophical activity. These changes were also accompanied by an increased interest in political philosophy. Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527) argued that a key responsibility of rulers is to ensure stability and security. He believed they should govern effectively to benefit the state as a whole, even if harsh circumstances require the use of force and ruthless actions. In contrast, Thomas More (1478–1535) envisioned an ideal society characterized by communal ownership, egalitarianism, and devotion to public service.

The Renaissance also witnessed various developments in the philosophy of nature and science, which helped lay the groundwork for the scientific revolution. One such development was the emphasis on empirical observation in scientific inquiry. Another was the idea that mathematical explanations should be employed to understand these observations. Francis Bacon (1561–1626 CE) is often seen as a transitional figure between the Renaissance and modernity. He sought to revolutionize logic and scientific inquiry with his work Novum Organum, which was intended to replace Aristotle&#x27;s influential treatises on logic. Bacon&#x27;s work discussed, for example, the role of inductive reasoning in empirical inquiry, which involves deriving general laws from numerous individual observations. Another key transitional figure was Galileo Galilei (1564–1642 CE), who played a crucial role in the Copernican Revolution by asserting that the Sun, rather than the Earth, is at the center of the Solar System.
=== Early modern ===
Early modern philosophy encompasses the 17th and 18th centuries. The philosophers of this period are traditionally divided into empiricists and rationalists. However, contemporary historians argue that this division is not a strict dichotomy but rather a matter of varying degrees. These schools share a common goal of establishing a clear, rigorous, and systematic method of inquiry. This philosophical emphasis on method mirrored the advances occurring simultaneously during the scientific revolution.

Empiricism and rationalism differ concerning the type of method they advocate. Empiricism focuses on sensory experience as the foundation of knowledge. In contrast, rationalism emphasizes reason—particularly the principles of non-contradiction and sufficient reason—and the belief in innate knowledge. While the emphasis on method was already foreshadowed in Renaissance thought, it only came to full prominence during the early modern period.

The second half of this period saw the emergence of the Enlightenment movement, which used these philosophical advances to challenge traditional authorities while promoting progress, individual freedom, and human rights.

==== Empiricism ====
Empiricism in the early modern period was mainly associated with British philosophy. John Locke (1632–1704) is often considered the father of empiricism. In his book &quot;An Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot;, he rejected the notion of innate knowledge and argued that all knowledge is derived from experience. He asserted that the mind is a blank slate at birth, relying entirely on sensory experience to acquire ideas. Locke distinguished between primary qualities, which he believed are inherent in external objects and exist independently of any observer, and secondary qualities, which are the powers of objects to produce sensations in observers.

George Berkeley (1685–1753) was strongly influenced by Locke but proposed a more radical form of empiricism. He developed a form of idealism, giving primacy to perceptions and ideas over material objects. Berkeley argued that objects only exist insofar as they are perceived by the mind, leading to the conclusion that there is no reality independent of perception.

David Hume (1711–1776) also upheld the empiricist principle that knowledge is derived from sensory experience. However, he took this idea further by arguing that it is impossible to know with certainty that one event causes another. Hume&#x27;s reasoning was that the connection between cause and effect is not directly perceivable. Instead, the mind observes consistent patterns between events and develops a habit of expecting certain outcomes based on prior experiences.

The empiricism promoted by Hume and other philosophers had a significant impact on the development of the scientific method, particularly in its emphasis on observation, experimentation, and rigorous testing.

==== Rationalism ====
Another dominant school of thought in this period was rationalism. René Descartes (1596–1650) played a pivotal role in its development. He sought to establish absolutely certain knowledge and employed methodological doubt, questioning all his beliefs to find an indubitable foundation for knowledge. He discovered this foundation in the statement &quot;I think, therefore I am.&quot; Descartes used various rationalist principles, particularly the focus on deductive reasoning, to build a comprehensive philosophical system upon this foundation. His philosophy is rooted in substance dualism, positing that the mind and body are distinct, independent entities that coexist.

The rationalist philosophy of Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677) placed even greater emphasis on deductive reasoning. He developed and employed the so-called &quot;geometrical method&quot; to construct his philosophical system. This method begins with a small set of self-evident axioms and proceeds to derive a comprehensive philosophical system through deductive reasoning. Unlike Descartes, Spinoza arrived at a metaphysical monism, asserting that there is only one substance in the universe. Another influential rationalist was Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716). His principle of sufficient reason posits that everything has a reason or explanation. Leibniz used this principle to develop his metaphysical system known as monadology.

=== Enlightenment and other late modern philosophy ===
The latter half of the modern period saw the emergence of the cultural and intellectual movement known as the Enlightenment. This movement drew on both empiricism and rationalism to challenge traditional authorities and promote the pursuit of knowledge. It advocated for individual freedom and held an optimistic view of progress and the potential for societal improvement. Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) was one of the central thinkers of the Enlightenment. He emphasized the role of reason in understanding the world and used it to critique dogmatism and blind obedience to authority. Kant sought to synthesize both empiricism and rationalism within a comprehensive philosophical system. His transcendental idealism explored how the mind, through its pre-established categories, shapes human experience of reality. In ethics, he developed a deontological moral system based on the categorical imperative, which defines universal moral duties. Other important Enlightenment philosophers included Voltaire (1694–1778), Montesquieu (1689–1755), and Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778).

Political philosophy during this period was shaped by Thomas Hobbes&#x27;s (1588–1679) work, particularly his book &quot;Leviathan&quot;. Hobbes had a pessimistic view of the natural state of humans, arguing that it involves a war of all against all. According to Hobbes, the purpose of civil society is to avoid this state of chaos. This is achieved through a social contract in which individuals cede some of their rights to a central and immensely powerful authority in exchange for protection from external threats. Jean-Jacques Rousseau also theorized political life using the concept of a social contract, but his political outlook differed significantly due to his more positive assessment of human nature. Rousseau&#x27;s views led him to advocate for democracy.

=== 19th century ===
The 19th century was a rich and diverse period in philosophy, during which the term &quot;philosophy&quot; acquired the distinctive meaning it holds today: a discipline distinct from the empirical sciences and mathematics. A rough division between two types of philosophical approaches in this period can be drawn. Some philosophers, like those associated with German and British idealism, sought to provide comprehensive and all-encompassing systems. In contrast, other thinkers, such as Bentham, Mill, and the American pragmatists, focused on more specific questions related to particular fields, such as ethics and epistemology.

Among the most influential philosophical schools of this period was German idealism, a tradition inaugurated by Immanuel Kant, who argued that the conceptual activity of the subject is always partially constitutive of experience and knowledge. Subsequent German idealists critiqued what they saw as theoretical problems with Kant&#x27;s dualisms and the contradictory status of the thing-in-itself. They sought a single unifying principle as the foundation of all reality. Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762–1814) identified this principle as the activity of the subject or transcendental ego, which posits both itself and its opposite. Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling (1775–1854) rejected this focus on the ego, instead proposing a more abstract principle, referred to as the absolute or the world-soul, as the foundation of both consciousness and nature.

The philosophy of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) is often described as the culmination of this tradition. Hegel reconstructed a philosophical history in which the measure of progress is the actualization of freedom. He applied this not only to political life but also to philosophy, which he claimed aims for self-knowledge characterized by the identity of subject and object. His term for this is &quot;the absolute&quot; because such knowledge—achieved through art, religion, and philosophy—is entirely self-conditioned.

Further influential currents of thought in this period included historicism and neo-Kantianism. Historicists such as Johann Gottfried Herder emphasized the validity and unique nature of historical knowledge of individual events, contrasting this with the universal knowledge of eternal truths. Neo-Kantianism was a diverse philosophical movement that revived and reinterpreted Kant&#x27;s ideas.

British idealism developed later in the 19th century and was strongly influenced by Hegel. For example, Francis Herbert Bradley (1846–1924) argued that reality is an all-inclusive totality of being, identified with absolute spirit. He is also famous for claiming that external relations do not exist.

Karl Marx (1818–1883) was another philosopher inspired by Hegel&#x27;s ideas. He applied them to the historical development of society based on class struggle. However, he rejected the idealistic outlook in favor of dialectical materialism, which posits that economics rather than spirit is the basic force behind historical development.

Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860) proposed that the underlying principle of all reality is the will, which he saw as an irrational and blind force. Influenced by Indian philosophy, he developed a pessimistic outlook, concluding that the expressions of the will ultimately lead to suffering. He had a profound influence on Friedrich Nietzsche, who saw the will to power as a fundamental driving force in nature. Nietzsche used this concept to critique many religious and philosophical ideas, arguing that they were disguised attempts to wield power rather than expressions of pure spiritual achievement.

In the field of ethics, Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) developed the philosophy of utilitarianism. He argued that whether an action is right depends on its utility, i.e., on the pleasure and pain it produces. The goal of actions, according to Bentham, is to maximize happiness or to produce &quot;the greatest good for the greatest number.&quot; His student John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) became one of the foremost proponents of utilitarianism, further refining the theory by asserting that what matters is not just the quantity of pleasure and pain, but also their quality.

Toward the end of the 19th century, the philosophy of pragmatism emerged in the United States. Pragmatists evaluate philosophical ideas based on their usefulness and effectiveness in guiding action. Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) is usually considered the founder of pragmatism. He held that the meaning of ideas and theories lies in their practical and observable consequences. For example, to say that an object is hard means that, on a practical level, it is difficult to break, pierce, or scratch. Peirce argued that a true belief is a stable belief that works, even if it must be revised in the future. His pragmatist philosophy gained wider popularity through his lifelong friend William James (1842–1910), who applied Peirce&#x27;s ideas to psychology. James argued that the meaning of an idea consists of its experiential consequences and rejected the notion that experiences are isolated events, instead proposing the concept of a stream of consciousness.

=== 20th century ===
Philosophy in the 20th century is usually divided into two main traditions: analytic philosophy and continental philosophy. Analytic philosophy was dominant in English-speaking countries and emphasized clarity and precise language. It often employed tools like formal logic and linguistic analysis to examine traditional philosophical problems in fields such as metaphysics, epistemology, science, and ethics. Continental philosophy was more prominent in European countries, particularly in Germany and France. It is an umbrella term without a precisely established meaning and covers philosophical movements like phenomenology, hermeneutics, existentialism, deconstruction, critical theory, and psychoanalytic theory.

Interest in academic philosophy increased rapidly in the 20th century, as evidenced by the growing number of philosophical publications and the increasing number of philosophers working at academic institutions. Another change during this period was the increased presence of female philosophers. However, despite this progress, women remained underrepresented in the field.

Some schools of thought in 20th-century philosophy do not clearly fall into either analytic or continental traditions. Pragmatism evolved from its 19th-century roots through scholars like Richard Rorty (1931–2007) and Hilary Putnam (1926–2016). It was applied to new fields of inquiry, such as epistemology, politics, education, and the social sciences.

The 20th century also saw the rise of feminism in philosophy, which studies and critiques traditional assumptions and power structures that disadvantage women. Prominent feminist philosophers include Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986), Martha Nussbaum (1947–present), and Judith Butler (1956–present).

==== Analytic ====

George Edward Moore (1873–1958) was one of the founding figures of analytic philosophy. He emphasized the importance of common sense and used it to argue against radical forms of philosophical skepticism. Moore was particularly influential in the field of ethics, where he claimed that our actions should promote the good. He argued that the concept of &quot;good&quot; cannot be defined in terms of other concepts and that whether something is good can be known through intuition.

Gottlob Frege (1848–1925) was another pioneer of the analytic tradition. His development of modern symbolic logic had a significant impact on subsequent philosophers, even outside the field of logic. Frege employed these advances in his attempt to prove that arithmetic can be reduced to logic, a thesis known as logicism. The logicist project of Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) was even more ambitious since it included not only arithmetic but also geometry and analysis. Although their attempts were very fruitful, they did not fully succeed, as additional axioms beyond those of logic are required. In the philosophy of language, Russell&#x27;s theory of definite descriptions was influential. It explains how to make sense of paradoxical expressions like &quot;the present King of France,&quot; which do not refer to any existing entity. Russell also developed the theory of logical atomism, which was further refined by his student Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951). According to Wittgenstein&#x27;s early philosophy, as presented in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, the world is made up of a multitude of atomic facts. The world and language have the same logical structure, making it possible to represent these facts using propositions. Despite the influence of this theory, Wittgenstein came to reject it in his later philosophy. He argued instead that language consists of a variety of games, each with its own rules and conventions. According to this view, meaning is determined by usage and not by referring to facts.

Logical positivism developed in parallel to these ideas and was strongly influenced by empiricism. It is primarily associated with the Vienna Circle and focused on logical analysis and empirical verification. One of its prominent members was Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970), who defended the verification principle. This principle claims that a statement is meaningless if it cannot be verified through sensory experience or the laws of logic. Carnap used this principle to reject the discipline of metaphysics in general. However, this principle was later criticized by Carnap&#x27;s student Willard Van Orman Quine (1908–2000) as one of the dogmas of empiricism. A core idea of Quine&#x27;s philosophy was naturalism, which he understood as the claim that the natural sciences provide the most reliable framework for understanding the world. He used this outlook to argue that mathematical entities have real existence because they are indispensable to science.

Wittgenstein&#x27;s later philosophy formed part of ordinary language philosophy, which analyzed everyday language to understand philosophical concepts and problems. The theory of speech acts by John Langshaw Austin (1911–1960) was an influential early contribution to this field. Other prominent figures in this tradition include Gilbert Ryle (1900–1976) and Sir Peter Frederick Strawson (1919–2006). The shift in emphasis on the role of language is known as the linguistic turn.

Richard Mervyn Hare (1919–2002) and John Leslie Mackie (1917–1981) were influential ethical philosophers in the analytic tradition, while John Rawls (1921–2002) and Robert Nozick (1938–2002) made significant contributions to political philosophy.

==== Continental ====


Phenomenology was an important early movement in the tradition of continental philosophy. It aimed to provide an unprejudiced description of human experience from a subjective perspective, using this description as a method to analyze and evaluate philosophical problems across various fields such as epistemology, ontology, philosophy of mind, and ethics. The founder of phenomenology was Edmund Husserl (1859–1938), who emphasized the importance of suspending all antecedent beliefs to achieve a pure and unbiased description of experience as it unfolds. His student, Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), adopted this method into an approach he termed fundamental ontology. Heidegger explored how human pre-understanding of reality shapes the experience of and engagement with the world. He argued that pure description alone is insufficient for phenomenology and should be accompanied by interpretation to uncover and avoid possible misunderstandings. This line of thought was further developed by his student Hans-Georg Gadamer (1900–2002), who held that human pre-understanding is dynamic and evolves through the process of interpretation. Gadamer explained this process as a fusion of horizons, which involves an interplay between the interpreter&#x27;s current horizon and the horizon of the object being interpreted.

Another influential aspect of Heidegger&#x27;s philosophy is his focus on how humans care about the world. He explored how this concern is related to phenomena such as anxiety and authenticity. These ideas influenced Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980), who developed the philosophy of existentialism. Existentialists hold that humans are fundamentally free and responsible for their choices. They also assert that life lacks a predetermined purpose, and the act of choosing one&#x27;s path without such a guiding purpose can lead to anxiety. The idea that the universe is inherently meaningless was especially emphasized by absurdist thinkers like Albert Camus (1913–1960).

Critical Theory emerged in the first half of the 20th century within the Frankfurt School of philosophy. It is a form of social philosophy that aims to provide a reflective assessment and critique of society and culture. Unlike traditional theory, its goal is not only to understand and explain but also to bring about practical change, particularly to emancipate people and liberate them from domination and oppression. Key themes of Critical Theory include power, inequality, social justice, and the role of ideology. Notable figures include Theodor Adorno (1903–1969), Max Horkheimer (1895–1973), and Herbert Marcuse (1898–1979).

The second half of 20th-century continental philosophy was marked by a critical attitude toward many traditional philosophical concepts and assumptions, such as truth, objectivity, universal explanations, reason, and progress. This outlook is sometimes labeled &quot;postmodernism&quot;. Michel Foucault (1926–1984) examined the relationship between knowledge and power, arguing that knowledge is always shaped by power. Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) developed the philosophy of deconstruction, which aims to expose hidden contradictions within philosophical texts by subverting the oppositions they rely on, such as the opposition between presence and absence or between subject and object. Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995) drew on psychoanalytic theory to critique and reimagine traditional concepts like desire, subjectivity, identity, and knowledge.

== Arabic–Persian ==
Arabic–Persian philosophy refers to the philosophical tradition associated with the intellectual and cultural heritage of Arabic- and Persian-speaking regions. This tradition is also commonly referred to as &quot;Islamic philosophy&quot; or &quot;philosophy in the Islamic world&quot;.

The classical period of Arabic–Persian philosophy began in the early 9th century CE, roughly 200 years after the death of Muhammad. It continued until the late 12th century CE and was an integral part of the Islamic Golden Age. The early classical period, prior to the work of Avicenna, focused particularly on the translation and interpretation of Ancient Greek philosophy. The late classical period, following Avicenna, was shaped by the engagement with his comprehensive philosophical system.

Arabic–Persian philosophy had a profound influence on Western philosophy. During the early medieval period, many of the Greek texts were unavailable in Western Europe. They became accessible in the later medieval period largely due to their preservation and transmission by the Arabic–Persian intellectual tradition.

=== Kalam and early classical ===
The early Arabic intellectual tradition before the classical period was characterized by various theological discussions, primarily focused on understanding the correct interpretation of Islamic revelation. Some historians view this as part of Arabic–Persian philosophy, while others draw a more narrow distinction between theology (kalam) and philosophy proper (falsafa). Theologians, who implicitly accepted the truth of revelation, restricted their inquiries to religious topics, such as proofs of the existence of God. Philosophers, on the other hand, investigated a broader range of topics, including those not directly covered by the scriptures.

Early classical Arabic–Persian philosophy was strongly influenced by Ancient Greek philosophy, particularly the works of Aristotle, but also other philosophers such as Plato. This influence came through both translations and comprehensive commentaries. A key motivation for this process was to integrate and reconcile Greek philosophy with Islamic thought. Islamic philosophers emphasized the role of rational inquiry and examined how to harmonize reason and revelation.

Al-Kindi (801–873) is often considered the first philosopher of this tradition, in contrast to the more theological works of his predecessors. He followed Aristotle in regarding metaphysics as the first philosophy and the highest science. From his theological perspective, metaphysics studies the essence and attributes of God. He drew on Plotinus&#x27;s doctrine of &quot;the One&quot; to argue for the oneness and perfection of God. For Al-Kindi, God emanates the universe by &quot;bringing being to be from non-being.&quot; In the field of psychology, he argued for a dualism that strictly distinguishes the immortal soul from the mortal body. Al-Kindi was a prolific author, producing around 270 treatises during his lifetime.

Al-Farabi (c. 872–950), strongly influenced by Al-Kindi, accepted his emanationist theory of creation. Al-Farabi claimed that philosophy, rather than theology, is the best pathway to truth. His interest in logic earned him the title &quot;the Second Master&quot; after Aristotle. He concluded that logic is universal and forms the foundation of all language and thought, a view that contrasts with certain passages in the Quran that assign this role to Arabic grammar. In his political philosophy, Al-Farabi endorsed Plato&#x27;s idea that a philosopher-king would be the best ruler. He discussed the virtues such a ruler should possess, the tasks they should undertake, and why this ideal is rarely realized. Al-Farabi also provided an influential classification of the different sciences and fields of inquiry.

=== Later classical ===
Avicenna (980–1037) drew on the philosophies of the Ancient Greeks and Al-Farabi to develop a comprehensive philosophical system aimed at providing a holistic and rational understanding of reality that encompasses science, religion, and mysticism. He regarded logic as the foundation of rational inquiry. In the field of metaphysics, Avicenna argued that substances can exist independently, while accidents always depend on something else to exist. For example, color is an accident that requires a body to manifest. Avicenna distinguished between two forms of existence: contingent existence and necessary existence. He posited that God has necessary existence, meaning that God&#x27;s existence is inherent and not dependent on anything else. In contrast, everything else in the world is contingent, meaning that it was caused by God and depends on Him for its existence. In psychology, Avicenna viewed souls as substances that give life to beings. He categorized souls into different levels: plants possess the simplest form of souls, while the souls of animals and humans have additional faculties, such as the ability to move, sense, and think rationally. In ethics, Avicenna advocated for the pursuit of moral perfection, which can be achieved by adhering to the teachings of the Quran. His philosophical system profoundly influenced both Islamic and Western philosophy.

Al-Ghazali (1058–1111) was highly critical of Avicenna&#x27;s rationalist approach and his adoption of Greek philosophy. He was skeptical of reason&#x27;s ability to arrive at a true understanding of reality, God, and religion. Al-Ghazali viewed the philosophy of other Islamic philosophers as problematic, describing it as an illness. In his influential work, &quot;The Incoherence of the Philosophers&quot;, he argued that many philosophical teachings were riddled with contradictions and incompatible with Islamic faith. However, Al-Ghazali did not completely reject philosophy; he acknowledged its value but believed it should be subordinate to a form of mystical intuition. This intuition, according to Al-Ghazali, relied on direct personal experience and spiritual insight, which he considered essential for attaining a deeper understanding of reality.

Averroes (1126–1198) rejected Al-Ghazali&#x27;s skeptical outlook and sought to demonstrate the harmony between the philosophical pursuit of knowledge and the spiritual dimensions of faith. Averroes&#x27; philosophy was heavily influenced by Aristotle, and he frequently criticized Avicenna for diverging too much from Aristotle&#x27;s teachings. In the field of psychology, Averroes proposed that there is only one universal intellect shared by all humans. Although Averroes&#x27; work did not have a significant impact on subsequent Islamic scholarship, it had a considerable influence on European philosophy.

=== Post-classical ===
Averroes is often considered the last major philosopher of the classical era of Islamic philosophy. The traditional view holds that the post-classical period was marked by a decline on several levels. This decline is understood both in terms of the global influence of Islam and in the realm of scientific and philosophical inquiry within the Islamic world. Al-Ghazali&#x27;s skepticism regarding the power of reason and the role of philosophy played a significant part in this development, leading to a shift in focus towards theology and religious doctrine. However, some contemporary scholars have questioned the extent of this so-called decline. They argue that it is better understood as a shift in philosophical interest rather than an outright decline. According to this view, philosophy did not disappear but was instead integrated into and continued within the framework of theology.

Mulla Sadra (1571–1636) is often regarded as the most influential philosopher of the post-classical era. He was a prominent figure in the philosophical and mystical school known as illuminationism. Mulla Sadra saw philosophy as a spiritual practice aimed at fostering wisdom and transforming oneself into a sage. His metaphysical theory of existence was particularly influential. He rejected the traditional Aristotelian notion that reality is composed of static substances with fixed essences. Instead, he advocated a process philosophy that emphasized continuous change and novelty. According to this view, the creation of the world is not a singular event in the past but an ongoing process. Mulla Sadra synthesized monism and pluralism by claiming that there is a transcendent unity of being that encompasses all individual entities. He also defended panpsychism, arguing that all entities possess consciousness to varying degrees.

The movement of Islamic modernism emerged in the 19th and 20th centuries in response to the cultural changes brought about by modernity and the increasing influence of Western thought. Islamic modernists aimed to reassess the role of traditional Islamic doctrines and practices in the modern world. They sought to reinterpret and adapt Islamic teachings to demonstrate how the core tenets of Islam are compatible with modern principles, particularly in areas such as democracy, human rights, science, and the response to colonialism.

== Indian ==

Indian philosophy is the philosophical tradition that originated on the Indian subcontinent. It can be divided into three main periods: the ancient period, which lasted until the end of the 2nd century BCE, the classical and medieval period, which lasted until the end of the 18th century CE, and the modern period that followed. Indian philosophy is characterized by a deep interest in the nature of ultimate reality, often relating this topic to spirituality and asking questions about how to connect with the divine and reach a state of enlightenment. In this regard, Indian philosophers frequently served as gurus, guiding spiritual seekers.

Indian philosophy is traditionally divided into orthodox and heterodox schools of thought, referred to as āstikas and nāstikas. The exact definitions of these terms are disputed. Orthodox schools typically accept the authority of the Vedas, the religious scriptures of Hinduism, and tend to acknowledge the existence of the self (Atman) and ultimate reality (Brahman). There are six orthodox schools: Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika, Sāṃkhya, Yoga, Mīmāṃsā, and Vedānta. The heterodox schools are defined negatively, as those that do not adhere to the orthodox views. The main heterodox schools are Buddhism and Jainism.

=== Ancient ===

The ancient period of Indian philosophy began around 900 BCE and lasted until 200 BCE. During this time, the Vedas were composed. These religious texts form the foundation of much of Indian philosophy, covering a wide range of topics, including hymns and rituals. Of particular philosophical interest are the Upanishads, which are late Vedic texts that discuss profound philosophical topics. Some scholars consider the Vedas as part of philosophy proper, while others view them as a form of proto-philosophy. This period also saw the emergence of non-Vedic movements, such as Buddhism and Jainism.

The Upanishads introduce key concepts in Indian philosophy, such as Atman and Brahman. Atman refers to the self, regarded as the eternal soul that constitutes the essence of every conscious being. Brahman represents the ultimate reality and the highest principle governing the universe. The Upanishads explore the relationship between Atman and Brahman, with a key idea being that understanding their connection is a crucial step on the spiritual path toward liberation. Some Upanishads advocate an ascetic lifestyle, emphasizing withdrawal from the world to achieve self-realization. Others emphasize active engagement with the world, rooted in the belief that individuals have social duties to their families and communities. These duties are prescribed by the concept of dharma, which varies according to one&#x27;s social class and stage of life. Another influential idea from this period is the concept of rebirth, where individual souls are caught in a cycle of reincarnation. According to this belief, a person&#x27;s actions in previous lives determine their circumstances in future lives, a principle known as the &quot;law of karma&quot;.

While the Vedas had a broad influence, not all Indian philosophical traditions originated from them. For example, the non-Vedic movements of Buddhism and Jainism emerged in the 6th century BCE. These movements agreed with certain Vedic teachings about the cycle of rebirth and the importance of seeking liberation but rejected many of the rituals and the social hierarchy described in the Vedas. Buddhism was founded by Gautama Siddhartha (563–483 BCE), who challenged the Vedic concept of Atman by arguing that there is no permanent, stable self. He taught that the belief in a permanent self leads to suffering and that liberation can be attained by realizing the absence of a permanent self.

Jainism was founded by Mahavira (599–527 BCE). Jainism emphasizes respect for all forms of life, a principle expressed in its commitment to non-violence. This principle prohibits harming or killing any living being, whether in action or thought. Another central tenet of Jainism is the doctrine of non-absolutism, which posits that reality is complex and multifaceted, and thus cannot be fully captured by any single perspective or expressed adequately in language. The third pillar of Jainism is the practice of asceticism or non-attachment, which involves detaching oneself from worldly possessions and desires to avoid emotional entanglement with them.

=== Classical and medieval ===
The classical and medieval periods in Indian philosophy span roughly from 200 BCE to 1800 CE. Some scholars refer to this entire duration as the &quot;classical period,&quot; while others divide it into two distinct periods: the classical period up until 1300 CE, and the medieval period afterward. During the first half of this era, the orthodox schools of Indian philosophy, known as the darsanas, developed. Their foundational scriptures usually take the form of sūtras, which are aphoristic or concise texts that explain key philosophical ideas. The latter half of this period was characterized by detailed commentaries on these sutras, aimed at providing comprehensive explanations and interpretations.

Samkhya is the oldest of the darśanas. It is a dualistic philosophy that asserts that reality is composed of two fundamental principles: Purusha, or pure consciousness, and Prakriti, or matter. Samkhya teaches that Prakriti is characterized by three qualities known as gunas. Sattva represents calmness and harmony, Rajas corresponds to passion and activity, and Tamas involves ignorance and inertia. The Yoga school initially formed a part of Samkhya and later became an independent school. It is based on the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali and emphasizes the practice of physical postures and various forms of meditation.

Nyaya and Vaisheshika are two other significant orthodox schools. In epistemology, Nyaya posits that there are four sources of knowledge: perception, inference, analogical reasoning, and testimony. Nyaya is particularly known for its theory of logic, which emphasizes that inference depends on prior perception and aims to generate new knowledge, such as understanding the cause of an observed phenomenon. Vaisheshika, on the other hand, is renowned for its atomistic metaphysics. Although Nyaya and Vaisheshika were originally distinct schools, they later became intertwined and were often treated as a single tradition.

The schools of Vedānta and Mīmāṃsā focus primarily on interpreting the Vedic scriptures. Vedānta is concerned mainly with the Upanishads, discussing metaphysical theories and exploring the possibilities of knowledge and liberation. In contrast, Mīmāṃsā is more focused on the ritualistic practices outlined in the Vedas.

Buddhist philosophy also flourished during this period, leading to the development of four main schools of Indian Buddhism: Sarvāstivāda, Sautrāntika, Madhyamaka, and Yogācāra. While these schools agree on the core teachings of Gautama Buddha, they differ on certain key points. The Sarvāstivāda school holds that &quot;all exists,&quot; including past, present, and future entities. This view is rejected by the Sautrāntika school, which argues that only the present exists. The Madhyamaka school, founded by Nagarjuna (c. 150–250 CE), asserts that all phenomena are inherently empty, meaning that nothing possesses a permanent essence or independent existence. The Yogācāra school is traditionally interpreted as a form of idealism, arguing that the external world is an illusion created by the mind.

The latter half of the classical period saw further developments in both the orthodox and heterodox schools of Indian philosophy, often through detailed commentaries on foundational sutras. The Vedanta school gained significant influence during this time, particularly with the rise of the Advaita Vedanta school under Adi Shankara (c. 700–750 CE). Shankara advocated for a radical form of monism, asserting that Atman and Brahman are identical, and that the apparent multiplicity of the universe is merely an illusion, or Maya.

This view was modified by Ramanuja (1017–1137 CE), who developed the Vishishtadvaita Vedanta school. Ramanuja agreed that Brahman is the ultimate reality, but he argued that individual entities, such as qualities, persons, and objects, are also real as parts of the underlying unity of Brahman. He emphasized the importance of Bhakti, or devotion to the divine, as a spiritual path and was instrumental in popularizing the Bhakti movement, which continued until the 17th to 18th centuries.

Another significant development in this period was the emergence of the Navya-Nyāya movement within the Nyaya school, which introduced a more sophisticated framework of logic with a particular focus on linguistic analysis.

=== Modern ===
The modern period in Indian philosophy began around 1800 CE, during a time of social and cultural changes, particularly due to the British rule and the introduction of English education. These changes had various effects on Indian philosophers. Whereas previously, philosophy was predominantly conducted in the language of Sanskrit, many philosophers of this period began to write in English. An example of this shift is the influential multi-volume work &quot;A History of Indian Philosophy&quot; by Surendranath Dasgupta (1887–1952). Philosophers during this period were influenced both by their own traditions and by new ideas from Western philosophy.

During this period, various philosophers attempted to create comprehensive systems that would unite and harmonize the diverse philosophical and religious schools of thought in India. For example, Swami Vivekananda (1863–1902) emphasized the validity and universality of all religions. He used the principles of Advaita Vedanta to argue that different religious traditions are merely different paths leading to the same spiritual truth. According to Advaita Vedanta, there is only one ultimate reality, without any distinctions or divisions. This school of thought considers the diversity and multiplicity in the world as an illusion that obscures the underlying divine oneness. Vivekananda believed that different religions represent various ways of realizing this divine oneness.

A similar project was pursued by Sri Aurobindo in his &quot;integral philosophy.&quot; His complex philosophical system seeks to demonstrate how different historical and philosophical movements are part of a global evolution of consciousness. Other contributions to modern Indian philosophy were made by spiritual teachers like Sri Ramakrishna, Ramana Maharshi, and Jiddu Krishnamurti.

== Chinese ==

Chinese philosophy encompasses the philosophical thought associated with the intellectual and cultural heritage of China. Various periodizations of this tradition exist. One common periodization divides Chinese philosophy into four main eras: an early period before the Qin dynasty, a period up to the emergence of the Song dynasty, a period lasting until the end of the Qing dynasty, and a modern era that follows. The three main schools of Chinese philosophy are Confucianism, Daoism, and Buddhism. Other influential schools include Mohism and Legalism.

In traditional Chinese thought, philosophy was not distinctly separated from religious thought and other types of inquiry. It was primarily concerned with ethics and societal matters, often placing less emphasis on metaphysics compared to other traditions. Philosophical practice in China tended to focus on practical wisdom, with philosophers often serving as sages or thoughtful advisors.

=== Pre-Qin ===
The first period in Chinese philosophy began in the 6th century BCE and lasted until the rise of the Qin dynasty in 221 BCE. The concept of Dao, often translated as &quot;the Way,&quot; played a central role during this period, with different schools of thought interpreting it in various ways. Early Chinese philosophy was heavily influenced by the teachings of Confucius (551–479 BCE). Confucius emphasized that a good life is one that aligns with the Dao, which he understood primarily in terms of moral conduct and virtuous behavior. He argued for the importance of filial piety, the respect for one&#x27;s elders, and advocated for universal altruism. In Confucian thought, the family is fundamental, with each member fulfilling their role to ensure the family&#x27;s overall flourishing. Confucius extended this idea to society, viewing the state as a large family where harmony is essential.

Laozi (6th century BCE) is traditionally regarded as the founder of Daoism. Like Confucius, he believed that living a good life involves being in harmony with the Dao. However, unlike Confucius, Laozi focused not only on society but also on the relationship between humans and nature. His concept of wu wei, often translated as &quot;effortless action,&quot; was particularly influential. It refers to acting in a natural, spontaneous way that is in accordance with the Dao, which Laozi saw as an ideal state of being characterized by ease and spontaneity.

The Daoist philosopher Zhuangzi (399–295 BCE) employed parables and allegories to express his ideas. To illustrate the concept of wu wei in daily life, he used the example of a butcher who, after years of practice, could cut an ox effortlessly, with his knife naturally following the optimal path without any conscious effort. Zhuangzi is also famous for his story of the butterfly dream, which explores the nature of subjective experience. In this story, Zhuangzi dreams of being a butterfly and, upon waking, questions whether he is a man who dreamt of being a butterfly or a butterfly dreaming of being a man.

The school of Mohism was founded by Mozi (c. 470–391 BCE). Central to Mozi&#x27;s philosophy is the concept of &quot;jian ai&quot;, which advocates for universal love or impartial caring. Based on this concept, he promoted an early form of consequentialism, arguing that political actions should be evaluated based on how they contribute to the welfare of the people.

=== Qin to pre-Song dynasties ===
The next period in Chinese philosophy began with the establishment of the Qin dynasty in 221 BCE and lasted until the rise of the Song dynasty in 960 CE. This period was influenced by Xuanxue philosophy, legalist philosophy, and the spread of Buddhism. Xuanxue, also known as Neo-Daoism, sought to synthesize Confucianism and Daoism while developing a metaphysical framework for these schools of thought. It posited that the Dao is the root of ultimate reality, leading to debates about whether this root should be understood as being or non-being. Philosophers such as He Yan (c. 195–249 CE) and Wang Bi (226–249 CE) argued that the Dao is a formless non-being that acts as the source of all things and phenomena. This view was contested by Pei Wei (267–300 CE), who claimed that non-being could not give rise to being; instead, he argued that being gives rise to itself.

In the realm of ethics and politics, the school of Legalism became particularly influential. Legalists rejected the Mohist idea that politics should aim to promote general welfare. Instead, they argued that statecraft is about wielding power and establishing order. They also dismissed the Confucian emphasis on virtues and moral conduct as the foundation of a harmonious society. In contrast, Legalists believed that the best way to achieve order was through the establishment of strict laws and the enforcement of punishments for those who violated them.

Buddhism, which arrived in China from India in the 1st century CE, initially focused on the translation of original Sanskrit texts into Chinese. Over time, however, new and distinctive forms of Chinese Buddhism emerged. For instance, Tiantai Buddhism, founded in the 6th century CE, introduced the doctrine of the &quot;Threefold Truth,&quot; which sought to reconcile two opposing views. The first truth, conventional realism, affirms the existence of ordinary things. The second truth posits that all phenomena are illusory or empty. The third truth attempts to reconcile these positions by claiming that the mundane world is both real and empty at the same time. This period also witnessed the rise of Chan Buddhism, which later gave rise to Zen Buddhism in Japan. In epistemology, Chan Buddhists advocated for a form of immediate acquaintance with reality, asserting that it transcends the distortions of linguistic distinctions and leads to direct knowledge of ultimate reality.

=== Song to Qing dynasties and modern ===
The next period in Chinese philosophy began with the emergence of the Song dynasty in 960 CE. Some scholars consider this period to end with the Opium Wars in 1840, while others extend it to the establishment of the Republic of China in 1912. During this era, neo-Confucianism became particularly influential. Unlike earlier forms of Confucianism, Neo-Confucianism placed greater emphasis on metaphysics, largely in response to similar developments in Daoism and Buddhism. It rejected the Daoist and Buddhist focus on non-being and emptiness, instead centering on the concept of li as the positive foundation of metaphysics. Li is understood as the rational principle that underlies being and governs all entities. It also forms the basis of human nature and is the source of virtues. Li is often contrasted with qi, which is seen as a material and vital force.

The later part of the Qing dynasty and the subsequent modern period were marked by an encounter with Western philosophy, including the ideas of philosophers like Plato, Kant, and Mill, as well as movements like pragmatism. However, Marx&#x27;s ideas of class struggle, socialism, and communism were particularly significant. His critique of capitalism and his vision of a classless society led to the development of Chinese Marxism. In this context, Mao Zedong (1893–1976) played a dual role as both a philosopher who expounded these ideas and a revolutionary leader committed to their practical implementation. Chinese Marxism diverged from classical Marxism in several ways. For instance, while classical Marxism assigns the proletariat the responsibility for both the rise of the capitalist economy and the subsequent socialist revolution, in Mao&#x27;s Marxism, this role is assigned to the peasantry under the guidance of the Communist Party.

Traditional Chinese thought also remained influential during the modern period. This is exemplified in the philosophy of Liang Shuming (1893–1988), who was influenced by Confucianism, Buddhism, and Western philosophy. Liang is often regarded as a founder of New Confucianism. He advocated for a balanced life characterized by harmony between humanity and nature as the path to true happiness. Liang criticized the modern European attitude for its excessive focus on exploiting nature to satisfy desires, and he viewed the Indian approach, with its focus on the divine and renunciation of desires, as an extreme in the opposite direction.

== Others ==
Various philosophical traditions developed their own distinctive ideas. In some cases, these developments occurred independently, while in others, they were influenced by the major philosophical traditions.

=== Japanese ===
Japanese philosophy is characterized by its engagement with various traditions, including Chinese, Indian, and Western schools of thought. Ancient Japanese philosophy was shaped by Shinto, the indigenous religion of Japan, which included a form of animism that saw natural phenomena and objects as spirits, known as kami. The arrival of Confucianism and Buddhism in the 5th and 6th centuries CE transformed the intellectual landscape and led to various subsequent developments. Confucianism influenced political and social philosophy and was further developed into different strands of neo-Confucianism. Japanese Buddhist thought evolved particularly within the traditions of Pure Land Buddhism and Zen Buddhism.

In the 19th and 20th centuries, interaction with Western thinkers had a major influence on Japanese philosophy, particularly through the schools of existentialism and phenomenology. This period saw the foundation of the Kyoto School, established by Kitaro Nishida (1870–1945). Nishida criticized Western philosophy, particularly Kantianism, for its reliance on the distinction between subject and object. He sought to overcome this dichotomy by developing the concept of &quot;basho,&quot; which is usually translated as &quot;place&quot; and may be understood as an experiential domain that transcends the subject-object distinction. Other influential members of the Kyoto School include Tanabe Hajime (1885–1962) and Nishitani Keiji (1900–1990).

=== Latin American ===
Philosophy in Latin America is often considered part of Western philosophy. However, in a more specific sense, it represents a distinct tradition with its own unique characteristics, despite strong Western influence. Philosophical ideas concerning the nature of reality and the role of humans within it can be found in the region&#x27;s indigenous civilizations, such as the Aztecs, the Maya, and the Inca. These ideas developed independently of European influence. However, most discussions typically focus on the colonial and post-colonial periods, as very few texts from the pre-colonial period have survived.

The colonial period was dominated by religious philosophy, particularly in the form of scholasticism. In the 18th and 19th centuries, the emphasis shifted to Enlightenment philosophy and the adoption of a scientific outlook, particularly through positivism. An influential current in the later part of the 20th century was the philosophy of liberation, which was inspired by Marxism and focused on themes such as political liberation, intellectual independence, and education.

=== African ===


In the broadest sense, African philosophy encompasses philosophical ideas that originated across the entire African continent. However, the term is often understood more narrowly to refer primarily to the philosophical traditions of Western and sub-Saharan Africa. The philosophical tradition in Africa draws from both ancient Egypt and scholarly texts from medieval Africa. While early African intellectual history primarily focused on folklore, wise sayings, and religious ideas, it also included philosophical concepts, such as the idea of Ubuntu. Ubuntu is usually translated as &quot;humanity&quot; or &quot;humanness&quot; and emphasizes the deep moral connections between people, advocating for kindness and compassion.

African philosophy before the 20th century was primarily conducted and transmitted orally as ideas by philosophers whose names have been lost to history. This changed in the 1920s with the emergence of systematic African philosophy. A significant movement during this period was &quot;excavationism&quot;, which sought to reconstruct traditional African worldviews, often with the goal of rediscovering a lost African identity. However, this approach was contested by Afro-deconstructionists, who questioned the existence of a singular African identity. Other influential strands and topics in modern African thought include ethnophilosophy, négritude, pan-Africanism, Marxism, postcolonialism, and critiques of Eurocentrism.

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===

=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27654" start="4" end="25" title="History of philosophy" label="history of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="72" end="85" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="196" end="200" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="202" end="222" title="Religion" label="religious traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="246" end="264" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="284" end="319" title="Metaphysics" label="inquiry into the fundamental nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="337" end="351" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="446" end="453" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="462" end="466" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="468" end="489" title="Ethics" label="how people should act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="495" end="521" title="Epistemology" label="how to arrive at knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="527" end="535" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="563" end="571" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="577" end="588" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="622" end="646" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Ancient Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="668" end="676" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="829" end="849" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment period"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="953" end="968" title="German idealism" label="German idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="970" end="980" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="982" end="992" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="994" end="1006" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="1029" end="1042" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="1044" end="1058" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1064" end="1077" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193104" start="1080" end="1105" title="Islamic philosophy" label="Arabic–Persian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="1195" end="1213" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="1333" end="1341" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736005" start="1532" end="1572" title="The Incoherence of the Philosophers" label="Al-Ghazali&amp;#x27;s critique of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010955" start="1595" end="1606" title="Mulla Sadra" label="Mulla Sadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935373" start="1659" end="1676" title="Islamic modernism" label="Islamic modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="1778" end="1787" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="1790" end="1807" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="1919" end="1928" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="1954" end="1967" title="Enlightenment in Buddhism" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="2024" end="2029" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q618680" start="2082" end="2098" title="Āstika and nāstika" label="orthodox schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2190" end="2198" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="2203" end="2210" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348383" start="2275" end="2290" title="Advaita Vedanta" label="Advaita Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630544" start="2295" end="2306" title="Navya-Nyāya" label="Navya-Nyāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="2342" end="2352" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q847493" start="2357" end="2365" title="Yogācāra" label="Yogācāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="2612" end="2630" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800296" start="2674" end="2690" title="self-cultivation" label="self-cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="2721" end="2733" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="2749" end="2755" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="2803" end="2809" title="Daoism" label="Daoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2927" end="2935" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q599057" start="2982" end="2989" title="Xuanxue" label="Xuanxue"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="2994" end="3010" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="3130" end="3137" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194146" start="3202" end="3221" title="Japanese philosophy" label="Japanese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57618104" start="3223" end="3248" title="Latin American philosophy" label="Latin American philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q386260" start="3254" end="3272" title="African philosophy" label="African philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="3410" end="3423" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="3865" end="3873" title="mystical" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="3878" end="3887" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q49447" start="4118" end="4127" title="worldview" label="worldview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="4939" end="4959" title="intellectual history" label="intellectual history"/>
<link wikidata="Q737560" start="5360" end="5372" title="Neo-Kantians" label="Neo-Kantians"/>
<link wikidata="Q77045" start="5378" end="5396" title="Wilhelm Windelband" label="Wilhelm Windelband"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="5603" end="5617" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="6515" end="6524" title="biography" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="6584" end="6598" title="methodological" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="6621" end="6634" title="periodization" label="periodization"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="6881" end="6899" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193104" start="6978" end="7003" title="Islamic philosophy" label="Arabic–Persian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="7005" end="7022" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="7028" end="7046" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="7201" end="7214" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="7233" end="7247" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7281" end="7293" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="7314" end="7328" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7378" end="7391" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="7393" end="7406" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7412" end="7421" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="7693" end="7709" title="Platonic Academy" label="Platonic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="7798" end="7809" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="7938" end="7960" title="Presocratic philosophy" label="Presocratic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="8308" end="8314" title="cosmos" label="cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="8372" end="8387" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="8403" end="8414" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="8451" end="8457" title="Uranus (mythology)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="8462" end="8466" title="Gaia" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="8789" end="8795" title="Thales" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="8899" end="8914" title="first principle" label="first principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="8925" end="8930" title="arche" label="arche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637515" start="8952" end="8957" title="water (classical element)" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="8995" end="9006" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="9160" end="9170" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q194245" start="9217" end="9224" title="apeiron" label="apeiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="9262" end="9272" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="9432" end="9437" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="9542" end="9552" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q132157" start="9648" end="9660" title="Zeno of Elea" label="Zeno of Elea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33378" start="9810" end="9835" title="Achilles and the Tortoise" label="Achilles and the Tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="9890" end="9897" title="atomism" label="atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="9901" end="9911" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80612" start="10053" end="10063" title="Anaximenes of Miletus" label="Anaximenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="10065" end="10075" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="10077" end="10087" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83375" start="10089" end="10099" title="Empedocles" label="Empedocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83041" start="10101" end="10111" title="Anaxagoras" label="Anaxagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q165589" start="10113" end="10122" title="Leucippus" label="Leucippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750514" start="10132" end="10140" title="sophists" label="sophists"/>
<link wikidata="Q169243" start="10150" end="10160" title="Protagoras" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q179785" start="10165" end="10172" title="Gorgias" label="Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="10232" end="10240" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="10259" end="10264" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q839475" start="10521" end="10554" title="Socratic method" label="approach to philosophical inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026054" start="10600" end="10618" title="Socratic dialogues" label="Socratic dialogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="10955" end="10962" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208160" start="10964" end="10971" title="courage" label="courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q799" start="10977" end="10983" title="wisdom" label="wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q815577" start="11179" end="11188" title="ignorance" label="ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="11480" end="11495" title="theory of forms" label="theory of forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="11606" end="11612" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311247" start="11627" end="11635" title="Form of the Good" label="goodness"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="11821" end="11832" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="11837" end="11849" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="11902" end="11912" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="11929" end="11933" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="11956" end="11962" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706580" start="11964" end="11970" title="thymos" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q775842" start="11976" end="11982" title="desire" label="desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="12098" end="12104" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="12109" end="12129" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="12223" end="12239" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="12242" end="12251" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078867" start="12430" end="12450" title="philosophy of nature" label="philosophy of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="12465" end="12470" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092032" start="12798" end="12819" title="problem of universals" label="problem of universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q714737" start="12925" end="12944" title="categories of being" label="categories of being"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140529" start="13060" end="13071" title="four causes" label="four causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q777205" start="13240" end="13271" title="Aristotelian ethics" label="Aristotle&amp;#x27;s ethical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771260" start="13348" end="13358" title="eudaimonia" label="eudaimonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="13385" end="13390" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="13429" end="13439" title="inferences" label="inferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="13651" end="13663" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="13665" end="13673" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="13679" end="13689" title="Skepticism" label="Skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q753132" start="13727" end="13757" title="Hellenistic philosophy" label="Hellenistic schools of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="13886" end="13905" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="13965" end="13979" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208195" start="14122" end="14130" title="pleasure" label="pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8" start="14241" end="14250" title="happiness" label="happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="14294" end="14302" title="hedonism" label="hedonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q262568" start="14341" end="14353" title="ataraxia" label="tranquillity"/>
<link wikidata="Q406365" start="14610" end="14622" title="apatheia" label="indifference"/>
<link wikidata="Q12621536" start="14653" end="14661" title="judgment" label="judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="14683" end="14693" title="well-being" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="14712" end="14728" title="dogma" label="dogmatic beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153422" start="14788" end="14805" title="epoche" label="suspend judgments"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="14940" end="14946" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="14977" end="14986" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="15017" end="15029" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="15610" end="15618" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="15648" end="15656" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="16084" end="16090" title="Christian Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="16364" end="16367" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="16384" end="16400" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="16442" end="16447" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="16575" end="16593" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="16730" end="16748" title="Christian doctrine" label="Christian doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062821" start="16881" end="16896" title="problem of evil" label="problem of evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="16968" end="16979" title="all-knowing" label="all-knowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="16985" end="16997" title="all-powerful" label="all-powerful"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="17059" end="17068" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190255" start="17164" end="17178" title="Moral responsibility" label="responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q847198" start="17334" end="17349" title="just war theory" label="just war theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="17352" end="17360" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="17695" end="17699" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="17708" end="17714" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q202253" start="17875" end="17886" title="Nominalism" label="nominalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="17978" end="17985" title="trinity" label="trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="18553" end="18573" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Anselm of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q373152" start="18769" end="18814" title="ontological argument for the existence of God" label="ontological argument for the existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295" start="19115" end="19128" title="Peter Abelard" label="Peter Abelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="19404" end="19418" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="19634" end="19642" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="19734" end="19750" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="19935" end="19945" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="20234" end="20241" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="20246" end="20255" title="existence" label="existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="20537" end="20549" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="20626" end="20634" title="Rationality" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129353" start="20693" end="20709" title="natural theology" label="natural theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192931" start="20733" end="20742" title="Five Ways (Aquinas)" label="Five Ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q190089" start="20789" end="20800" title="Duns Scotus" label="Duns Scotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282965" start="20928" end="20944" title="Distinction (philosophy)" label="real distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840755" start="21198" end="21207" title="haecceity" label="haecceity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43936" start="21271" end="21288" title="William of Ockham" label="William of Ockham"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="21414" end="21433" title="Ockham&amp;#x27;s Razor" label="Ockham&amp;#x27;s Razor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21714" end="21738" title="Philosophical realism#Medieval philosophy" label="realism about universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="21905" end="21916" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="22220" end="22228" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="22563" end="22569" title="cleric" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="22732" end="22741" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="22786" end="22804" title="Christian theology" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="22942" end="22957" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="23984" end="24003" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="24154" end="24159" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="24260" end="24271" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="24349" end="24363" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="24482" end="24489" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="24531" end="24552" title="scientific revolution" label="scientific revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="24666" end="24678" title="mathematical" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="24745" end="24758" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q585046" start="24922" end="24935" title="Novum Organum" label="Novum Organum"/>
<link wikidata="Q500930" start="24967" end="25014" title="Organon" label="Aristotle&amp;#x27;s influential treatises on logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="25070" end="25089" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="25224" end="25239" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191320" start="25289" end="25310" title="Copernican Revolution" label="Copernican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="25333" end="25336" title="Heliocentric model" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="25354" end="25359" title="Geocentric model" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="25385" end="25397" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="25548" end="25559" title="Empiricism" label="empiricists"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="25564" end="25576" title="Rationalism" label="rationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q237202" start="26026" end="26044" title="sensory experience" label="sensory experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="26151" end="26168" title="non-contradiction" label="non-contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="26173" end="26190" title="sufficient reason" label="sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070614" start="26209" end="26225" title="innate knowledge" label="innate knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="26564" end="26571" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="26577" end="26589" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074689" start="26678" end="26696" title="British philosophy" label="British philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="26698" end="26708" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="26785" end="26824" title="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q223802" start="26964" end="26975" title="Tabula rasa" label="blank slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217789" start="27071" end="27088" title="Primary–secondary quality distinction" label="primary qualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="27276" end="27291" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="27408" end="27416" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="27643" end="27653" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966559" start="28003" end="28022" title="Humean definition of causality" label="consistent patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="28417" end="28431" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192325" start="28703" end="28726" title="Cogito, ergo sum" label="I think, therefore I am"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="28807" end="28826" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="28924" end="28941" title="substance dualism" label="substance dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="29055" end="29069" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="29549" end="29574" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="29592" end="29622" title="principle of sufficient reason" label="principle of sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211539" start="29747" end="29757" title="monadology" label="monadology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="29925" end="29938" title="the Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="30189" end="30202" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="30353" end="30362" title="dogmatism" label="dogmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174834" start="30386" end="30395" title="authority" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279698" start="30504" end="30527" title="transcendental idealism" label="transcendental idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221373" start="30653" end="30666" title="Deontology" label="deontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q209681" start="30693" end="30715" title="categorical imperative" label="categorical imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="30807" end="30815" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="30829" end="30840" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="30858" end="30879" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="30948" end="30961" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="31015" end="31024" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816064" start="31121" end="31143" title="bellum omnium contra omnes" label="war of all against all"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="31255" end="31270" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="31414" end="31435" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="31654" end="31663" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="31874" end="31892" title="empirical sciences" label="empirical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="31897" end="31908" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="32048" end="32054" title="German idealism" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q918561" start="32059" end="32075" title="British idealism" label="British idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="32199" end="32219" title="American pragmatism" label="American pragmatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="32432" end="32445" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12359813" start="32702" end="32717" title="thing-in-itself" label="thing-in-itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="32793" end="32815" title="Johann Gottlieb Fichte" label="Johann Gottlieb Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="32951" end="32985" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="33090" end="33102" title="Absolute (philosophy)" label="the absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="33193" end="33222" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="33594" end="33602" title="Absolute (philosophy)" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q460501" start="33774" end="33785" title="historicism" label="historicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q737560" start="33790" end="33804" title="neo-Kantianism" label="neo-Kantianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="33827" end="33850" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q350236" start="34211" end="34234" title="Francis Herbert Bradley" label="Francis Herbert Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954835" start="34361" end="34406" title="Bradley&amp;#x27;s regress" label="claiming that external relations do not exist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="34409" end="34418" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="34553" end="34567" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q181207" start="34625" end="34648" title="dialectical materialism" label="dialectical materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="34668" end="34677" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="34748" end="34767" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q364340" start="34841" end="34845" title="Will (philosophy)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q106718306" start="34942" end="34961" title="Philosophical pessimism" label="pessimistic outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="35068" end="35087" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q583998" start="35101" end="35114" title="will to power" label="will to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="35288" end="35293" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="35374" end="35388" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="35429" end="35443" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="35502" end="35509" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="35704" end="35720" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="35975" end="35985" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="36120" end="36142" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q125249" start="36611" end="36624" title="William James" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284176" start="36865" end="36888" title="stream of consciousness" label="stream of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="36988" end="37007" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="37012" end="37034" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="37173" end="37185" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="37190" end="37209" title="linguistic analysis" label="linguistic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="37526" end="37539" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="37541" end="37553" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="37555" end="37569" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="37571" end="37585" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="37587" end="37602" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256338" start="37608" end="37629" title="psychoanalytic theory" label="psychoanalytic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671277" start="37821" end="37842" title="academic institutions" label="academic institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="38127" end="38137" title="Pragmatism" label="Pragmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215258" start="38196" end="38209" title="Richard Rorty" label="Richard Rorty"/>
<link wikidata="Q221697" start="38226" end="38239" title="Hilary Putnam" label="Hilary Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="38326" end="38335" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="38345" end="38360" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="38401" end="38409" title="feminism" label="feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="38563" end="38581" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q235470" start="38595" end="38610" title="Martha Nussbaum" label="Martha Nussbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q219368" start="38631" end="38644" title="Judith Butler" label="Judith Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q295386" start="38682" end="38701" title="George Edward Moore" label="George Edward Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="38802" end="38814" title="common sense" label="common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="38861" end="38885" title="philosophical skepticism" label="philosophical skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189222" start="39153" end="39162" title="intuition" label="intuition"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="39165" end="39178" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="39424" end="39434" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q845691" start="39478" end="39486" title="logicism" label="logicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="39512" end="39528" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q265469" start="39820" end="39841" title="definite descriptions" label="definite descriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094228" start="40041" end="40056" title="logical atomism" label="logical atomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="40099" end="40118" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q655717" start="40203" end="40233" title="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus" label="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="40394" end="40406" title="propositions" label="propositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q772496" start="40480" end="40500" title="Philosophical Investigations" label="his later philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q247592" start="40559" end="40564" title="Language game (philosophy)" label="games"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="40694" end="40712" title="Logical positivism" label="Logical positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208238" start="40829" end="40842" title="Vienna Circle" label="Vienna Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76519" start="40936" end="40949" title="Rudolf Carnap" label="Rudolf Carnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297476" start="40980" end="41002" title="verification principle" label="verification principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214969" start="41281" end="41304" title="Willard Van Orman Quine" label="Willard Van Orman Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232002" start="41331" end="41351" title="Two Dogmas of Empiricism" label="dogmas of empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="41396" end="41406" title="Naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="41450" end="41466" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41567" end="41608" title="Philosophy of mathematics#Empiricism" label="mathematical entities have real existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q107863149" start="41626" end="41650" title="Quine–Putnam indispensability argument" label="indispensable to science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056732" start="41705" end="41733" title="ordinary language philosophy" label="ordinary language philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="41833" end="41844" title="speech acts" label="speech acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="41848" end="41868" title="John Langshaw Austin" label="John Langshaw Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="41984" end="41996" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q311760" start="42013" end="42041" title="Sir Peter Frederick Strawson" label="Sir Peter Frederick Strawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513072" start="42117" end="42132" title="linguistic turn" label="linguistic turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q471923" start="42135" end="42154" title="Richard Mervyn Hare" label="Richard Mervyn Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q713642" start="42171" end="42189" title="John Leslie Mackie" label="John Leslie Mackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="42273" end="42283" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="42300" end="42313" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q164359" start="42554" end="42564" title="experience" label="experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="42722" end="42730" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="42732" end="42750" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="42797" end="42811" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="42977" end="42993" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q464595" start="43054" end="43074" title="fundamental ontology" label="fundamental ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="43291" end="43305" title="Hermeneutics" label="interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76356" start="43413" end="43431" title="Hans-Georg Gadamer" label="Hans-Georg Gadamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497061" start="43581" end="43599" title="fusion of horizons" label="fusion of horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="43894" end="43901" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360032" start="43906" end="43918" title="Authenticity (philosophy)" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="43943" end="43959" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="44344" end="44353" title="Absurdism" label="absurdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="44368" end="44380" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="44395" end="44410" title="Critical Theory" label="Critical Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="44468" end="44484" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q180592" start="44516" end="44533" title="social philosophy" label="social philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="44854" end="44859" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="44861" end="44871" title="Social inequality" label="inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="44873" end="44887" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="44905" end="44913" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="44939" end="44953" title="Theodor Adorno" label="Theodor Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q76826" start="44967" end="44981" title="Max Horkheimer" label="Max Horkheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60030" start="44999" end="45014" title="Herbert Marcuse" label="Herbert Marcuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="45190" end="45195" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="45197" end="45208" title="Objectivity (philosophy)" label="objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="45296" end="45309" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="45317" end="45332" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="45450" end="45465" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="45719" end="45733" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="45836" end="45848" title="subjectivity" label="subjectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q254474" start="45850" end="45858" title="Identity (philosophy)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="46162" end="46175" title="Islamic world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="46306" end="46314" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="46392" end="46410" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="46461" end="46469" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="47366" end="47371" title="kalam" label="kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193104" start="47396" end="47403" title="falsafa" label="falsafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="48158" end="48166" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160460" start="48890" end="48899" title="Al-Farabi" label="Al-Farabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846856" start="48960" end="48972" title="Emanationism" label="emanationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="49728" end="49736" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="50083" end="50093" title="Substance (philosophy)" label="substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q424630" start="50125" end="50134" title="Accident (philosophy)" label="accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359069" start="50300" end="50310" title="Contingency (philosophy)" label="contingent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823137" start="50325" end="50344" title="Metaphysical necessity" label="necessary existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="51106" end="51116" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736005" start="51473" end="51508" title="The Incoherence of the Philosophers" label="The Incoherence of the Philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="51966" end="51974" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010955" start="53496" end="53507" title="Mulla Sadra" label="Mulla Sadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q716920" start="53677" end="53692" title="illuminationism" label="illuminationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="54015" end="54033" title="process philosophy" label="process philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="54215" end="54221" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q879021" start="54226" end="54235" title="Pluralism (philosophy)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="54286" end="54291" title="being" label="being"/>
<link wikidata="Q661384" start="54351" end="54362" title="panpsychism" label="panpsychism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935373" start="54449" end="54466" title="Islamic modernism" label="Islamic modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="54911" end="54923" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="54954" end="54965" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="55054" end="55073" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q618680" start="55735" end="55755" title="āstika and nāstika" label="āstikas and nāstikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="55959" end="55964" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="55988" end="55995" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q595650" start="56030" end="56035" title="Nyaya" label="Nyāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q651387" start="56037" end="56046" title="Vaisheshika" label="Vaiśeṣika"/>
<link wikidata="Q164828" start="56048" end="56055" title="Samkhya" label="Sāṃkhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="56057" end="56061" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q847918" start="56063" end="56070" title="Mīmāṃsā" label="Mīmāṃsā"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512051" start="56076" end="56083" title="Vedanta" label="Vedānta"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="56213" end="56221" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="56226" end="56233" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="56362" end="56367" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="56562" end="56572" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="57311" end="57321" title="mokṣa" label="liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="57351" end="57358" title="Asceticism" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="57626" end="57632" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="57671" end="57683" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396418" start="57688" end="57701" title="ashramas" label="stage of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="57763" end="57770" title="Saṃsāra" label="rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="57988" end="57993" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="58422" end="58440" title="Gautama Siddhartha" label="Gautama Siddhartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="58721" end="58729" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="58838" end="58850" title="ahiṃsā" label="non-violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745997" start="58980" end="59010" title="anekāntavāda" label="the doctrine of non-absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048984" start="59211" end="59239" title="aparigraha" label="asceticism or non-attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079293" start="59776" end="59784" title="darsanas" label="darsanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209680" start="59852" end="59858" title="sūtras" label="sūtras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052353" start="60232" end="60239" title="Purusha" label="Purusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q920021" start="60268" end="60276" title="Prakriti" label="Prakriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q926633" start="60364" end="60369" title="gunas" label="gunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155718" start="60371" end="60377" title="Sattva" label="Sattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477486" start="60411" end="60416" title="Rajas" label="Rajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q925255" start="60458" end="60463" title="Tamas (philosophy)" label="Tamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026889" start="60500" end="60511" title="Yoga (philosophy)" label="Yoga school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068646" start="60606" end="60630" title="Yoga Sutras of Patanjali" label="Yoga Sutras of Patanjali"/>
<link wikidata="Q466797" start="60662" end="60679" title="Asana" label="physical postures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269944" start="60701" end="60711" title="Dhyana in Hinduism" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714540" start="60830" end="60850" title="pramāṇa" label="sources of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512051" start="61352" end="61359" title="Vedānta" label="Vedānta"/>
<link wikidata="Q633994" start="61783" end="61795" title="Sarvāstivāda" label="Sarvāstivāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q255774" start="61797" end="61808" title="Sautrāntika" label="Sautrāntika"/>
<link wikidata="Q844421" start="61810" end="61820" title="Madhyamaka" label="Madhyamaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q847493" start="61826" end="61834" title="Yogācāra" label="Yogācāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q171195" start="62169" end="62178" title="Nagarjuna" label="Nagarjuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348383" start="62753" end="62768" title="Advaita Vedanta" label="Advaita Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q180967" start="62782" end="62794" title="Adi Shankara" label="Adi Shankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q223890" start="62986" end="62990" title="Maya (religion)" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741798" start="63019" end="63027" title="Ramanuja" label="Ramanuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561031" start="63062" end="63085" title="Vishishtadvaita Vedanta" label="Vishishtadvaita Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q507417" start="63320" end="63326" title="Bhakti" label="Bhakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914617" start="63416" end="63431" title="Bhakti movement" label="Bhakti movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630544" start="63556" end="63567" title="Navya-Nyāya" label="Navya-Nyāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="63854" end="63866" title="British Raj" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="64046" end="64054" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564301" start="64224" end="64245" title="Surendranath Dasgupta" label="Surendranath Dasgupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47478" start="64575" end="64592" title="Swami Vivekananda" label="Swami Vivekananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192207" start="65194" end="65207" title="Sri Aurobindo" label="Sri Aurobindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183126" start="65489" end="65504" title="Sri Ramakrishna" label="Sri Ramakrishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q288441" start="65506" end="65521" title="Ramana Maharshi" label="Ramana Maharshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179266" start="65527" end="65545" title="Jiddu Krishnamurti" label="Jiddu Krishnamurti"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="65678" end="65683" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="65833" end="65844" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="65882" end="65894" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="65934" end="65946" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q712192" start="65983" end="66001" title="Three teachings" label="three main schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="66028" end="66040" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="66042" end="66048" title="Daoism" label="Daoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="66054" end="66062" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="66098" end="66104" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="66109" end="66117" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="66668" end="66671" title="Dao" label="Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="66891" end="66900" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="67098" end="67110" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="67165" end="67183" title="Ren (philosophy)" label="universal altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="67428" end="67433" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q878084" start="67728" end="67734" title="wu wei" label="wu wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="68009" end="68017" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68358" end="68373" title="Zhuangzi (book)#&amp;quot;The Butterfly Dream&amp;quot;" label="butterfly dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="68636" end="68640" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="68840" end="68856" title="consequentialism" label="consequentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q599057" start="69187" end="69205" title="Xuanxue" label="Xuanxue philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="69246" end="69254" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156713" start="69573" end="69579" title="He Yan" label="He Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459865" start="69600" end="69607" title="Wang Bi" label="Wang Bi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385580" start="69745" end="69752" title="Pei Wei (Jin dynasty)" label="Pei Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="70113" end="70118" title="Power (politics)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q668188" start="70669" end="70685" title="Tiantai Buddhism" label="Tiantai Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q940709" start="71140" end="71153" title="Chan Buddhism" label="Chan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="71180" end="71192" title="Zen Buddhism" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="71678" end="71695" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="71722" end="71738" title="neo-Confucianism" label="neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875698" start="72041" end="72043" title="Li (neo-Confucianism)" label="li"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="72275" end="72277" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="72594" end="72603" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="72609" end="72618" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="72666" end="72676" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160095" start="72741" end="72756" title="Chinese Marxism" label="Chinese Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="72775" end="72785" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="73052" end="73063" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120936" start="73146" end="73166" title="socialist revolution" label="socialist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="73171" end="73189" title="Maoism" label="Mao&amp;#x27;s Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="73220" end="73229" title="peasantry" label="peasantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="73256" end="73271" title="Communist Party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167488" start="73395" end="73408" title="Liang Shuming" label="Liang Shuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q840873" start="73532" end="73548" title="New Confucianism" label="New Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194146" start="74151" end="74170" title="Japanese philosophy" label="Japanese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="74332" end="74338" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="74399" end="74406" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="74467" end="74471" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="74755" end="74772" title="Japanese Buddhist" label="Japanese Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q262244" start="74827" end="74845" title="Pure Land Buddhism" label="Pure Land Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068751" start="75085" end="75097" title="Kyoto School" label="Kyoto School"/>
<link wikidata="Q45125" start="75114" end="75128" title="Kitaro Nishida" label="Kitaro Nishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724007" start="75194" end="75204" title="Kantianism" label="Kantianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394797" start="75554" end="75567" title="Tanabe Hajime" label="Tanabe Hajime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993564" start="75584" end="75599" title="Nishitani Keiji" label="Nishitani Keiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="76012" end="76018" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="76024" end="76028" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="76038" end="76042" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q473518" start="76578" end="76602" title="philosophy of liberation" label="philosophy of liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q386260" start="76770" end="76788" title="African philosophy" label="African philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="76855" end="76872" title="African continent" label="African continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="76980" end="76987" title="Western Africa" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="76992" end="77010" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="77105" end="77120" title="History of Africa" label="medieval Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213843" start="77290" end="77296" title="Ubuntu philosophy" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11858966" start="78100" end="78115" title="ethnophilosophy" label="ethnophilosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852544" start="78117" end="78126" title="négritude" label="négritude"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="78128" end="78142" title="pan-Africanism" label="pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="78144" end="78151" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="78153" end="78168" title="postcolonialism" label="postcolonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="78187" end="78199" title="Eurocentrism" label="Eurocentrism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748763" wikidata="Q1002075" url="?curid=748763" title="Flogging a Dead Horse">
<text>Flogging a Dead Horse is a compilation album of singles by Sex Pistols, released after their break-up, and includes the four songs issued as singles A-sides that were included on &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&#x27;s the Sex Pistols&quot;, three of their B-sides, and the six A-sides taken from &quot;The Great Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Swindle&quot; and one B-side, &quot;My Way&quot;.

==Background==
By the time the record was released, the group was finished as a musical unit: the &quot;Sex Pistols&quot; consisted only of manager Malcolm McLaren, and designer Jamie Reid. Their relationship with Virgin records was difficult, and Reid&#x27;s tacky sleeve design was intended to warn people against another cash-in; it was largely interpreted as a hip joke, and seems to have hurt sales very little.

Reid&#x27;s first sleeve design consisted of the title hastily scrawled across his designs for the &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks&quot; (front cover) and &quot;The Great Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Swindle&quot; albums (back cover). It was printed, and copies exist, but was rejected by Virgin and never made it to record stores. For its replacement, Reid used a photo of a model from the cheapest agency he could find, along with dull letraset lettering, making the record look like a cheap easy listening album. The back cover featured a fake plastic dog turd on top of a gold disc of the &quot;Never Mind the Bollocks&quot; LP, a reference to a scene in the film &quot;The Great Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Swindle&quot; in which Steve Jones defecates on the gold disc awarded to Johnny Rotten for &quot;Never Mind The Bollocks&quot; and the woman with ants on her face eats it. The album was released without the band&#x27;s involvement or permission.

==Title meaning==
The title has several ironic meanings: the idiomatic one of the saying &quot;Flogging a dead horse&quot; reflecting the fact that the Pistols&#x27; endeavours were now finished, futile and pointless; and the British slang use of &#x27;flogging&#x27; to mean &#x27;selling&#x27; - i.e. the Pistols&#x27; management, in true punk style, were overtly referencing that they were trying to get as much money for as little effort as possible from the album&#x27;s sales.

==Track listing==
;Side one
#&quot;Anarchy in the U.K.&quot; (Johnny Rotten, Steve Jones, Glen Matlock, Paul Cook) – 3:33
#&quot;I Wanna Be Me&quot; (Rotten, Jones, Matlock, Cook) – 3:06
#&quot;God Save the Queen&quot; (Rotten, Jones, Matlock, Cook) – 3:21
#&quot;Did You No Wrong&quot; (Rotten, Jones, Matlock, Cook, Wally Nightingale) – 3:14
#&quot;Pretty Vacant&quot; (Rotten, Jones, Matlock, Cook) – 3:18
#&quot;No Fun&quot; (Iggy Pop, Ron Asheton, Scott Asheton, David Alexander) – 6:26
#&quot;Holidays in the Sun&quot; (Rotten, Jones, Sid Vicious, Cook) – 3:21
;Side two
#&quot;No One Is Innocent&quot; (Jones, Cook, Ronnie Biggs) – 3:03
#&quot;My Way&quot; (Paul Anka, Claude François, Jacques Revaux) – 4:05
#&quot;Something Else&quot; (Eddie Cochran, Sharon Sheeley) – 2:12
#&quot;Silly Thing&quot; (Jones, Cook) – 2:53
#&quot;C&#x27;mon Everybody&quot; (Cochran, Jerry Capehart) – 1:57
#&quot;(I&#x27;m Not Your) Steppin&#x27; Stone&quot; (Tommy Boyce, Bobby Hart) – 3:09
#&quot;Great Rock &#x27;N&#x27; Roll Swindle&quot; (Jones, Cook, Julien Temple) – 4:24

&quot;No One Is Innocent&quot; features train robber Ronnie Biggs and is listed as &quot;The Biggest Blow&quot; on the cover. &quot;My Way&quot;, &quot;Something Else&quot; and &quot;C&#x27;Mon Everybody&quot; are sung by Sid Vicious and represent his complete studio recordings with the Sex Pistols. &quot;Silly Thing&quot; is sung by drummer Paul Cook, although the version that was released as a single in the UK was sung by Steve Jones. &quot;Great Rock &#x27;N&#x27; Roll Swindle&quot; is sung by several hopefuls auditioning to be the Sex Pistols&#x27; new lead singer - the winner was Edward Tudor-Pole. The album sleeve features no individual credits.

== Certifications ==


== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="59" end="70" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q457275" start="185" end="237" title="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols" label="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260910" start="306" end="347" title="The Great Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Swindle" label="The Great Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Swindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q325377" start="539" end="554" title="Malcolm McLaren" label="Malcolm McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138987" start="569" end="579" title="Jamie Reid" label="Jamie Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q457275" start="914" end="937" title="Never Mind the Bollocks, Here&amp;#x27;s the Sex Pistols" label="Never Mind the Bollocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064564" start="968" end="1009" title="The Great Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Swindle (album)" label="The Great Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll Swindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821134" start="1240" end="1248" title="letraset" label="letraset"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="1533" end="1544" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="1583" end="1596" title="John Lydon" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563857" start="1852" end="1873" title="Flogging a dead horse" label="Flogging a dead horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q486421" start="2276" end="2295" title="Anarchy in the U.K." label="Anarchy in the U.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="2303" end="2316" title="John Lydon" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q347986" start="2318" end="2329" title="Steve Jones (musician)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q51319" start="2331" end="2343" title="Glen Matlock" label="Glen Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q363260" start="2345" end="2354" title="Paul Cook" label="Paul Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q685575" start="2435" end="2453" title="God Save the Queen (Sex Pistols song)" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963447" start="2559" end="2576" title="Wally Nightingale" label="Wally Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603413" start="2592" end="2605" title="Pretty Vacant" label="Pretty Vacant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="2671" end="2679" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q335807" start="2681" end="2692" title="Ron Asheton" label="Ron Asheton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342571" start="2694" end="2707" title="Scott Asheton" label="Scott Asheton"/>
<link wikidata="Q562112" start="2709" end="2724" title="Dave Alexander (musician)" label="David Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398159" start="2740" end="2759" title="Holidays in the Sun (song)" label="Holidays in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="2782" end="2793" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756249" start="2825" end="2843" title="No One Is Innocent (song)" label="No One Is Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q560955" start="2864" end="2876" title="Ronnie Biggs" label="Ronnie Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q925657" start="2892" end="2898" title="My Way" label="My Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q216563" start="2906" end="2915" title="Paul Anka" label="Paul Anka"/>
<link wikidata="Q365985" start="2917" end="2932" title="Claude François" label="Claude François"/>
<link wikidata="Q507543" start="2934" end="2948" title="Jacques Revaux" label="Jacques Revaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560018" start="2964" end="2978" title="Somethin&amp;#x27; Else (Eddie Cochran song)" label="Something Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969" start="2986" end="2999" title="Eddie Cochran" label="Eddie Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q274209" start="3001" end="3015" title="Sharon Sheeley" label="Sharon Sheeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960560" start="3031" end="3042" title="Silly Thing (song)" label="Silly Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354548" start="3077" end="3097" title="C&amp;#x27;mon Everybody" label="C&amp;#x27;mon Everybody"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177455" start="3114" end="3128" title="Jerry Capehart" label="Jerry Capehart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544779" start="3144" end="3183" title="(I&amp;#x27;m Not Your) Steppin&amp;#x27; Stone" label="(I&amp;#x27;m Not Your) Steppin&amp;#x27; Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q324836" start="3191" end="3202" title="Tommy Boyce" label="Tommy Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q324836" start="3204" end="3214" title="Boyce and Hart" label="Bobby Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q722023" start="3288" end="3301" title="Julien Temple" label="Julien Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q560955" start="3364" end="3376" title="Ronnie Biggs" label="Ronnie Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="3533" end="3544" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="3599" end="3610" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048711" start="3903" end="3920" title="Edward Tudor-Pole" label="Edward Tudor-Pole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748764" wikidata="Q347822" url="?curid=748764" title="Destroyer (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[destroyer]] is a type of warship.

Destroyer may also refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
===Characters===
*Destroyer (comics), several characters from DC and Marvel Comics, including:
**Destroyer (Marvel Comics), one of three superheroes to use the name
**Destroyer (Thor), an Asgardian weapon in Marvel Comics
**Alex Power or Destroyer, a member of the Marvel Comics team Power Pack
**Jack Power (Marvel Comics) or Destroyer, a member of the Marvel Comics team Power Pack
*Destoroyah, or Destroyer, a Godzilla villain
*Destroyer, a massive golem from &quot;The Legend of Spyro: Dawn of the Dragon&quot;
*Destroyers, the main antagonists in the expansion pack &quot;Guild Wars: Eye of the North&quot;
*The Destroyer, the main antagonist in &quot;Darksiders&quot;

===Film and television===
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (1943 film), an American black-and-white war film
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (1988 film), an American horror film
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (2018 film), an American crime film
*&quot;Saakshyam&quot;, a 2018 Telugu-language film, released in Hindi in 2020 as &quot;Pralay: The Destroyer&quot;
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (&quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot;), a television episode

===Games===
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (arcade game), a 1977 naval combat game by Atari
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (video game), a 1986 naval combat game by Epyx
*Destroyer (dice game) or Ship, captain, and crew, a drinking game

===Literature===
*&quot;The Destroyer&quot; (novel series), an action-adventure novel series by Warren Murphy and Richard Sapir
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, a 2005 novel in the &quot;Foreigner&quot; series by C. J. Cherryh
*&quot;The Destroyers&quot;, a 1974 novel by Douglas Reeman
*&quot;The Destroyers&quot; (novel), a 2017 novel by Christopher Bollen
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (magazine), a Swedish English-language gay magazine

===Music===
*Ibanez Destroyer, an electric guitar

====Performers====
*Destroyer (band), a Canadian rock band fronted by Daniel Bejar
*The Destroyers, George Thorogood&#x27;s band
*The Destroyers (band), British folk punk band

====Albums====
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (Black Mountain album), 2019
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (Gorgoroth album) or the title song, 1998
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (Kiss album), 1976
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (Led Zeppelin bootleg recording), 1977
*&quot;The Destroyer&quot; (Alec Empire album), 1996
*&quot;The Destroyer (Part 1)&quot;, by TR/ST, 2019
*&quot;The Destroyer (Part 2)&quot;, by TR/ST, or the title song, 2019

====Songs====
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (The Kinks song), 1981
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (Static-X song), 2007
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, by The Browning from &quot;End of Existence&quot;, 2021
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, by Design the Skyline from &quot;Nevaeh&quot;, 2011
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, by Parkway Drive from &quot;Ire&quot;, 2015
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, by Phantogram from &quot;Three&quot;, 2016
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, by Saint Motel from &quot;Saintmotelevision&quot;, 2016
*&quot;Destroyer&quot;, by Twisted Sister from &quot;Under the Blade&quot;, 1982

==People==
*Dick Beyer (1930–2019), ringname The Destroyer, American professional wrestler
*Rudy Distrito (born 1958), nickname The Destroyer, Filipino basketball player
*Shaun Wallace (born 1960), nickname The (Dark) Destroyer, British Barrister and a Chaser on The Chase.

==Religion==
*Destroying angel (Bible), also known as &quot;The Destroyer&quot;
*Shiva the Destroyer, of Hindu tradition

==Sports==
*Club Destroyers, a football club from Santa Cruz, Bolivia
*Columbus Destroyers, an Arena Football League team from Columbus, Ohio, US, 1999–2008 and 2019
*FC JAX Destroyers, a soccer team from Jacksonville, Florida, US, 2010–2012
*Mid-Michigan Destroyers, a Premier Basketball League team from Bay City, Michigan, US, 2009
*Virginia Destroyers, a United Football League team from Virginia Beach, Virginia, US, 2009–2012

==Weaponry==
*Destroyer carbine, a Spanish rifle
*Douglas B-66 Destroyer, a US Air Force light bomber
*Douglas BTD Destroyer, a US Navy torpedo bomber
*Heavy fighter or &quot;Zerstörer&quot; (lit. Destroyer), a class of 1930s and 1940s German combat aircraft
*Gaztanaga Destroyer, a Spanish pistol
==Other uses==
*&quot;Destroyer&quot; (magazine), Swedish magazine

==See also==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347822" start="2" end="15" title="Destroyer (disambiguation)" label="[[destroyer]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q347822" start="39" end="48" title="Destroyer (disambiguation)" label="Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869534" start="113" end="131" title="Destroyer (comics)" label="Destroyer (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549354" start="192" end="217" title="Destroyer (Marvel Comics)" label="Destroyer (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473486" start="262" end="278" title="Destroyer (Thor)" label="Destroyer (Thor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245206" start="319" end="329" title="Alex Power" label="Alex Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245206" start="392" end="418" title="Jack Power (Marvel Comics)" label="Jack Power (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514075" start="480" end="490" title="Destoroyah" label="Destoroyah"/>
<link wikidata="" start="564" end="603" title="The Legend of Spyro: Dawn of the Dragon" label="The Legend of Spyro: Dawn of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="672" end="700" title="Guild Wars: Eye of the North" label="Guild Wars: Eye of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166313" start="752" end="762" title="Darksiders (video game)" label="Darksiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265358" start="797" end="830" title="Destroyer (1943 film)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (1943 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265366" start="870" end="903" title="Destroyer (1988 film)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (1988 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48672823" start="930" end="963" title="Destroyer (2018 film)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (2018 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302502" start="995" end="1004" title="Saakshyam" label="Saakshyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969075" start="1105" end="1165" title="Destroyer (Justice League Unlimited)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Justice League Unlimited&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754118" start="1202" end="1237" title="Destroyer (arcade game)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (arcade game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265364" start="1274" end="1308" title="Destroyer (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497909" start="1344" end="1365" title="Destroyer (dice game)" label="Destroyer (dice game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14648106" start="1429" end="1469" title="The Destroyer (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;The Destroyer&amp;quot; (novel series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468622" start="1583" end="1611" title="Foreigner series" label="&amp;quot;Foreigner&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252469" start="1674" end="1688" title="Douglas Reeman" label="Douglas Reeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108744125" start="1690" end="1724" title="The Destroyers (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Destroyers&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299352" start="1762" end="1794" title="Destroyer (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983639" start="1850" end="1866" title="Ibanez Destroyer" label="Ibanez Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q608248" start="1908" end="1924" title="Destroyer (band)" label="Destroyer (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q288560" start="1988" end="2004" title="George Thorogood" label="George Thorogood"/>
<link wikidata="Q125984744" start="2018" end="2039" title="The Destroyers (band)" label="The Destroyers (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62239926" start="2081" end="2125" title="Destroyer (Black Mountain album)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (Black Mountain album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754949" start="2133" end="2172" title="Destroyer (Gorgoroth album)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (Gorgoroth album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q833616" start="2198" end="2232" title="Destroyer (Kiss album)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (Kiss album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265359" start="2240" end="2294" title="Destroyer (Led Zeppelin bootleg recording)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (Led Zeppelin bootleg recording)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729848" start="2302" end="2347" title="The Destroyer (Alec Empire album)" label="&amp;quot;The Destroyer&amp;quot; (Alec Empire album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61791728" start="2361" end="2383" title="The Destroyer (Part 1)" label="The Destroyer (Part 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65948717" start="2413" end="2435" title="The Destroyer (Part 2)" label="The Destroyer (Part 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265362" start="2493" end="2531" title="Destroyer (The Kinks song)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (The Kinks song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037249" start="2539" end="2576" title="Destroyer (Static-X song)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (Static-X song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805353" start="2634" end="2650" title="End of Existence" label="End of Existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148511" start="2720" end="2726" title="Nevaeh (album)" label="Nevaeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720641" start="2791" end="2794" title="Ire (album)" label="Ire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228858" start="2856" end="2861" title="Three (Phantogram album)" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963142" start="2924" end="2941" title="Saintmotelevision" label="Saintmotelevision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399758" start="3007" end="3022" title="Under the Blade" label="Under the Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272676" start="3048" end="3058" title="Dick Beyer" label="Dick Beyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12970174" start="3128" end="3141" title="Rudy Distrito" label="Rudy Distrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490995" start="3207" end="3220" title="Shaun Wallace" label="Shaun Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498075" start="3299" end="3309" title="The Chase (British game show)" label="The Chase."/>
<link wikidata="Q1465739" start="3325" end="3349" title="Destroying angel (Bible)" label="Destroying angel (Bible)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="3392" end="3397" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527966" start="3445" end="3460" title="Club Destroyers" label="Club Destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q730085" start="3504" end="3523" title="Columbus Destroyers" label="Columbus Destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424985" start="3600" end="3617" title="FC JAX Destroyers" label="FC JAX Destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840756" start="3676" end="3699" title="Mid-Michigan Destroyers" label="Mid-Michigan Destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081575" start="3769" end="3788" title="Virginia Destroyers" label="Virginia Destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265377" start="3880" end="3897" title="Destroyer carbine" label="Destroyer carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372864" start="3916" end="3938" title="Douglas B-66 Destroyer" label="Douglas B-66 Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252040" start="3969" end="3990" title="Douglas BTD Destroyer" label="Douglas BTD Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961442" start="4018" end="4031" title="Heavy fighter" label="Heavy fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529203" start="4126" end="4145" title="Gaztanaga Destroyer" label="Gaztanaga Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299352" start="4180" end="4212" title="Destroyer (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Destroyer&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748766" wikidata="Q4777016" url="?curid=748766" title="Antonio Valero de Bernabé">
<text>Antonio Vicente Miguel Valero de Bernabé Pacheco (October 26, 1790 – June 7, 1863), a.k.a. The Liberator from Puerto Rico, was a Puerto Rican military leader. Trained in Spain, he fought with the Spanish Army to expel the French leader, Napoleon, from Spain and was promoted to colonel during these years. A variant of his name, Manuel Antonio Valero, has been adopted by some historians, but it is not present in official documentation nor was it used by him.

Valero de Bernabé had recently graduated from the military academy when Napoleon convinced King Charles IV of Spain to permit the French leader to pass through Spain with his army to attack Portugal. When Napoleon later refused to leave Spanish soil, the government declared war. Valero de Bernabé joined the Spanish Army and fought as an official of the Murcia Division of Spain, and helped defeat Napoleon&#x27;s army at the Siege of Saragossa (1808) in the Peninsular War, also known as the Spanish War of Independence. 
During this conflict, he was involved in the defense of the Arrabal, holding his post despite the French advance and being taken prisoner as a result. After this action, Valero de Bernabé was awarded many decorations and promoted to the rank of colonel at the age of 19. 

When Ferdinand VII assumed the throne of Spain in 1813, Valero de Bernabé became critical of the new king&#x27;s policies towards the Spanish colonies in Latin America. He developed a keen hatred of the monarchy, resigned his commission in the army, and in 1821 emigrated to Mexico with his family. There he joined the Army of the Three Guarantees headed by Agustín de Iturbide, and was appointed as Chief of Staff. He successfully fought for Mexico&#x27;s independence from Spain, achieved in 1821, after which the people proclaimed Iturbide the Emperor of Mexico, gaining the rank of Brigadier General. Since Valero de Bernabé had developed anti-monarchist feelings following his experiences in Spain, he led an unsuccessful revolt against Iturbide. He fled the country, but was captured by a Spanish pirate and handed over to the authorities in Cuba, where he was imprisoned. Valero de Bernabé escaped from jail with the help of a group of supporters of secessionists from South America.

He joined Simón Bolívar to fight for the independence of the Central and South American colonies from Spain. He also supported the independence of Puerto Rico and Cuba. Like Bolivar, he advocated forming a federation of Latin American nations. After serving as the Chief of Operations against the faction led by Tadeo Piñago, who was defeated and killed in action, Valero de Bernabé was promoted to Brigadier General. He was named General in Chief of the armies in the provinces of Aragua, Caracas and Guarico, which involved actions at Boca Chica, Jengibre and San Francisco de Tiznado. Valero de Bernabé led his division in the unsuccessful revolution organized by Falcón. From there he migrated to Colombia and reached Bogotá. President Mosquera named him Commander in Chief of the 1st Division and Military Chief of the State of Boyacá. Valero de Bernabé was both a founding father of Venezuela and of the Federal Party of Venezuela. Falsely accused of plotting against Bolívar, he was sent into exile with his family. When Bolívar died in 1830, Valero de Bernabé was allowed to serve as an honour guard at his funeral. He remained politically active until his own death.

In a career that spanned six decades, taking place in Europe and throughout the Americas, Valero also served in several military and administrative posts. He was the Commander in Chief of the 2nd Division of the Colombian Army that aided Bolívar at Peru. Bolívar named him Military Chief of the Department of the Panama isthmus. Valero was also Chief of Staff of the Colombian Army, Military Commander of Valles de Aragua, Military Governor of Puerto Cabello, Minister of War and Navy of Venezuela (under José Tadeo Monagas and José Antonio Páez), Chief of Staff of Mexico, Chief of Operations in the successful campaign against Tamanaco and Güires, Commander of Arms of the province of Caracas. In addition, Valero received several commendations including the cross of the Independence of Mexico, the Medalla del Libertador and the Medal del Callao and the Bust of the Liberator of Venezuela.

==Early life==
===Lineage===
Valero de Bernabé was a direct descendant of the Aragonese aristocracy and a noble with the recognition of &quot;Infanzonería e Hidalguía&quot; as a birthright. His titles were traced to May 10, 1372, when Peter IV of Aragon granted the recognitions to Miguel de Bernabé, his siblings and descendants, for his actions during the War of the Two Peters, where he died incinerated at the castle of Báguena after refusing to surrender the fortification to the Castilian forces. Numerous of his descendants would gather other noble titles, marrying into other aristocratic lineages, becoming counts or marquis. Military tradition was also present and Aurelio Valero de Bernabé would become a Caballero de Malta. Among them was also inquisitor Pedro de Arbués y Valero, who was canonized by the Catholic Church in 1867.

However, with time the ambiguous language of the recognition led to numerous legal proceedings, peaking with several taking place before the General Courts in 1678. In response, king Phillip and the Fourth Arm of the General Courts elaborated a &quot;Ley y Fuero del Reino&quot; establishing that these noble titles were recognized to all descendants of Miguel de Bernabé and his sisters, regardless of the origin of their lineage, and that the descendants of the male members of the family would inherit them. Among the beneficiaries of this infanzería was Juan Valero de Bernabé, father of Antonio Valero de Bernabé Ibañez, the great-grandfather of Valero de Bernabé Pacheco. 

===Childhood and military instruction===
Valero was born on October 26, 1790, at the town of Santiago de Fajardo to Cayetano Valero and Rosa Pacheco de Onormandia. His father was the Subteniente de Ganaderos and Capitain of the Regimiento Fijo of Puerto Rico, following in the military tradition of a family that included his first cousin, the marquis of Cañada and general of the national armies, Joaquín Ibáñez de Bernabé. He arrived to Puerto Rico, where he met and married Pacheco, a local noblewoman. On November 14, 1790, Valero was baptized in a ceremony held at the Fajardo parish and headed by presbyter José María Tufiño. His godparents were Miguel Cánovanas and Joaquina Pacheco, with Juan Paulino, José Aguayo and Francisco Bricnony being among the witnesses. 

He was born during an age where the absolutist policies of the Spanish Crown had disregarded its colonies, Puerto Rico itself being left without proper education systems, heavily taxed with tributes and lacking formal mercantile relations that allowed them to prosper economically. The power of the local nobility rested in the municipal councils and the cabildos, which were the positions mostly dominated by Puerto Ricans and where the educated gathered. The situation forced the aristocracy to send their children to study abroad, with military education being imparted at the Military Academies of Spain. These would lead to a military tradition from which figures emerged to prominence in several wars and even the Inquisition, reaching a number of recognitions and titles including caballeros del hábito of various locations.

Fajardo itself was still a small town, whose economy mostly revolved around the cattle industry. It had been militarized to combat recurrent attacks by pirates and buccaneers, mainly due to its proximity to Vieques and other adjacent islands, and to prevent the contraband that frequently entered through the coast as a response to the mercantile restrictions imposed by Spain (which led to uncontrolled inflation). In 18th Century Puerto Rico, the local military was entirely composed by nobles, as it was a requisite to hold a position. Valero de Bernabé spent his childhood and was raised in Puerto Rico until the age of 13, when his family sent him to Spain. In his &quot;Memorias&quot;, Valero de Bernabé was critical of the state of local education under the Spanish government, citing that he had been forced by it to leave towards Europe. His upbringing left a distinct affection for Puerto Rico, towards which he felt a strong connection despite years of exile.

Once there, Valero de Bernabé opted for a military career and on April 25, 1803, joined the Spanish Army as a cadet. Joining the Military Academies in Spain at the age of 10 was a privilege reserved for the sons of noble military men. His first martial education was in charge of instructor Jacobo Duxtrax. On November 30, 1804, Valero de Bernabé was ascended to Second Lieutenant. He joined the Valencia Regiment, where he performed under this rank. On March 20, 1808, Valero de Bernabé was ascended to Lieutenant. With the promotion, he was assigned to the Murcia Regiment. When Napoleon Bonaparte refused to leave Spain after being granted access to Portugal through the country, a war erupted to protect the independence of the nation. Valero de Bernabé was among those enrolled to battle on behalf of Spain.

==Spanish War of Independence==
===Battle of Tudela===
After losing at Bailén, the French were forced to reorganize and take refuge in the left side of the Ebro river. The 5th Central Division, where Valero de Bernabé served, traveled from Tarragona and was taken over by Field Marshall José de Caro at Tudela. They crossed the Ebro river several times to reach Funes, from which they were able to discern that the French were organizing to cross the river and reunite at Alfaro. During the night of the 19th they began to move back to Tuleda, reaching there two days later, cross in the river one last time and setting camp at the shore guarding a road to Argueda and a bridge. Other forces led by general Castaños (Central) and general Paladox (Right) were also present near by, leading to a clash between both officers over control of the heterogeneous forces on the night of the 22.

Initial orders for the day intended to take control of the area where the road to Alfaro was. However, brigadier and General Mayor of the 5th&#x27;s Cavalry encountered the full force of the French 80,000 army led by Moncey, Lannes, Lefevre and Ney during reconnaissance. The Spanish then reorganized to defensive positions, with Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s division taking the central position while the Castaños led the forces to the left. The French forces were more than double of the Spanish side. Hostilities had begun by 8:00 a.m. and the French artillery was proving troublesome to the Spanish to the point that the general ordered his Regiment to relocate behind a nearby hill, but their commander was gravely injured and replaced by Sargent Mayor Luis María Adriani. The French then redirected their attention to the forces towards the right. Adriani led the regiment to an elevated position, from which he attempted to counter with cannon fire in a strategy that Valero de Bernabé later called &quot;bizarre&quot;. In the exchange that followed, he was injured by a rifle bullet in his ankle and was taken away in horseback by a soldier of N. Chacón&#x27;s escort. The French continued their advance and forced the Spanish to retreat. Valero de Bernabé took note of the amount of dead, wounded and felled animals left behind in the path. In total, the French lost around 6,000 soldiers, while the Spanish side several and had at least 2,000 taken prisoner. In a town en route to Zaragoza, Valero de Bernabé was aided by his cousin Miguel Deso, who gave first aids to treat his wound. Proceeding there, he encountered the chaplain of his regiment, Joaquín Taboada, who had suffered a similar fate. During the night, Valero de Bernabé continued alert to the sound of the distant battles, amidst false alarms.

===Fight for Zaragosa===
Valero de Bernabé arrived to Zaragoza at 11 a.m. of the following morning. He immediately took notice of the widespread confusion caused by the influx of numerous wounded, while the townspeople repaired the walls at haste. General Palafox was focused on organizing 35,700 individuals under his command. Within days, Valero de Bernabé began experiencing symptoms of fever, but despite being seriously ill he recovered with the help of Taboada. The chaplain then brought him the notification that his colonel had decided to promote him to the rank of Captain on July 24, 1808, due to his actions at Tuleda, also requesting his presence without delay. Rejoiced, a still weak Valero de Bernabé left the house and traveled to the house of his officer, who also paid him two months. After thanking Taboada for notifying him, he left and bought epaulettes at a gambling building, leaving with only five ounces. Afterwards, when he was going to ask Toboada to return since he was felling indisposed, Valero de Bernabé was approached by a colonel that asked if they were related, quickly recognizing the figure as his cousin the marquis of Cañada who greeted him effusively. He informed the officer of his destination and the events that preceded, who responded by noting how he was the Mayor General of the group that he had just joined and offered him the role of Adjutant of Orders. Valero de Bernabé accepted the offer and began the following day, seeing it as an opportunity. In the days that followed, he was affected by the death of Toboada as a consequence of his injuries. The Spanish closely monitored the approach of the French, while more work was done to fix the walls. In the meanwhile, they gathered supplies and prepared the organization of the military for the resistance.

During the afternoon of the 20th, the French vanguard was seen doing reconnaissance near the adjacent area of Montetorrero, who led by Marshalls Moncey and Mortier took over the locale within a day. The second led his forces over the Ebeo river and approached the plaza with 10,000 men at 9:00 a.m. attacking the Arrabal, a sector of Zaragoza that is isolated from the rest by the river, an hour later. There Valero de Bernabé was found along the rest if his division, serving under General José de Manzo, guarding it with improvised batteries placed at strategic points to block access. These managed to surprise Mortier&#x27;s forces, who expected to take the Arrabal without resistance, suffering several casualties at the hand of the Spanish musketeers and artillery. Nonetheless, the French reorganized and launched numerous waves, until their final retreat at 4:00 p.m. when they moved out of range. Valero de Bernabé considered this day a decisive win, nothing that there were French remains scattered throughout the battleground and piled against their defense.

Rumors spread during the days that followed, some citing that either the Duque del Infantado or General Reding would come to help, others that Bonaparte was trapped at the Paular Monastery. Cautious, the town celebrated these by tolling the bells and singing religious songs. As the French exploited these to launch all sort of ammunition, including incendiary bombs and heated cannonballs, Valero de Bernabé suspected that they were responsible for the dubious information. As Zaragosa burned, the lack of food was complicated by the outbreak of an epidemic, killing some of those trapped within and driving others to suicide. The able civilians, both men and women, joined the resistance. Children were also involved in aiding those in the frontline along their mothers. Valero de Bernabé was impressed both by the misery and the heroism that coexisted within the battle.

The French had now sieged Zaragosa for two months, with the resistance frustrating marshal Lannes who wrote to Bonaparte that they were being confronted and attacked by the townspeople who refused to surrender, something that he found disconcerting. The French continued focused on taking control of the area of Arrabal, considered a strategic point. Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s division was located at the Monjas de Altavoz Convent, where the soldiers sought refuge along the nuns that remained there. Religious buildings, due to their structure and sturdiness, were of strategic advantage. On January 27, the French managed to capture the Monastery of Santa Engracia. Three days later the monasteries of the Greek Augustinians and Santa Mónica also fell, taking more than 70 buildings away from the Spanish resistance. Valero de Bernabé was aided by a nun named Sor Dorotea, who shared her own food with him. She was also responsible for saving his life by moving his bed, concerned that it was adjacent to a cold draft, only for its former location to be bombed shortly afterwards. Valero de Bernabé brushed the incident aside, but the nun was startled and fainted.

The French continued pushing forward, capturing all of the terrain outside the city by early February, systematically breaching Zaragosa as well. The battle, however, was arduous for the emaciated Spanish and was battled in every street and building possible. The French continued exhausting all tactics, including proposing the negotiation of surrender in exchange for concessions, which was sardonically declined by Palafox.

On August 3, the French breached the door to Santa Engracia. Eleven days later, they began a fire that destroyed the convent and allowed them to capture half if Zaragosa. Another attempt at capitulation was met with more cynicism. The population, accepting their death as a likely outcome, sang songs of defiance in favor of dying before surrendering. Both actions impressed Valero de Bernabé. He participated in the attack that took place on December 21, 1808. 

===Decline of Zaragosa===
By January, the accumulation of dead bodies had become a worse health risk taking the life of José de Manzo (who was replaced by Gaspar de Teballer), with the Spanish using the French prisoners to remove the bodies of their compatriots. Valero de Bernabé was confounded by the choice of hours to exchange fire, which was mostly limited to the night hours. He recorded the actions of a young woman named Agustina Domenech, who took over a post by herself after all men had fallen and manned a cannon against the French. During the attack that took place on January 2, 1809, Valero de Bernabé managed to take over a strategic building and two pieces of artillery.

The remaining survivors of Arrabal were forced to man the batteries without guard changes, due to the losses. Personally, Valero de Bernabé also suffered the loss of Duxtrax, killed in action. During the morning of February 8, the French made a move to take Arrabal, forcing the Spanish to surrender the Convento de Jesús. However, after the military including Valero de Bernabé counterattacked once they breached the adjacent Church, forcing them to retreat after suffering several casualty. His performance at Zaragoza lead to two successive promotions, the first to Lt. Colonel as a direct consequence of this exchange, from which he emerged with an injury in his right leg. His cousin was forced to leave after falling prey to the sickness, with Valero de Bernabé inheriting the responsibilities of the Major General. The part proved risky, as he had to travel to the palace where general Palafox was situated adjacent to Arrabal at least twice a day, being exposed. By this point, most of city of Zaragoza had been reduced to rubble, with the remaining population slowly dying to the war or epidemics. The French continued their offensive, incessantly bombing the city and destroying what few buildings were left standing.

===The fall of the Arrabal===
The French spent eight days of relative tranquility building new artilleries outside the Arrabal. On February 18, 1809, after deflecting the criticism of Valero de Bernabé and others, a Spanish artillery official tried to ambush enemy troops by throwing a grenade towards them, inadvertently alerting them of the location of his batteries. The French counterattacked with full force, causing significant destruction within two hours. Taking advantage of this, they breached the Arrabal. Sieged by artillery fire, bombs and grenades, Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s group was forced to leave the San Lázaro battery and retreated towards the square of the Monasterio. The French pushed back the Spanish and killed two generals, including the baron of Visages. Valero de Bernabé was the left in charge of the remaining troops, leading a resistance that was systematically battled on each house and street, but that lost a third of its members overwhelmed by the amount of enemies. This forced them to concentrate on the Tejares battery, their last one left, where the remaining Spanish numbered 1,300 between soldiers and civilians. On the way he met lieutenant Mauricio Alber who noticing that he was only wearing a frock coat gave him an intricate navy uniform. There a reunion was held, where a strategy to move towards the adjacent rural zone of Justibal was discarded due to enemy presence. After seven hours of battle, the group determined that the only option left was to stipulate the condition of the Spanish surrender, which the French opting to ignore capitulations, dividing the captured in groups and stripping them of their weapons and most of their belongings.

Taken prisoner, they were transported to the adjacent Molinos within an hour. The French officers separated their Spanish counterparts and were amused how malnourished men could present resistance. Valero de Bernabé was offered a tobacco by a French officer and requested food. There, he encountered a comrade named José Semanat, with whom he discussed their mutual misery and discussed how he was left broke by losing five ounces of gold, being given half an ounce as a gesture of friendship. During the exchange, he noticed that the silver spurs that he was wearing were still in his feet and hid them. The French generally respected him, since he was still wearing the uniform that he found during the siege, unlike other of the captured. Valero de Bernabé was witness to the systematic burning of what was left of Zaragosa and the purging of those that had remained within, choosing to meditate as a distraction. Afterwards, he was separated from the group and taken towards a dinner prepared by the French officer, who curiously questioned about the Spanish resistance. Valero de Bernabé was given a place to sleep in a building where the French officers were with the protection of this individual, sympathizing with them the loss of comrades. After a sleepless night, he requested to meet the other Spanish officers, who had been taken away, creating anxiety and frustration within him, while wondering why he had been treated differently or why he had not been warned by Semanat. Noticing a grenadier troop assembling behind him, Valero de Bernabé became convinced that he was going to be executed, confronting the enemy officer that had supervised him, only to be told that they had no interest in &quot;executing the brave&quot;, citing the extraordinary resistance at Zaragosa, and also critiquing the ambition of his own leaders and the uncritical following that Bonaparte had gained. Surprised by this, he was taken to lunch along the other French officers, where he gave the spurs to the officer as gratitude. The following day he was taken before Lannes, who was amused when Valero de Bernabé requested that his horse was returned. 

Capitulations stalled due to an illness suffered by Paralox, with the marshal refusing requests for temporary ceasefire and pressuring by launching more attacks against a reduced population. A Board replaced the ill officer and met with Lannes, who only offered exemptions for women and children, which prompted the Spanish side to insist that it would rather disappear than surrender on his terms. As a witness, Valero de Bernabé noted feeling pride at this stance, particularly due to the circumstances. Lannes in turn offered to give the military an honorable exit from the city. Eventually, capitulations were signed and the French took over Zaragosa, disposing of at least 50,000 bodies. 

===Remainder of the Peninsular War===
Valero de Bernabé was taken to Pamplona,where he was to be sent to France along other Spanish officers. However, he managed to escape and joined a regiment at Mano de Hierro, being placed under the forces of the Duke of Albuquerque. With them, he participated in the Spanish retreat from Sevilla to León island where the Central Board had been moved. This led to his second promotion, to Colonel on March 9, reaching the rank at the age of 19. After three months, he joined the forces of general Senén de Contreras in his mission to aid the town of Tarragona, which was sieged by the French marshal Suchet. Under the general&#x27;s governance the population there employed similar tactics to Zaragosa, with individuals of all groups resisting, but the city systematically fell into French control who killed him in the process before sacking it. Valero de Bernabé survived this siege and left, joining the Regiment of Chinchilla.

On May 21, 1809, Joaquín Ibañez de Bernabé Cuevas y Grior certified all of the work that Valero de Bernabé had done under his supervision. He remained stationed here for three months. He was awarded the ribbon of the Zaragosa defenders.

In 1810, Valero de Bernabé was sent from the Central Reserve Division of the Army to the Plaza de Cartagena, where he involved in an epidemic while serving in the garrison. In June 18 and 24, 1811, he was involved at actions in Venta del Baúl. On July 21, 1812, Valero de Bernabé and his artillery company entered Ibi, pushing the enemy back to a castle and holding position at the town despite the arrival of reinforcements. Luis María Balanzat later noted in his certification that they remained in their posts despite being early surrounded. Between April 12 and 13, 1813, he fought at Castalla. Valero de Bernabé led the Compañia de Cazadores del Regimiento de Chinchilla and the Division&#x27;s column on June 13, 1813. He also led his company at the port of Albaida, where they were outnumbered by the enemy. On June 6, 1813, Valero de Bernabé led the retaking of the town of Muro and gained control of other adjacent settlements. From there, he participated in the battle of Castalla under general Roche, who after exchanging control with the French, ordered a retreat when reinforcements led by general Harispe. 

Valero de Bernabé was also present in the castle of Sagunto, holding position from January 9 to May 22, 1814, when it was abandoned. The French retreated from Spain shortly afterwards, pursued by the Iberian army.

For his performance in the war, in which he battled for six straight years at several pivotal sites, Valero de Bernabé received the Laureated Cross of San Fernando and was declared Benemérito de la Patria in heroic and eminent grade twice. On March 11, 1815, he was awarded the Cross of Zaragoza in a diploma. At age 26, a copy of his service sheet as a First Adjutant Colonel and the 14th Line of the Expeditionary Battalion in the Infantry Regiment of Sevilla was certified by Lt. Colonel Antonio Muñoz. On March 14, 1816, Valero de Bernabé received the 3rd Army Cross in a diploma. On September 15, 1817, he was also awarded the 2nd Army Cross in a diploma.

===Masonic rite===
After the war, he held a debt of gratitude towards Sor Dorotea, whom he was unable to contact or learn of her fate despite making arrangements. Later, he would encounter Agustina Domenech again, now decorated and recognized with the rank of Captain.

However, liberals soon grew frustrated with the restored Ferdinand VII, who immediately discarded the proposed 1812 Cádiz Constitution, jailed its proponents and reestablished the Inquisition court. Valero de Bernabé was moved to the guarniciones. Also studying, he became involved with the masonry lodges that were popularized since 1814 and where a number of liberal military-men were discussing how to deal with the absolutists postures of the Crown, conspiring to bring it down and return the Constitution and to stop the assignation of troops to fight in the rebellious American colonies. These grew exponentially, until most of the military was affiliated to them by 1817. General Juan O&#x27;Donojú, to whom he served as adjutant, was also a mason. Valero de Bernabé, who was expected to leave and fight against the independence movement at Argentina as adjunct ant of General Dionisio Vives&#x27; Buenos Aires battalion, had joined the logia named El Taller Sublime along Antonio Alcalá Galiano. They were sent to Lebrija to wait for transport. Eventually, the conspiracies led to the Grito de Riego, which aborted these plans. In 1819, Enrique O&#x27;Donnell, Conde de La Bisbal imprisoned several of the Masonic leaders, including fellow Puerto Rican Demetrio O&#x27;Daly and Antonio Quiroga, in a castle. However, sympathizing with the idea of stopping overseas intervention, he allowed them more liberty than expected. A reactionary movement tried to recruit O&#x27;Donojú as their main leader, but it was Riego who ultimately took over the revolt. O&#x27;Daly and Quiroga escaped and led their respective troops as the insurrection massified. Fearing that he would be executed, Ferdinand relented and gave way to the Constitution. As part of the ensuing reform, the constitutional government named O&#x27;Donojú Captain General of Andalusia and Valero de Bernabé accompanied him as adjutant.

Meanwhile, in Mexico Iturbe led its own resistance against Spain, to whom he proposed the Plan de Iguala, which negotiated the establishment of a monarchy with ties to the Spanish Crown. The document was not approved by the Spanish Congress. This led to an increase in revolutionary actions, leading to the destitution of viceroy Apodaca and general Novella being given the authority. However, the Spanish decided to name O&#x27;Donojú as the new viceroy, who accepted expecting to negotiate peace in terms similar to the rejected proposals. The functionary left towards Mexico in 1821, and along him traveled Valero de Bernabé.

==Mexican War of Independence==
===Joining the revolution; Chief of Staff===
However, the Mexican revolution was distinctly monarchic and supported by the Church. O&#x27;Donojú encountered a situation where the revolt was now the predominant force in the colony, and in which Novella refused to recognize him as viceroy. Eventually, and influenced by the circumstances that had led to the political environment he unsuccessfully tried to calm down the situation, but was met with resistance. Valero de Bernabé was inclined to support the independence cause and communicated this stance to him. While moving towards the capital, O&#x27;Donojú&#x27;s forces were involved in some skirmishes with the revolutionaries and backed away towards Veracruz. He then approached the aristocratic Itúrbide and knowing of his monarchic sentiment, sent Valero de Bernabé and other officers to negotiate a treaty. The pacto de Córdoba was signed on August 24, 1821, proposing an independent monarchy led by the Spanish monarchy, in particular Carlos and Francisco de Paula. However, Ferdinand VII was focused on the Iberian affairs and forged an alliance with Louis XVIII to reverse the liberal Constitution, with the Congress taking over the evaluation and eventually voted against and nullified it. O&#x27;Donojú was considered a traitor by elements at Spain, facing the criticism of the count of Toreno and representatives of Moscoso and Espiga, while being supported by the Mexican deputies Lucas Alaman, Puchet and Lallave. 

Faced with this decision, O&#x27;Donojú and his allies defected Spain and traveled to the capital on October 26, a day later Itúrbide entered the city with the rebel army. Both formed the board that ruled immediately afterwards, along Velázquez de León, Bárcenas and Yañez. Itúrbide was placed in charge of the nation, which moved towards an imperial format, and placed in effect a declaration of Independence was drafted on September 28, 1821. Valero de Bernabé addressed his decision to defect Spain and join those that fought to gain their independence from the kingdom citing that &quot;it is very difficult to find a single american of those that served in Europe that had not behaved with honor and decision in defense of Liberty, and while the cause was worthy, the ingrate government never deserved [their] sacrifice.&quot; Ultimately, he explained it as a matter of principle, which was enhanced by his birthplace, which beckoned his interests to the New World. He later noted that he &quot;overcame great obstacles and suffered physically for his opinions&quot; as part of his transition. Wanting to reduce the profile of his noble lineage, he began signing his name as simply &quot;Antonio Valero&quot;.

The local population was divided between Itúrbide and O&#x27;Donojú, a conflict that was solved when the latter died ten days later, officially of pleurisy but with rumors immediately stating that he was poisoned. Valero de Bernabé was given the option to continue his military service for the Mexican army, quickly joining their ranks and being promoted to Chief of Staff of the nation. 

===Plot to assassinate the emperor===
However, as a Congress was created the first political parties mimicked the conservative and liberal stances of Spain, with conservatives supporting the establishment of a monarchy and liberals lobbying for a republican government. As before, Valero de Bernabé joined the Partido Liberal and faced Itúrbide&#x27;s Borbonistas and the Ecclesiastic party. The Congress commissioned him to write rules for their Army. Defeated in Congress, their retreated to the Masonic logias under the Scottish rite, with Valero de Bernabé of which he had funded and presiding over one of them. As before, these entities served as the discussion grounds for republican coup d&#x27;erat. However, Itúrbide made a move to ascend to the throne on August 10, 1822, aided by a military contingent, clergy and civilians. An extraordinary session was called at Congress, which the liberals boycotted, resulting in his designation as emperor. 

Valero de Bernabé was incensed at the move, rejecting the provisions that other officers accepted; the peaceful integration into the new power sphere in exchange for a promotion to the rank of general only. He would preside a session with his masons where he actively plotted to assassin the emperor. Itúrbide opted not to directly attack the logias, concerned with the influence that Valero de Bernabé ejected through them. The empire infiltrated the logias by planting spies within them. Itbúrbide schemed to quell the assassination attempt by making the masonic conspiracies public and immediately promoting Valero de Bernabé to the rank of brigadier general, planting suspicion that he had published the information himself. The plot was successful, forcing Valero de Bernabé to leave the country, after learning that his co-conspirators planned to turn on him and convinced that they would not believe that he was innocent. 

He confronted the emperor and requested his passport, revealing that he was aware of the imperial influence among the republicans, and calling Itúrbide a &quot;common tyrant&quot;. When responding to the reason why he was leaving, Valero de Bernabé stated that &quot;[Itúrbide] knew [the motive] better than even himself and insisted that he only wanted his passport as &quot;reward&quot; for his services. He then left Veracruz accompanied by another Puerto Rican, a man named Hernáiz who was a Spanish navy lieutenant. They left towards Jamaica, but where intercepted by a corsair near Havana, where they had to disembark. Despite remaining hidden in the Spanish colony, Valero de Bernabé was eventually discovered and imprisoned in a fort. There he rendezvoued with Vives, then governor, who officially ordered his transport to Spain and the issue of a passport for this purpose, but also relaxed the security of the jail. Helped by a group of dissidents, he escaped and managed to travel to board a vapor ship leaving towards New York by using a passport that bore a signature supposed to belong to Vives. From there, he embarked to La Guaira. Due to the nature of this event, its authenticity was questioned until his son, José Valero, certified it during the 20th century.

Afterwards, he would criticize Itúrbide, not only for his imperial ambitions, but also for what he felt were vestiges of &quot;Neron and Caligula&quot;, citing a &quot;political and religious Inquisition&quot; that led to the use of deception against the republicans and calling him a hypocrite for allying with the Borbones. Despite the political critic, Valero de Bernabé lamented leaving &quot;a country that owes [him] a few sacrifices for its political existence&quot;. On May 1, 1824, Ferdinand VII issued an amnesty decree pardoning those involved in the rebellion, which omitted O&#x27;Donojú and his followers, including Valero de Bernabé, who were still threatened with execution if they entered Spanish soil.

==Spanish American wars of independence==
===Joining Bolívar; ratification of rank===
Valero de Bernabé harbored intentions to pursue the independence of the Caribbean colonies, the last bastion of the Spanish in the New World, including his native Puerto Rico and expected to have Bolívar&#x27;s support once the South American wars were over. After arriving to La Guaira&#x27;s port, he offered his services to the Colombian army, which were accepted by the Vice President, general Santander, who informed him that Bolívar was currently focused on the situation at Peru, where a number of treasons have left him understaffed and suspicious, and that he could not make a compromise on his initiative to pursue the independence of the Antilles at the moment. At Bogota he not only met Santander, but also the general in charge of Simón Bolívar&#x27;s incursion at Peru, Carlos Soublette. However, a wait of several months that followed until the organization of an army bored him.

Instead of remaining inactive, Valero de Bernabé contacted general Páez on October 20, 1823, who was still battling at Venezuela, offering his services. However, the officer learned that he was being reassigned to take charge of a division at Bogota and declined. On October 28, Valero de Bernabé was formally informed of his post by Colombia&#x27;s Secretary of Exterior P. Gual. He was given the rank of brigadier general and assigned to serve as Commander in Chief of the Second Column at Magdalena, from which they were going to Peru to aid Bolívar. Valero de Bernabé found himself in command of unprepared troops, since the bulk of the army was there already. 

On November 24, 1823, the delegation of a Cuban independentist group tied to Bernabé Sánchez arrived to La Guaira with intentions of contacting Bolívar, serendipitously staying in the same inn as him. Among them were José Antonio Miralla, Fructuoso del Castillo, José Ramón Betancourt, José Agustín Arango, Gaspar Betancourt Cisneros, and José Aniceto Iznaga. Recognizing common goals, Valero de Bernabé invited them to travel along him to Bogotá, where he was going to meet Santander. The group travelled towards Caracas, where the Cubans met the president of the Colombian Supreme Court Francisco Javier Yáñez, who expressed the same concerns about the timing of the secessionist incursion. Being convinced to postpone the initiative, the group split with Betancourt Cisneros and Ancieto rendezvousing with Valero de Bernabé at Puerto Cabello and reaching Maracaibo on December 14, 1823. From here, they prepared to take the trip to Bogotá on horseback and using canoes, reaching there on January 19, 1824. However, Santader ratified his previous stances on the timing of an independence incursion in the Caribbean.

He travelled to Cartagena, and within months prepared a group of mestizos and amerindians recruited Soledad, Santa Marta and Corozal, for battle. In total, the Second Division was 1,600 strong by the time it left towards Peru, even before it could receive additional members from Zulia, at the behest of general Carlos Soublette. This officer wrote to Valero de Bernabé on August 2, 1824, setting the date of embarkment four days later, time in which he would have to coordinate with other officers. He reunited with Arango, whom he assigned as his private secretary. Valero de Bernabé would traverse the isthmus towards Gatun within days. Santander wrote to Soublette speaking highly of the division, with both officers expressing satisfaction at the improvised group&#x27;s performance. Valero de Bernabé would remain in communication with the officer, with whom he discussed processal issues and from whom he learned that Itúrbide had been executed.

On February 16, 1824, Valero de Bernabé received a carta de naturaleza from the Vice President acting on a law approved on July 4, 1823, with the news making it to the &quot;Gaceta de Colombia&quot;. Despite this, he faced criticism from the native officers such as general R.M. Carambaño, who insisted that he only took over the Second Division because general Ibarra had been injured in a horse accident. These arguments have been refuted by historians, since Valero actually organized the division and Ibarra was given control of the 1st Division and orders to cross the isthmus after him and aid the injured and ill of the 2nd along the way, having redirected to Caracas before. Ibarra himself expressed respect towards Valero de Bernabé due to his previous experience along O&#x27;Donojú, listing him as a &quot;good officer&quot; in a letter to Bolívar.

On August 18, 1824, Soublette wrote to Bolívar about the departure of what he called the &quot;Valero Division&quot;, providing a description of its composition and expressed that Valero de Bernabé was &quot;enthusiastic [and] willing to be useful&quot;, but also noted some resentment towards him for receiving the rank of brigadier general despite being a recent arrival, but justifying the selection as he had actual military merits as opposed to several Colombian generals which had been promoted as payment due to a lack of funding (a practice that Bolívar described as &quot;stimulating enthusiasm and rewarding feats&quot;, despite recognizing that &quot;most [of his generals] only had brutal bravery as a merit&quot; in the &quot;Diario de Bucaramanga&quot;). The situation was exacerbated when he reached Bogotá and his rank was formally recognized. 

During his absence a smear campaign took place in the capital&#x27;s media, in which a newspaper named &quot;El Noticiosito&quot; published a piece claiming that &quot;the only service that he had made to Colombia was [being a ventriloquist, one of his hobbies] and publishing some paper [...] that was seen as scientific and eloquent&quot;, also implying that he had bought the rank from &quot;some Congress party&quot;. Another newspaper titled &quot;El Constitucional&quot; rebuffed this piece, sardonically congratulated the publication on behalf of him for attacking while he was gone, before turning serious and chastising the editorial line &quot;small and diminute ideas&quot;, calling the critics of the government out and challenging them to leave their anonymity and meet with their targets publicly. &quot;El Noticiosito&quot; published a reply titled &quot;Un viudo del Noticiosito al amigo del General Valero y del Señor Miralla&quot;, where it argued that he could possess &quot;as much capacity and patriotism as Sieyes and Roger had at France, but that does not justify being placed ahead of the military race, being a foreigner, of other military-men that sealed [the independence] with their blood&quot;.

===Peruvian War of Independence===
Arriving at Peru, Valero de Bernabé joined forces with the 1st Division under colonel Monagas and 600 men sent by colonel Diego Ibarra. The former was unsatisfied with his new role and was granted a license, being replaced by Rafael Picazo. On October 20, 17 units formed a fleet that took his forces to sea, facing weather conditions that dispersed it. Valero de Bernabé managed to reach the island of Puná on November 14. A day later, he left towards Guayaquil. There he met governor Juan Paz del Castillo and received new directions, momentarily staying there and collaborating with the general while trying to prepare his ailing troops. Valero de Bernabé informed Bolívar of his arrival and received reply from Manuel Jóse Soler to organize and prepare to continue towards Peru. Bolívar and Paz del Castillo exchanged letters on the situation, in which the general stated that Valero de Bernabé &quot;has patience and has worked much&quot;, but that he and the troops had fallen ill upon arriving, affecting the composition and conditioning of the soldiers. Regardless of this, Valero de Bernabé took 1,500 infantrymen towards Ayacucho on January 15, 1825. 

On February 15, 1825, Valero de Bernabé arrived to Chorrillos. At Perú he faced the distrust of the locals and the independentist officers as a result of the campaign published at Bogotá. Three days later, he arrived to Lima. There, Valero de Bernabé and Arango met with Bolívar and insisted on their plan to lead an incursion to seek the independence of Puerto Rico and Cuba, but received the same response on the timing, followed by an assertion that he did intend to do so in the future, having made a promise to one of his dead colonels. He was given the role of Chief of Staff and received orders to lead the division that was active at the siege of the castle of El Callao under general Bartolomé Salom. In a letter describing the reunion, Bolívar discussed his impression on Valero de Bernabé, stating that he &quot;seems like an excellent officer from what I have seen and heard of him and from his physiognomy&quot;.

He placed lines at Bellavista, adjacent to El Callao, preparing to take on the Spanish forces of general Rodil, who stayed within the structure for nearly a year, refusing to surrender despite the army having done so at Ayacucho. However, his relationship with Salom was difficult, with the general often complaining before Bolívar directly and through fellow general Tomás de Heres (who supported his comrade despite admitting in his letter that he had not met Valero de Bernabé), both of which lobbied to have him removed. These conflicts began after Valero de Bernabé founded a Masonic lodge which attracted several officers, despite Salom approaching him and trying to convince him otherwise, considering it a venue for indiscipline and a threat to his authority.

As provisions became scarce, Rodil ordered the expulsion of those that he considered useless to the fight, in particular women. On May 2, Salom ordered his troops not to receive them and to send them back. The following day, Rodil ordered to execute them, with the independentist forces intervening. Valero de Bernabé decided to provide refuge for the group, challenging and questioning Salom&#x27;s judgement. He commanded some of his soldiers to defend them and facilitate the arrival to Bellavista. Valero then challenged Rodil to a duel, citing a lack of chivalry. This gesture was well received by most of the other officers, including Manuel Figueredo, wrote about the incident in &quot;Diario&quot;.

Salom and Tomás de Heres insisted on his separation citing increasing insubordination following the act. On May 4, 1825, the second contacted Bolívar reaffirming this posture. Two weeks later, Bolívar ordered Valero de Bernabé to travel towards Colombia, leaving Salom&#x27;s complaints in charge of Santander. However, Salom withdrew his complaints, minimizing the scope of the matter to a &quot;conflict between two gentlemen&quot; as opposed to widespread insubordination as cited by Tomás de Heres) and instead contacted Bolívar, requesting the stay of Valero de Bernabé until El Callao surrendered. From this point on, his reports were positive.

On January 21, 1826, Santander replied to a letter informing him that Bolívar had not lingering issues with the squabble between the two officers. Valero de Bernabé had originally written requesting assistance for his wife and to discuss his impending award of the Cross of Mexico. Five days later, the capitulation for the surrender of El Callao was signed. On February 15, 1826, Bolívar wrote to Valero de Bernabé congratulating his for the performance at El Callao, citing that he was &quot;very satisfied with his conduct&quot; and offering his recommendation while requesting the reward offered to those involved in the battle.

===Simulacrums of a Puerto Rican War of Independence===

After Peru, Bolívar assigned Valero de Bernabé to take a Division towards the isthmus of Panama, expecting an incursion from admiral Laborde. Sucre wrote to Soublette discussing the possibility of joining forces with Valero de Bernabé and begin the emancipation of the Antilles. He arrived during the preparations for the Panama Congress and served as Military Commander and picked the Girardot regiment and reinforcements from Cartagena which were to serve as defense for Portobello. On April 9, 1826, Santander wrote to him a letter informing that he was aware of his work in the department due to reports by general Carreño and that the government was satisfied with his performance. On May 24, 1826, Aniceto reached Bellavista, with the intention of reuniting with Valero de Bernabé and travel to Cartagena and wait in anticipation the beginning of the Caribbean incursion along the Girardot regiment and the reinforcements. On July 9, 1826, Santander congratulated him for the state of the defenses at Portobello, expressing concern about Laborde and discussing the Páez uprising.

The power struggle at Colombia turned several of the officers rebellious, being led by Páez and Santander in separate schemes, convinced Bolívar to leave Peru and reunited with Valero de Bernabé at Panama. One of few to remain loyal, he escorted the leader to Bogotá. In the process, Valero de Bernabé witnessed how the rebels had employed Bolívar&#x27;s extended absence to turn the Colombian masses against him. The leader was frustrated by what he considered &quot;ingratitude&quot; and faced a similar situation at Venezuela, where he was stripped of all power and recognition. As the Panama Congress begun, Bolívar retreated towards the Quinta de Fusca. Valero de Bernabé passed the 1827 Easter celebration there, and was involved in the preparations to counter a coup d&#x27;erat planned at Zipaquisá.

The Congress of Panama approved the resolution to pursue the independence of Puerto Rico and Cuba unanimously, with Bolívar arguing the organization of troops and war ships. However, these plans where used to pressure the end of the war and force Spain to recognize the new nations. Immersed in an internal struggle and receiving demands of the United States not to interfere with their interests at Cuba (and preferring Spanish over British control in the region) and Britain&#x27;s opposition to intervention because of negotiations to leave the Caribbean alone if Spain recognized the emancipated nations (in turn expecting the United States or France to take over if Spain left the region), the incursion was aborted for the moment. 

The Ocaña Convention placed Bolívar and Santander in direct confrontation, with the latter having the majority. The situation failed to reach a consensus and the royalist faction withdrew from the event, effectively marking the dissolution of Gran Colombia into smaller nations. As Bolívar headed towards Bogotá, either to abdicate as president or take the role of dictator depending on the source, he survived an assassination attempt. This led to the execution of several dissidents and the exile of Santander. At Bogotá, Valero de Bernabé served as Subchief of Staff.

On January 25, 1827, after Spain and England entered war, Bolívar began plotting to side with the British and take Puerto Rico along generals Briceño Méndez, Montilla and Padilla. Santander proposed the use of the Girardot battalion in the incursion, knowing Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s willingness and expecting to easily convince him. However, before the plan came to fruition, Spain and Britain solved their differences diplomatically, with Bolívar opting to not to enter into a war without allies. José Valero would later state that his father never stopped thinking about Puerto Rico, and that he persistently held to the idea of its independence.

===Decline and death of Bolívar; Exile===
On June 3, 1828, general José La Mar declared war on Colombia and took over Ecuador intending to annex it to Peru. Valero de Bernabé was placed in charge of a division during the counteroffensive, but halted at Popayan, where news broke that La Mar had been defeated by general Flores. 

In 1829, Bolívar named Valero de Bernabé Commander of Arms of Puerto Cabello, facing an increasingly secessionist sentiment among Venezuelans. He was charged with dealing with armed revolutionaries at Guines and Pamanco. Valero de Bernabé succeeded in defeating and dissolving both groups. Bolívar, addressing him as a &quot;dear friend of the heart&quot;, congratulated him for his success in these missions. After receiving support of the populace and the local government, he opted to stay two months and aid, at the request of general Páez. For this campaign, Valero de Bernabé was named Commander of Arms of Caracas.

Following another uprising led by general Córdova, Bolívar abdicated his title of president of Colombia. In 1830, Páez led a campaign for secession, attacking Bolívar&#x27;s opposition as the element preventing its completion. This led to demands of exile at the Congress of Valencia. Valero de Bernabé, serving as Minister of War and Navy, protested the treatment being given to Bolívar, being the sole dissident. After the exile demand passed, he rescinded his office and was in turn exiled himself for this stance, settling at St. Thomas. Six months later, Bolívar died at Santa Marta. 

==Venezuelan Federal War==
===Revolutionary Head of Aragua===
Valero de Bernabé remained at St. Thomas for a year. Recognizing his military career, the government granted a pension to his family. In 1831, interim Secretary of Interior Antonio Leocadio Gúzman approached him with the intention of having him denounce the exiled Venezuelans. In May, Valero de Bernabé was allowed back into Venezuela. There he revendouzed with Francisco Hernáiz, who extended an invitation on behalf of the government to retake military office. He took the offer, initially remaining distant from the increasingly unstable political landscape. When the liberal and conservative parties were proposed, Valero de Bernabé abandoned this political retirement to join the ranks of the first as one of its founding members. 

When general Judas Tadeo Piñango revolted against the government of José Tadeo Monagas, Valero de Bernabé was tasked with opposition the insurrection. He defeated the rebel leader at the Action of Taratara and inflicted wounds that would later prove lethal. For this, Valero de Bernabé was promoted to the rank of divisional general. Under the liberal Monagas, Valero de Bernabé would serve as Commander of Arms of both Caracas and Cumaná and also served as Secretary of War and Navy. He was later assigned Jefe del Ejército del Centro and of the State of Aragua, an office that he held until general Julián Castro led a coup d&#x27;erat that placed the conservatives in charge, immediately resigning. From there, he left to his hacienda at Cantón San Sebastián. The new government arrested Valero de Bernabé and transported him to Caracas, but eventually allowed him to leave. He returned to his house at La Victoria.

On July 2, 1858, a federal revolution led by generals Zamora and Juan Crisóstomo Falcón took over the province and named Valero de Bernabé the revolutionary leader for the state of Aragua. He led the organization of enough forces to oppose an incursion by the government, who intended to retake control. At Boca Chica, Valero de Bernabé defeated the centralist forces. However, the federalists faced a counterattack that resulted in losses at Tiznado and Gengibre. As Valero de Bernabé led his forces to join those of Zamora, the general was killed and replaced by a less prepared Falcón. He blamed the loss of the revolution of the tactics employed by this officer, whom he accused of possessing nothing more than &quot;a bravery that could have been imprudent&quot; and of disregarding the preparation of the troops and of failing to keep a proper structure in the General Staff resulting in inefficiency which he tried to compensate by issuing unfair punishment to his officials. As an example of this, Valero de Bernabé cites incidents where Falcón stopped the march of the revolutionary army to &quot;amuse himself by shooting howler monkeys&quot; or set an impromptu fight between two bulls.

===Exile at Colombia and death===

After the revolution was forced to retreat, Valero de Bernabé travelled towards Colombia, traversing terrain that lacked infrastructure and transport. On March 28, 1860, he reached Amparo, where he noticed the presence of enemy soldiers guarding the customs building. After Falcón arrived, he spoke to the disgraced leader and opted to cross the river. Valero de Bernabé travelled towards Arauca, but opted not to enter the town due to its reputation as a conservative bastion. On April 7, 1860, they reached El Veneno in Colombia, where they received a cordial welcome. From there, Valero de Bernabé left towards La Pastora, where Ventura Melgarejo offered him lunch to his disdain, having judged the individual a somewhat wealthy figure that exploited this to &quot;enact a despotic authority&quot;. His forces managed to cross the Ele river with the help of the local natives, towards El Trompito. They then crossed the Bravo river, guarding against other tribes. On the other side, they gave some tobacco to the natives and set camp, wary that their horses could be stolen by them. While getting ready to continue the march, Valero de Bernabé noticed that part of his entourage had left during the night, opting to follow the tracks left by a bull. On April 12, 1860, they arrived at Betoye, where they encountered some comrades and where they rested at a mansion. The following day, Valero de Bernabé received a mare from colonel Eulogio Aranguren and rendezvoused with Falcón. Marching towards Casenare, they reached Moreno four days later, where he reunited with Falcón again. Valero de Bernabé remained there until May 9, 1860, reaching Meseta the following day. Traveling the following morning, his mare slipped from a slope and both fell, forcing him to continue on foot. Arriving at Labranza Grande, Valero de Bernabé traded the injured animal for another, continuing and making brief stops at Venta de Caicus. On May 17, 1860, they crossed the Páramode San Ignacio and arrived at Mongua, where Valero de Bernabé visited the Church and was amused after recognizing the work of Rousseau, D&#x27;Alambert and Voltaire among the priest&#x27;s collection. The following day they arrived to the liberal bastion of Sogamoso, where he stayed until May 30, later commenting favorably about his time there. Valero de Bernabé was joined by colonel Ferrero and commander Santos Mattey, who escorted him towards Tunja, where he met with the president of the state, the general commander and a doctor who had a daughter of the same age as Rosa, which made him feel homesick, opting to attend a mass at a convent and pray for the safety of his family at Venezuela. A dance was held in his honor, being attended by the local nobility. On June 3, 1860, they left towards Venta Quemada, from where they travelled to Venta del Sopé, their last stop before reaching the capital. At Bogotá Valero de Bernabé rented a house, where he was visited by Fructuoso del Castillo (now a commander in the Colombian military), general Pablo Durán who had received his aid as governor after being jailed in 1829, and several of his colleagues. Valero de Bernabé later commented how the local aristocracy welcomed him, receiving visits from a host of people including the Chief of Business of Peru colonel Francisco Selaya, the family of general Codazi and Elvira de Yuleta, to whom he had served as marriage godfather. However, he took notice that the city&#x27;s location represented a challenge to its development. On July 21, 1860, Valero de Bernabé left Bogotá, intending to move closer to his family. As he passed to the Quinta de Fusca on his way to Cúcuta, he rememorated about his time with Bolívar. Arriving at his destination, he reunited with Hernáiz, from whom he received a letter from his wife. Valero de Bernabé also received a letter for general Andrade, which negotiated safe passage for himself in Venezuelan territory. However, the reunions that followed failed to produce results, as the officer refused to take authority on the matter. From there he wrote on the return of Páez, Angel Quintero and the failed peace talks that followed.

Valero de Bernabé received limited safe passage from the governor of Cúcuta, Ramón Palenzuela, allowing him to travel to the house at Táchira. There he wrote to Páez about his desire to reunite with his family in Caracas, for which he received no reply. However, his daughter Manuela warned him not to risk the journey, since he had been denied passport. Governor Bracho informed him that orders were issued for his exile and proposed a declaration of loyalty to Páez and a compromise not to become involved in the re-emergent revolution, but Valero de Bernabé refused to do it, considering such a gesture &quot;servile&quot;. Instead, he traveled to Maracaibo and stayed at the house of general Urdaneta. Valero de Bernabé remained critical of Páez, whom he regarded as &quot;the primordial cause of all revolutions [and] the biggest hindrance [towards] prosperity&quot; and a &quot;hypocritical [and ambitious] tyrant&quot;, and his politics, growing convinced that his moderation while exiled had been a farce. When news were made that Páez and several functionaries were arriving to Maracaibo, he expressed disdain. Travelling towards Cúcuta, Valero de Bernabé learned that the liberals had taken Bogotá and that they had established the right for wage and pension to the military involved in the independence wars. He offered his services to the authorities and received a passport honoring his rank that allowed his travel to the capital. On the way he stopped in the conservative town of Málaga, where he was received by president Salgar, which whom he had no issues despite the difference in criteria. From there he travelled towards Socorro, arriving to Chiquinquisá 14 days later after traversing rough terrain. After arriving to Bogotá, Valero de Bernabé stayed at the Tequendama Hotel, where he met Antonio Leocadio Gúzman and Nicholas Quevedo, later visiting general Mosquera who accepted reincorporating him into the Colombian military symbolized by the award of a uniform, silk belt sword and a coat. He was also given means to make sure that 100 pesos from his earnings were sent to his family. While traveling to Tunja, Valero de Bernabé received instructions from the president to return to Bogotá and leaving him in charge of the city in case of conflict. He received the support of Mosquera during his tenure, eventually retiring at the age of 72.

In April 1863, the Federal War concluded with the federalists victorious. Valero de Bernabé died on June 7, 1863, at 11:00 p.m. unable to reunite with his family at Venezuela. The following day he received obsequies with full military honors. On June 9, 1863, Valero de Bernabé was laid to rest in a local cemetery. Afterwards, his family remained at Venezuela. With time the exact location of his body was lost, due to lack of maintenance and his figure fell out of the Colombian traditions. General Gúzman Blanco later ordered for his body to be relocated to the National Pantheon, but was unable to do so, unable to locate his body.

==Personal life==

Valero de Bernabé was describe as educated, &quot;of Byronian type&quot; and &quot;possessor of an exquisite culture&quot;. Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s aristocratic lexicon, tendency to wear clean uniforms and his customs involving mannerisms and chivalry contrasted with the less formal behavior of both Bolívar and the other officers, something that worked in his favor at Lima making him popular among the women. Palma notes that at the age of 37, he was considered &quot;the perfect type of chivalrous ladies man&quot;. Tovar also addressed this description, citing an &quot;elegant figure, well modulated voice [and] singular people skills&quot;, noting that he &quot;was gentle even with the miserable&quot; and &quot;pleasant to talk&quot;.

Valero de Bernabé was a ventriloquist. Palma wrote about this skill in &quot;El Fraile y la Monja del Callao&quot; and &quot;Un ventrílocuo&quot;. In the first, the author narrates an incident where Valero de Bernabé was surrounded in an alley while returning to Bellavista, concealing himself and used his skill to project revolutionary cries as if they were coming from the rifles of the royalist, who were shocked and dropped the weapons, believing that they had become possessed by a demon, before running away to his amusement.

General Luis Capella Toledo also wrote about the skill in &quot;La Serrana de Anco&quot; citing an episode where a family from Anco reached Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s camp at Bellavista, who escorted them back there and projected his voice upon the forage to convince their daughter to return with her fiancé there. He would also employ this skill to play pranks, as he did when he tricked general Santa Cruz into thinking that a shrimp was begging not to be eaten, convinced a merchant that chicks had were complaining from within freshly laid eggs and chastised a herbalist for hitting his donkey by tricking him into believing that the animal warned him about vengeance. Despite being mischievous, Valero de Bernabé usually explained his ability to those that he fooled.

Tovar describes his ideas as &quot;liberal&quot; and &quot;radical&quot; about his definition of the concept of liberty, which the author states he was capable of disseminating &quot;eloquently&quot;, something that earned him a following at Lima. He also describes him as &quot;brace and experienced in the art of war&quot; and states that he displayed &quot;military cleverness in several attacks&quot; during his presence at Peru. In reference to the incident where Rodil ordered the execution of those he regarded as useless, he classifies it as an example of &quot;observative character, humanitarian sentiment and spirituality&quot;.

When discussing his opposition to the Utúrbide and to Bolívar&#x27;s exile, Venezuelan Vicente Dávila considers that this is a recurring personality trait of Valero de Bernabé, assuming that it emanated from &quot;his republican principles&quot;. He considered the latter event a &quot;ring of glory in his service record, which now exhibits its dues with pride.&quot; Valero de Bernabé was critical of the recurrent civil wars taking place at the emancipated Latin American nations, calling them &quot;a cancer&quot; that prevented &quot;systems of democratic governments [from ever reaching] perfection&quot;, in the process causing a malady of sociocultural issues.

==Legacy==
In life, Valero de Bernabé established logias at Mexico and Peru. Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s &quot;Memorias&quot; provided perspectives of several military incursions that were different from those compiled by early 20th Century scholars. This work was compiled in several books, some of which were lost or damaged by the passage of time, and written in a sober tone that avoided self-aggrandizement. His account of the battle at Tuleda is one of few where the entire chronology of the event is covered, and possibly the only one during this timeframe. Likewise, his firsthand account of the battle at Zaragosa, which remained unedited for 70 years, contrasted with the historian works that at the time depended mostly of pastiches of several sources. The passport bearing the counterfeit signature of Vives, and the real counterpart, were preserved by his family.

In 1874, the Venezuelan government built a National Pantheon of the Founding Fathers where the remains of their heroes were to be placed. Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s name is inscribed on the monument but his remains, which were never located, were not placed at the site. Puerto Rico has also honored Valero de Bernabé&#x27;s memory by naming a school and an avenue after him. There is also a statue of Valero de Bernabé in the city of Fajardo, his native city.

During the 1920s, his son José Valero Lara collaborated in retrieving several documents from the National Archive at Caracas and publications provided by archivist Vicente Dávila, in particular the book &quot;Investigaciones históricas&quot;, allowing for a biographical work to be published by Mariano Abril. 

His direct arrival to Peru from Mexico led to some confusion among Peruvian historians about his actual origin, including Enrique C. Tovar, who published a panflet that was credited as popularizing his figure beyond the academic circles. In it, this author describes Valero de Bernabé as possessing &quot;strong influence among the troops&quot;, describing that the &quot;Valero battery&quot; had been among the most efficient against Rodil. The author also argued that he could be considered a &quot;libertador of both Spains&quot;.

By the 1970s, this misconception had been repeated in the &quot;Diccionario hispano-americano&quot;. Eduardo Posada, former Secretary of National Historic Academy of Colombia considered Valero de Bernabé a &quot;prócer&quot; (a Spanish term akin to &quot;national hero&quot;), lamenting that his name had not been as remembered as those of other &quot;noble and disinterested men [that reached Colombia] during the heroic days of Independence&quot;. Writing about the siege of El Callao, Peruvian Ricardo Palma wrote that he &quot;was worth for his intelligence, courage, activity and preparation almost as much as an army&quot;, describing him as an &quot;unleashed lion&quot; in the battlefield.

==References==

Footnotes
Bibliography 
*

==Notes==
==See also==

*List of Puerto Ricans
*List of Puerto Rican military personnel
*Simón Bolívar
*Agustín de Iturbide
*María de las Mercedes Barbudo
*Ducoudray Holstein Expedition

==External links==
*El Nuevo Dia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4777016" start="0" end="48" title="Antonio Valero de Bernabé" label="Antonio Vicente Miguel Valero de Bernabé Pacheco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777016" start="91" end="121" title="Antonio Valero de Bernabé" label="The Liberator from Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="237" end="245" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="553" end="577" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="King Charles IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="652" end="660" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772" start="817" end="832" title="Region of Murcia" label="Murcia Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q209716" start="889" end="914" title="Siege of Saragossa (1808)" label="Siege of Saragossa (1808)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="922" end="936" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="1264" end="1277" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1534" end="1540" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q681113" start="1578" end="1606" title="Army of the Three Guarantees" label="Army of the Three Guarantees"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="1617" end="1636" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q890052" start="1806" end="1823" title="Emperor of Mexico" label="Emperor of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2107" end="2111" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="2261" end="2274" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="2398" end="2409" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q970332" start="3933" end="3951" title="José Tadeo Monagas" label="José Tadeo Monagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q304900" start="3956" end="3973" title="José Antonio Páez" label="José Antonio Páez"/>
<link wikidata="Q379053" start="4465" end="4489" title="Hidalgo (nobility)" label="Infanzonería e Hidalguía"/>
<link wikidata="Q336823" start="4558" end="4576" title="Peter IV of Aragon" label="Peter IV of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664602" start="4681" end="4702" title="War of the Two Peters" label="War of the Two Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q936045" start="4747" end="4754" title="Báguena" label="Báguena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577053" start="5090" end="5114" title="Pedro de Arbués" label="Pedro de Arbués y Valero"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="9007" end="9025" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q616200" start="12807" end="12816" title="epaulette" label="epaulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q332110" start="28671" end="28693" title="Antonio Alcalá Galiano" label="Antonio Alcalá Galiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344051" start="28836" end="28878" title="Enrique O&amp;#x27;Donnell, Conde de La Bisbal" label="Enrique O&amp;#x27;Donnell, Conde de La Bisbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495238" start="39194" end="39220" title="Gaspar Betancourt Cisneros" label="Gaspar Betancourt Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39476" end="39498" title="Francisco Javier Yáñez" label="Francisco Javier Yáñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951955" start="44429" end="44450" title="Juan Paz del Castillo" label="Juan Paz del Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="64425" end="64433" title="Lord Byron" label="Byronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="70685" end="70706" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11791281" start="70708" end="70747" title="List of Puerto Rican military personnel" label="List of Puerto Rican military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="70749" end="70762" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="70764" end="70783" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustín de Iturbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q14401960" start="70785" end="70814" title="María de las Mercedes Barbudo" label="María de las Mercedes Barbudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311578" start="70816" end="70845" title="Ducoudray Holstein Expedition" label="Ducoudray Holstein Expedition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748794" wikidata="Q5649894" url="?curid=748794" title="Hans Christian von Baeyer">
<text>Hans Christian von Baeyer (born 1938) is a Chancellor Professor of Physics at the College of William and Mary. His books include &quot;Information: The New Language of Science&quot;, &quot;Warmth Disperses and Time Passes: The History of Heat&quot;, and &quot;QBism: The Future of Quantum Physics&quot;.

He received the Science Journalism Award of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the National Magazine Award in the category &quot;Essays and Criticism,&quot; which cites his &quot;uncommon literary grace&quot;. In addition, he also won the 2005 Andrew Gemant Award for science writing, for prose &quot;crisp, captivating and illuminating&quot; with &quot;depth, passion and clarity&quot; in the ideas conveyed.

Von Baeyer was born in Germany and left the country during World War II. He graduated from Columbia College in 1958 and received his M.S. from the University of Miami and Ph.D. from Vanderbilt University. He is a descendant of German geologist and military officer Johann Jacob Baeyer, whose son, Adolf von Baeyer, won the 1905 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

In 1976, von Baeyer was selected as a Fellow of the American Physical Society.

== Bibliography ==
*
*
* 
** First published as: 
*

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5649894" start="0" end="25" title="Hans Christian von Baeyer" label="Hans Christian von Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="82" end="109" title="College of William and Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="115" end="119" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798608" start="135" end="175" title="Information (book)" label="Information: The New Language of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="353" end="404" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336908" start="413" end="436" title="National Magazine Award" label="National Magazine Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887042" start="574" end="593" title="Andrew Gemant Award" label="Andrew Gemant Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="764" end="771" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="800" end="812" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569677" start="832" end="848" title="Columbia College (New York)" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="888" end="907" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="923" end="944" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q76388" start="1006" end="1025" title="Johann Jacob Baeyer" label="Johann Jacob Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57078" start="1038" end="1054" title="Adolf von Baeyer" label="Adolf von Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="1069" end="1093" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q96387767" start="1134" end="1173" title="Fellow of the American Physical Society" label="Fellow of the American Physical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748797" wikidata="Q7245021" url="?curid=748797" title="Princeton Triangle Club">
<text>The Princeton Triangle Club is a theater troupe at Princeton University. Founded in 1891, it is one of the oldest collegiate theater troupes in the United States. Triangle 
premieres an original student-written musical every year, and then takes that show on a national tour. The club is known for its signature kickline; historically performed by the men of the ensemble in drag, the kickline has recently been performed by a co-ed cast.

The troupe presents several shows throughout the year, beginning in September with the &quot;Frosh Week Show.&quot; In the autumn it premieres the year&#x27;s new Triangle Show, an original student-written musical comedy, professionally directed and choreographed and performed in McCarter Theatre; this Triangle Show goes on a national tour in January. In spring, the Club showcases the new writers&#x27; material in a smaller campus venue. And during reunions after the end of the spring semester, the year&#x27;s Triangle Show plays its final performances at McCarter.

Among the club&#x27;s notable alumni are F. Scott Fitzgerald, Booth Tarkington, Russel Wright, Joshua Logan, Brooks Bowman, Jimmy Stewart, José Ferrer, Wayne Rogers, Clark Gesner, Jeff Moss, David E. Kelley, Nicholas Hammond, Zachary Pincus-Roth, and Brooke Shields.

==History==
The history of the Princeton Triangle Club reflects many major social, cultural, economic, political, literary and theatrical trends in the United States during the late 19th and 20th centuries. For most of its history, the club has produced student writing performed by students. Productions are known for blending topical humor with collegiate irreverence; the kickline has become standard.

===Beginnings===

The tradition started with a production by a group called the Princeton College Dramatic Association in 1883. In keeping with the practice of all-male institutions at the time, women&#x27;s roles were played by men. &quot;Entr&#x27;acte&quot; music, provided by the Instrumental or Banjo Clubs, were often popular dance tunes or excerpts from operas. The early theatricals were fundraisers for financially struggling athletic associations.

In 1891 the Dramatic Association joined forces with the University Glee Club to present &quot;Po-ca-hon-tas&quot;, the first show in the Triangle tradition of musicals written and produced by students. The reworked John Brougham play was performed both on campus and in Trenton. But the faculty vetoed a proposed New York performance. Over the years, students and administrators would often be at odds over theatrical activities. Nevertheless, the Association visited Trenton once again the following year with &quot;Katharine&quot;, a Shakespearean spoof marking the first appearance of Booth Tarkington 1893 in the Triangle records.

The 1893 production, &quot;The Honorable Julius Caesar&quot;, was again a reworking of Shakespeare. Tarkington, a senior and president of the Dramatic Association, was both co-author of the book and acted in the role of Cassius. The show was repeated the following year with several significant changes. Most importantly, the Princeton University Dramatic Association had been renamed the Triangle Club of Princeton.

===Early growth===

Financial problems caused Club members to curtail expenses in 1895. Neither the February production, &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, nor the May offering, &quot;Snowball&quot;, were written by students, and both had relatively small casts. The following year the Club turned to a recent graduate, Post Wheeler &#x27;91, in hopes that his magic touch as co-author of &quot;The Honorable Julius Caesar&quot; could be repeated, and they were pleased with the result. &quot;The Mummy&quot; (1895–96) was also notable as the first production in Triangle&#x27;s new home, the Casino, located on the lower campus near the present-day McCarter Theatre site. Yet another innovation was attempted in 1897. &quot;A Tiger Lily&quot;, the first Triangle show to be based on Princeton student life, was part of a double bill with &quot;Lend Me Five Shillings&quot;, a British farce. Since neither show was a great success, the Club returned to the tried and true in 1898 with a revival of &quot;Po-ca-hon-tas&quot;. &quot;The Privateer&quot;, presented in 1899, was originally entitled &quot;The Captain&#x27;s Kidd Sister&quot;, but the name was changed because the University of Pennsylvania&#x27;s Mask and Wig Club had already produced a show about Captain Kidd. The &quot;Privateer March&quot; was the first commercially published Triangle song.

===Traditions begin===

In 1901, with &quot;The King of Pomeru&quot;, Triangle ventured for the first time to New York, and the next year the club ventured as far as Pittsburgh. After the 1901 New York performance, Franklin B. Morse 1895 proposed a meeting to organize Triangle alumni, who he believed could help promote the club, build its reputation, arrange the annual tour, collect materials and memorabilia, and generally socialize among themselves. In June of that year, thirty-seven alumni met in Princeton, and the Triangle Board of Trustees was established.

After 1900, the Triangle became increasingly established. Printed copies of the scripts began appearing (the first was &quot;The Man From Where,&quot; performed 1903–04). Performing off campus and on became the norm, which led faculty to vett texts and performances were vetted before the students left campus with their show. Jenny Davidson Hibben, the wife of Princeton President John Grier Hibben, cut off-color passages or topics she considered morally inappropriate. She was a practicing Presbyterian.

In 1907, the first kickline was performed. It was part of &quot;The Mummy Monarch,&quot; but soon became a standard element of Triangle shows.

===Budding fame and higher standards===

By 1910 the tour had extended as far west as Chicago and St. Louis; elaborate social functions were becoming part of the annual trek. With &quot;Once in a Hundred Years&quot; (1912–13), Triangle moved its tour to the Christmas season, again traveling as far west as St. Louis. The following year, President Wilson and the First Lady attended &quot;The Pursuit of Priscilla&quot;’s Washington matinee performance; the First Family then hosted a reception for Triangle at the White House.

&quot;The Evil Eye&quot; (1915-16) had a distinguished pair of neophyte authors: Edmund Wilson &#x27;16 wrote the book, and F. Scott Fitzgerald &#x27;17 was responsible for the lyrics. Although he was never a cast member in a Triangle production, Fitzgerald wrote three shows for the Club between 1914 and 1917. The club had been criticized in previous years by Drama professor Donald Clive Stuart who asserted, on the front page of the Princeton University newspaper, that the plays were &quot;too burlesque&quot; and lacked novelty, especially when compared to theatrical culture at other Ivy League schools.

During 1917–18, a four man Triangle troupe toured Europe to entertain the soldiers stationed there for World War I. After the year hiatus, the club became active again with a revival of &quot;The Honorable Julius Caesar&quot;. The first post-war tour occurred when &quot;The Isle of Surprise&quot; was taken on the road during Christmas break of 1919. The Christmas tour reached as far as Nashville, Tennessee in 1922; the club presented a musical comedy called &quot;Espanola&quot; at Nashville&#x27;s Orpheum Theater.

In the spring of 1922, Triangle staged George Bernard Shaw&#x27;s &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Disciple&quot;. This production marked a milepost in the Club&#x27;s history, for its three female roles were actually played by women. Sets for this production were designed and painted by Russel Wright during his freshman year, marking one of the few times that a freshman was ever allowed to join Triangle.

===Professionalization and emerging stars===

During the early 1920s, New York performances began to be booked at the Metropolitan Opera House, although initially there was some concern whether they could fill such a large theatre and whether the men&#x27;s voices would be strong enough. Late in 1923, there were negotiations concerning a possible radio broadcast, and in the same year Triangle&#x27;s music publisher, J. Church Co., corresponded with the Victor Talking Machine Co. about a trial recording. But the major event during this decade was the planning and construction of McCarter Theatre for the Triangle Club. The completed theatre opened on February 21, 1930 with a performance of &quot;The Golden Dog&quot;. McCarter replaced the long-controversial Casino, which burned on January 8, 1924.

Here began the Golden Period for which the Triangle Club became famous, in terms of its eventual contribution of outstanding talent to the Broadway theatre and Hollywood. Within a few years the Club would send forth into these professional realms Erik Barnouw &#x27;29; C. Norris Houghton, Joshua Logan, and Myron McCormick, all Class of 1931; James Stewart &#x27;32; José Ferrer &#x27;33; and Nick Foran &#x27;34.

The 1935 show, &quot;Stags at Bay&quot;, featured &quot;East of the Sun (and West of the Moon),&quot; written by Brooks Bowman, which would become the most popular and longest-lasting national hit ever to come out of the Triangle Club. Recorded by Frank Sinatra and Louis Armstrong, among many others, &quot;East of the Sun&quot; still provides the club with royalties. Other songs from the same show, by Bowman, included &quot;Love and Dime&quot; and &quot;Will Love Find a Way?&quot;

===Difficulties in the Depression years===

With &quot;The Tiger Smiles&quot; (1930–31), Triangle writers returned to a Princeton town and gown setting for the first time since &quot;When Congress Came to Princeton&quot; (1908–09). The production was well received, but the club was already beginning to feel the effects of the Great Depression. In October 1930, the Program Manager reported, &quot;Due to the financial depression, the business of getting ads is a rather difficult one just now.&quot; By the following year economic conditions had begun to affect the tour. South Orange reported poor ticket sales, and the local alumni chairman was concerned with keeping down the cost of stagehands; in Pittsburgh, a poor house and lack of entertainment were attributed to the weak stock market. &quot;When It&#x27;s the Valet&quot; (1932–33) was ready to tour, local alumni groups were either unwilling to sponsor a show or unable to guarantee an adequate sum to cover expenses, let alone show a profit. The club&#x27;s Graduate Board sought aid from alumni in underwriting the show, but individual contributions were equally difficult to come by.

Throughout the mid-thirties, Triangle continued to tour in spite of the Depression, but there were rumblings of discontent from both the Graduate Board of the Club and the University administration. In a 1934 meeting with President Dodds, the Board indicated concern about the financial condition of McCarter Theatre; Triangle profits were insufficient to keep McCarter operating in the black, a situation that would become increasingly serious as the decade wore on. President Dodds had also heard alumni criticism about poor acting and an apparent lack of coaching in connection with the latest show. Yet he remained confident that Triangle could play an important role on campus. Later that year, Club Manager Stryker Warren &#x27;35 received a stern letter from Dean of the College Christian Gauss. Gauss had considered canceling the Christmas tour, first because of financial considerations, and then because of alumni criticism about excessive drinking.

Another change in tradition came during the 1941-42 academic year, when Triangle produced &quot;Ask Me Another&quot;, its first show in revue format. Then, at a Board meeting in September 1943, Graduate Treasurer B. Franklin Bunn &#x27;07 announced that there would be no Triangle Club activities for the duration of the war. The University assumed control of McCarter Theatre during this period, and the building was leased by the military for trainees’ use on campus.

===Post-war comeback===

In November 1945, the University Committee on Undergraduate Activities issued a report describing Triangle as controversial. The first post-war show, &quot;Clear the Track&quot;, opened in December 1946 and even managed a seven-city tour. But Triangle was beset with problems the following year for &quot;All Rights Reserved&quot; (1947–48). The Daily Princetonian reported, &quot;All Rights pretty nearly weren&#x27;t reserved. A play by the same name had fizzled on Broadway for a bare month, in 1934, and the petulant playwright threatened to sue. Hasty consultation with a Broadway lawyer revealed that the author could not possibly win the suit and that matter was closed.&quot; The club resolved tricky labor questions by employing union stagehands and music-hirelings, putting the later to work first in Philadelphia, where they were made to earn their fee by playing with the regular orchestra, and then in Washington, where they provided the intermission music.

Despite ongoing debate in the 1950s about the club&#x27;s obligations to theatrical professionalism, as well as its questionable effect on the University&#x27;s reputation, Triangle continued to reach a wider audience through greater media exposure. In 1948, &quot;All in Favor&quot; was broadcast on WNBC-TV, becoming the first college show to appear on the new medium of television. The entire score of &quot;Too Hot for Toddy&quot; (1950–51) was recorded, and members of the cast appeared on &quot;The Kate Smith Show&quot; and &quot;Ed Sullivan&#x27;s The Toast of the Town&quot;. Club productions appeared on The &quot;Ed Sullivan Show&quot; from 1950 to 1957. During the Christmas tour to Cincinnati, the club&#x27;s appearance was combined with a large-scale alumni gathering.

Finally, in 1953, a memorandum of agreement was drawn up between Princeton University and the Trustees of the Triangle Club abrogating the McCarter agreement of the 1920s. The club had been unable to cover operating expenses and pay the taxes of the Theatre. A full-time general manager was hired for McCarter, and the University, which had been underwriting Triangle&#x27;s losses, agreed to cancel the club&#x27;s debts.

A 1955 study stated that there were ninety or more members of the club, and that most of the men participated in the Christmas tour. A third of them said that they had participated in theatrical productions before enrolling at Princeton. Most members were also active in a collegiate sport.

===The Lyon era===

&quot;Spree de Corps&quot; (1955–56) marked the debut of Milton Lyon as Triangle director. From 1955 until his death forty years later, Lyon would direct all but a handful of Triangle&#x27;s original productions.

Student apathy toward extracurricular activities began to affect Triangle toward the end of the 1950s. At a meeting in October 1958, the Board noted a very small turnout for the previous month&#x27;s auditions. It was decided that more on-campus publicity would help, and as part of this effort Triangle Junior was formed, a group of seven club members who performed favorite Triangle songs at various receptions and functions. Over the following years, this small group would undergo periodic name changes, being known as &quot;Triangle Ding!&quot; and &quot;Triangle Bit Parts&quot; before returning to &quot;Ding!&quot;, as it is called today.

With the gradual elimination of passenger trains in the late 1950s, the club began touring by bus. Early in 1960 there was a proposal to produce a motion picture on the Triangle Club, but a Hollywood writers&#x27; strike and possible heavy expenses brought an end to this publicity idea. However, Triangle did embark on its first European tour that summer; the Club performed &quot;Breakfast in Bedlam&quot; (1959–60) at French and German bases of the American army. &quot;Tour de Farce&quot; (1961–62) became perhaps the most widely toured show: performances in Pasadena and San Francisco marked the first time the show had been seen live on both coasts, and then troupe members again went to Europe that summer to perform at US Army bases.

&quot;Funny Side Up&quot; (1963–64) was billed as the 75th anniversary show in spite of the fact that number seventy was &quot;Tour de Farce&quot;, produced only two years earlier. &quot;Funny Side Up&quot; did not have a smooth start: the writers were slow to produce material, and the trustees even considered the possibility that there would be no show. Because of the diamond jubilee, twenty-one songs from earlier shows were made a part of the program. The tour of &quot;Funny Side Up&quot; included several southern stops, and the Birmingham visit became problematic when Triangle was booked into a segregated theatre. After some strongly worded letters from Board members, it was determined that the performance would either be cancelled or moved to a non-segregated house.

===Coeducation and other changes===

&quot;A Different Kick&quot; (1968–69) was a Triangle milestone, featuring the first female undergraduate to be cast in a Club show—Sue Jean Lee &#x27;70, a junior in the Critical Languages Program. The University&#x27;s shift to coeducation the next fall would have a profound effect on Triangle. &quot;Call a Spade a Shovel&quot; (1969–1970) featured six women in a seventeen-member cast. The social and political commentary of the show, most especially its anti-Vietnam War tones, which reflected the views of the Vietnam Veteran who was president and much of the country, unleashed an unprecedented storm of alumni protest and caused a mass audience walk-out at the Grosse Pointe tour performance.

This incident, along with growing budgetary and logistical concerns, caused the Board of Trustees to revise its production schedule. As per the May 1970 Report of the Board&#x27;s New Directions Committee, there was to be neither a December show nor a Christmas tour; instead, a spring show was promised, to be followed by a short tour. &quot;Cracked Ice&quot; opened in April 1971, was repeated for alumni in June, but did finally tour the following December. To cut expenses, the cast and crew stayed in private homes rather than hotels, and non-union halls were booked.

The Princeton Triangle Workshop made its debut in November 1972 with a presentation of &quot;The Fantasticks&quot; at the Princeton Inn Theater; the following March the Workshop produced &quot;Transitions&quot; in Wilcox Hall. This began a 25-year tradition of smaller fall productions to complement the full-scale, original spring shows. The fall productions of 1978, &quot;Happily Ever After&quot;, and 1979, &quot;String of Pearls&quot;, were both written by undergraduates. For the 1981 spring show, Triangle writers returned to the very roots of the club and based their book musical, &quot;Bold Type&quot;, on Booth Tarkington&#x27;s novel, &quot;A Gentleman from Indiana&quot;.

The 1981 tour again returned to California, but with a revue of Triangle favorites, &quot;Fool&#x27;s Gold&quot;, rather than the spring show. The following year Triangle hired Miriam Fond, the first female director in the club&#x27;s history. Triangle finally found a permanent home for its fall productions when &quot;The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas&quot; opened at the Triangle Broadmead Theatre in November 1984. In the 1980s, the club began to present produce revues of the best of Triangle early in the fall to introduce the freshman class to the organization.

===Centennial===

The club&#x27;s centennial was celebrated in 1991 with a series of campus events throughout the year, including the spring show entitled &quot;The Older, the Better&quot;, a large Firestone Library exhibition of hundreds of items from the Triangle Archives, and a fall reunion weekend of parties and performances. The centennial of 1991 was difficult to reconcile with the fiftieth anniversary show (&quot;Once Over Lightly&quot;), which had been staged in 1938-39. After much debate, it had been decided that the first original work in the Triangle tradition was &quot;Po-ca-hon-tas&quot; of 1891, justifying the 1991 centennial.

===The second century===

In the late 1990s, the production schedule reverted to its original calendar, in which the new Triangle Show premiered at McCarter in the fall of each academic year, followed in winter by that show&#x27;s tour. This change meant that in 1997-1998 the Club needed to generate two-full length musicals in fifteen months, almost twice the writing load of previous years. In September 1997, Triangle began a writing workshop to coordinate the efforts of the writers; this program was enormously successful, producing &quot;In Lava and War&quot; in April 1998 and &quot;101 Damnations&quot; in November 1998. By the spring of 1999, the corps of 21 writers had been so prolific that Triangle presented an extra, original spring show at Theatre Intime, entitled &quot;The Rude Olympics&quot;. The 1999–2000 season saw the hundredth anniversary of the kickline in &quot;The Blair Arch Project&quot; (November 1999), as well as Triangle&#x27;s return to Theatre Intime in May with &quot;The Rude Olympics II: American Booty&quot;. &quot;Puns of Steel&quot; (2000–2001) became the first Club show to record its score on a CD.

===Recent developments===

The Club&#x27;s current calendar includes a Frosh Week Show during the first week of classes, the new Triangle Show premiere in November, the national tour in late January, a spring showcase of new writers&#x27; material in April/May, and an encore performance in early summer for reunions. The Club continues to receive a high level of regional recognition, with the 2007 Triangle Show &quot;A Turnpike Runs Through It&quot; appearing in &quot;The New York Times&quot;.

===Notable cast members and contributors (in chronological order)===
Booth Tarkington 1893 – * F. Scott Fitzgerald 1917 – Russel Wright &#x27;21 and &#x27;22 – Charles Arnt &#x27;29 – Joshua Logan &#x27;31 – James Stewart &#x27;32 – José Ferrer &#x27;34 – Brooks Bowman &#x27;36 – Bo Goldman &#x27;53 – Wayne Rogers &#x27;56 – Clark Gesner &#x27;60 – Jeff Moss &#x27;63 – A. Scott Berg &#x27;71 – David E. Kelley &#x27;79 – Cecil Hoffman &#x27;84 – Louis Bayard &#x27;85 – Brooke Shields &#x27;87 – Ellie Kemper &#x27;02 – Michael Yang &#x27;04 – Molly Ephraim &#x27;08

===History of shows===
see List of Princeton Triangle Club shows

===Recent club presidents===
* 2019 Kirsten Traudt
* 2020 John McEnany
* 2021 Regan McCall
* 2022 Imaan Khasru
* 2023 Gabriela Veciana
* 2024 Vera Fei
* 2025 Vera Fei

== Literature ==
* Donald Marsden: &quot;The Long Kickline: A History of the Princeton Triangle Club&quot; (Princeton: Princeton Triangle Club, 1968).

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7245021" start="4" end="27" title="Princeton Triangle Club" label="Princeton Triangle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="51" end="71" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="148" end="161" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q110486213" start="312" end="320" title="kickline" label="kickline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="375" end="379" title="drag (clothing)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453426" start="721" end="737" title="McCarter Theatre" label="McCarter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245001" start="893" end="901" title="Princeton Reunions" label="reunions"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="1054" end="1073" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q893138" start="1075" end="1091" title="Booth Tarkington" label="Booth Tarkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381291" start="1093" end="1106" title="Russel Wright" label="Russel Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="1108" end="1120" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974977" start="1122" end="1135" title="Brooks Bowman" label="Brooks Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="1137" end="1150" title="James Stewart" label="Jimmy Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="1152" end="1163" title="José Ferrer" label="José Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q726033" start="1165" end="1177" title="Wayne Rogers" label="Wayne Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127240" start="1179" end="1191" title="Clark Gesner" label="Clark Gesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765200" start="1193" end="1202" title="Jeff Moss" label="Jeff Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q504720" start="1204" end="1219" title="David E. Kelley" label="David E. Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q266520" start="1221" end="1237" title="Nicholas Hammond" label="Nicholas Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063987" start="1239" end="1258" title="Zachary Pincus-Roth" label="Zachary Pincus-Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="1264" end="1278" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114795" start="1927" end="1941" title="Entr&amp;#x27;acte" label="Entr&amp;#x27;acte"/>
<link wikidata="Q893138" start="2734" end="2750" title="Booth Tarkington" label="Booth Tarkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453426" start="3843" end="3859" title="McCarter Theatre" label="McCarter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90023734" start="4403" end="4420" title="Mask and Wig" label="Mask and Wig Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236332" start="5504" end="5521" title="John Grier Hibben" label="John Grier Hibben"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="5615" end="5627" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="6289" end="6300" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q704931" start="6384" end="6397" title="Edmund Wilson" label="Edmund Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381291" start="7715" end="7728" title="Russel Wright" label="Russel Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353824" start="8891" end="8903" title="Erik Barnouw" label="Erik Barnouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053314" start="8914" end="8932" title="Norris Houghton" label="C. Norris Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="8934" end="8946" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948472" start="8952" end="8967" title="Myron McCormick" label="Myron McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="8988" end="9001" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="9012" end="9023" title="José Ferrer" label="José Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209649" start="9038" end="9048" title="Nick Foran" label="Nick Foran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974977" start="9173" end="9186" title="Brooks Bowman" label="Brooks Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="9308" end="9321" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779" start="9326" end="9341" title="Louis Armstrong" label="Louis Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777383" start="21013" end="21027" title="Theatre Intime" label="Theatre Intime"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21872" end="21890" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q893138" start="21968" end="21984" title="Booth Tarkington" label="Booth Tarkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="21994" end="22013" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381291" start="22021" end="22034" title="Russel Wright" label="Russel Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958418" start="22059" end="22071" title="Charles Arnt" label="Charles Arnt"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="22083" end="22095" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="22107" end="22120" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="22132" end="22143" title="José Ferrer" label="José Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974977" start="22155" end="22168" title="Brooks Bowman" label="Brooks Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q724586" start="22180" end="22190" title="Bo Goldman" label="Bo Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q726033" start="22202" end="22214" title="Wayne Rogers" label="Wayne Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127240" start="22226" end="22238" title="Clark Gesner" label="Clark Gesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765200" start="22250" end="22259" title="Jeff Moss" label="Jeff Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15496884" start="22271" end="22284" title="A. Scott Berg" label="A. Scott Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q504720" start="22296" end="22311" title="David E. Kelley" label="David E. Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056128" start="22323" end="22336" title="Cecil Hoffman" label="Cecil Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686731" start="22348" end="22360" title="Louis Bayard" label="Louis Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="22372" end="22386" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q72077" start="22398" end="22410" title="Ellie Kemper" label="Ellie Kemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q64327" start="22446" end="22459" title="Molly Ephraim" label="Molly Ephraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592937" start="22497" end="22534" title="List of Princeton Triangle Club shows" label="List of Princeton Triangle Club shows"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748810" wikidata="Q316532" url="?curid=748810" title="Luca Marenzio">
<text>Luca Marenzio (also Marentio; October 18, 1553 or 1554 – August 22, 1599) was an Italian composer and singer of the late Renaissance.

He was one of the most renowned composers of madrigals, and wrote some of the most famous examples of the form in its late stage of development, prior to its early Baroque transformation by Monteverdi. In all, Marenzio wrote around 500 madrigals, ranging from the lightest to the most serious styles, packed with word-painting, chromaticism, and other characteristics of the late madrigal style. Marenzio was influential as far away as England, where his earlier, lighter work appeared in 1588 in the &quot;Musica Transalpina&quot;, the collection that initiated the madrigal craze in that country.

Marenzio worked in the service of several aristocratic Italian families, including the Gonzaga, Este, and Medici, and spent most of his career in Rome.

==Early years==
According to biographer Leonardo Cozzando, writing in the late 17th century, Marenzio was born at Coccaglio, a small town near Brescia, as one of seven children to a poor family. His father was a notary clerk in Brescia. A birthdate of October 18, 1553 has been proposed, based his father&#x27;s stating in 1588 that his son was 35, and a suggestion that he may have been named after St. Luke, whose feast day is on October 18.

==Early career==
He may have had some early musical training under Giovanni Contino, who was &quot;maestro di cappella&quot; at Brescia Cathedral from 1565 to 1567. He may also have gone with Contino to Mantua in 1568 when Contino began serving the Mantuan Gonzaga family; later in his life, Marenzio mentioned having spent five years in Mantua in the service of the Gonzaga family, but was unspecific as to when exactly this happened.

Following his time in Brescia and Mantua, he went to Rome, where he was employed by Cardinal Cristoforo Madruzzo until July 1578, evidently as a singer. Since Madruzzo had been the employer of Contino in Trent, this may have been arranged by Contino.

==Cardinal Luigi d&#x27;Este==
After the cardinal&#x27;s death Marenzio served at the court of Cardinal Luigi d&#x27;Este, who was a friend of Madruzzo; according to Marenzio himself, writing in the dedication of his first madrigal book, he was the cardinal&#x27;s &quot;maestro di cappella&quot;, although Luigi&#x27;s musical establishment only included a handful of musicians. Shortly after his hire, Luigi attempted to land a position for him with the papal choir, but was unable to do so for political reasons.

Marenzio had the opportunity to travel with Luigi in winter to spring 1580–1581 to Ferrara, the home of the Este family and one of the principal centers for composition of progressive secular music in the late 16th century. While there, he took part in the wedding festivities for Vincenzo Gonzaga and Margherita Farnese, an opulent affair requiring equally opulent music. Marenzio would have had an opportunity to hear the newly formed Concerto delle donne, the virtuoso female singers with the repertory of &quot;secret music&quot; that so influenced the course of madrigal composition at the end of the Renaissance. While in Ferrara Marenzio wrote and dedicated two entire books of new madrigals to Alfonso II and Lucrezia d&#x27;Este.

While Luigi made few demands on him, allowing him considerable time for his own musical pursuits, he paid him the tiny salary of only five scudi a month, about which Marenzio complained in the dedication (to Bianca Capello, Grand Duchess of Tuscany) of his &quot;Libro terzo a sei&quot; (1585). In one impassioned letter, dated 1584, Marenzio implored his employer for more prompt payment. A comment by Marenzio to the Duke of Mantua indicates that he may have had considerable other income from freelancing in Rome, either as a singer or a lutenist. Several times during his tenure with Luigi, he tried to find other work: he applied for the post of &quot;maestro di cappella&quot; at the court of Mantua; and once, in 1583, Luigi considered sending him to Paris as a gift to King Henry III of France, but the project fell through, to Marenzio&#x27;s considerable relief.

During his period of employment with Cardinal Luigi d&#x27;Este Marenzio began to establish an extensive reputation as a composer. He also became known as an expert lutenist, as indicated in a letter of 1581 from a singer to Luigi d&#x27;Este; and by the time the cardinal died in 1586, Marenzio had become internationally famous as a composer, with his numerous books of madrigals published and reprinted not only in Italy, but in the Netherlands. The popularity of his work during this period is evident also in the frequency with which his madrigals appeared in anthologies.

After the death of Luigi d&#x27;Este on December 30, 1586, Marenzio was without a patron, but probably continued to freelance in Rome; and sometime in 1587 he went to Verona where he met Count Mario Bevilacqua and attended the prestigious Accademia Filarmonica, one of the associations of musicians and humanists, dedicated to cultivating the most progressive trends, typical of the late Renaissance.

==Florence and return to Rome==
By the end of 1587, Marenzio had entered into the service of Ferdinando I de&#x27; Medici in Florence, where he stayed for two years. It is highly probable that he was already in the service of Ferdinando while the latter was still a cardinal living in Rome, and that he followed him to Florence when he succeeded to the granducal throne in 1587.

It is hard to assess the influence of Florentine composers on Marenzio&#x27;s music. According to Alfred Einstein, &quot;...he cannot conceivably have come to terms with the Camerata and with its pedantic and pretentious dilettantism.&quot; But although Marenzio never ventured into solo song, as did Giulio Caccini and other Florentines, this did not prevent him from forming friendships with two Florentine dilettante composers, Piero Strozzi and Antonio de&#x27; Bicci. On November 30, 1589 Marenzio returned to Rome, where he served several patrons, while retaining considerable independence; he lived in the Orsini palace until 1593, in the service of Virginio Orsini, the nephew of the Grand Duke of Tuscany. Another important patron at this time was Cardinal Cinzio Aldobrandini, nephew of the reigning Pope Clement VIII. This cardinal, who presided over an informal academy that gathered together men of letters and learning, assigned to Marenzio an apartment in the Vatican.

In 1595 John Dowland came to Italy to meet Marenzio; the two had exchanged letters when Dowland was still in England. Dowland got as far as Florence, and indicated that he wanted to study with Marenzio, but it is not known if he did: the two may never have met.

==Poland==
Marenzio&#x27;s final trip was a long one. He went to Poland in between late 1595 and early 1596, staying at least through October 1596, accepting a position as &quot;maestro di cappella&quot; at the court of Sigismund III Vasa in Warsaw; his predecessor, Annibale Stabile, had just died after only being there two months. While in Warsaw – the location of the court, recently moved from Kraków – Marenzio wrote and directed sacred music, including motets for double choir, a Te Deum for 13 voices, and a mass, the music for which has been lost.

According to pre-20th-century writers, the trip to Poland, which was ordered by the Pope, ruined Marenzio&#x27;s health. Marenzio returned from Poland by way of Venice, where he dedicated his eighth book of five-voice madrigals to the Gonzaga family. Marenzio did not live long after reaching Rome; he died on August 22, 1599, in the care of his brother at the garden of the Villa Medici on Monte Pincio. He was buried in the church of San Lorenzo in Lucina.

==Music==
While Marenzio wrote some sacred music in the form of masses, motets, and &quot;madrigali spirituali&quot; (madrigals based on religious texts), the vast majority of his work, and his enduring legacy, is his enormous output of madrigals. They vary greatly in style, technique and tone through the two decades of his composing career. To Marenzio, each madrigal text presented its own problem, which he solved in terms of that text alone: therefore there is no single &quot;Marenzio style&quot;, and he used the entire repertory of harmonic, textural, and rhetorical devices available to a composer of the late sixteenth century in his work. According to him, each madrigal text was a challenge of &quot;translation&quot;: printed word into music. By late in his career he was easily the most influential madrigal composer in Europe, and his earlier madrigals became the model for the new school of madrigal composition in England.

Marenzio published 23 books of madrigals and related forms, including one book of &quot;madrigali spirituali&quot;; he may have produced one further book that does not survive. Nine of the collections are for five voices (and it is possible that he produced a final tenth book); six are for six voices; two are for four voices; one is for four to six voices; and the remaining five are books of villanelle, a lighter form popular in the late 16th century, for three voices only. In addition to secular music, he published two books of motets, one of which is lost, a book of antiphons (now lost), and a book of &quot;Sacrae cantiones&quot; for five to seven voices. Almost all of his works were initially published in Venice, except for the &quot;madrigali spirituali&quot;, which appeared in Rome.

Marenzio produced seventeen books of madrigals between 1580 and 1589, which include some of the most expressive, varied and important works in madrigal literature. Most of the madrigals are for five voices, but he also wrote many four and six voice pieces, as well as a few exceptional settings for more, including one madrigal for eighteen voices for a Florentine intermedio in 1589. Text and music are always close. He varies textures, using imitative counterpoint, chordal texture, recitatives as needed to express the text. In addition to his madrigals he wrote &quot;canzonette&quot; and &quot;villanelle&quot; (related secular &quot;a cappella&quot; forms very much like madrigals, but usually a bit lighter in character). Close to 500 separate compositions survive.

Stylistically, his compositions show a generally increasing seriousness of tone throughout his life, but in all periods he was capable of the most astonishing mood-shifts within a single composition, sometimes within a single phrase; rarely does the music seem disunified, since he closely follows the texts of the poems being sung. During his last decade he not only wrote more serious, even sombre music, but experimented with chromaticism in a daring manner surpassed only by Gesualdo. For example, in the madrigal &quot;O voi che sospirate a miglior note&quot; he modulated completely around the circle of fifths within a single phrase, using enharmonic spellings within single chords (for instance, simultaneous C sharp and D flat), impossible to sing without either pitch drift or tempering intervals such that singers would approximate a sort of circulating temperament.

Even more characteristic of his style, and a defining characteristic of the madrigal as a genre, is his use of word-painting: the technique of mirroring in the music a specific word, phrase, implication or pun on what is being sung. An obvious example would be a setting of the phrase &quot;sinking in the sea&quot; to a descending series of notes, or accompanying the word &quot;anguish&quot; with a dissonant chord followed by an unsatisfying resolution.

Marenzio was often referred to as &quot;the divine composer&quot; or &quot;the sweetest swan&quot; by his successors. Like many of his contemporaries, he used pastoral and love poems from well-known Italian poets, such as Dante and Petrarch, but few set texts as attentively to their full expressive potential as did Marenzio. Using vivid imagery expressed through text-painting, he highlighted the specific emotions and moods contained in the poem. Consequently, historians claim Marenzio brought the Italian madrigal to its highest point of artistic and technical development.

==Influence==
Luca Marenzio was hugely influential on composers in Italy, as well as in the rest of Europe, particularly in England, as his madrigals from the 1580s were among the favorites of English composers, who adapted his techniques of word-painting, textural contrast, and chromaticism to an English idiom. As an example, when Nicholas Yonge published his &quot;Musica transalpina&quot; in 1588 in England, the first collection of Italian madrigals to be published there, Marenzio had the second-largest number of madrigals in the collection (after Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder); and the second collection of Italian madrigals published in England had more works by Marenzio than anyone else. Some English composers who admired Marenzio&#x27;s expressiveness and learned from him, gradually developing their own style from that seed, included Thomas Morley, John Wilbye, and Thomas Weelkes.

Outside of England, Marenzio&#x27;s madrigals also influenced composers as widely distributed as Hans Leo Hassler in South Germany and Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck in the Low Countries. In 1622 Henry Peacham wrote, &quot;for delicious aires and sweet invention in madrigals, Luca Marenzio excelleth all others.&quot; This quote by Peacham illustrates the effect Luca Marenzio had on later development of the madrigal, and the admiration he elicited from other composers from that period. Even in the mid-seventeenth century, Italian and English commentators continued to extol the virtues of Marenzio&#x27;s compositions; his music appeared in arrangements for viols late in the century; and his music has continued to be sung almost without interruption to the present day by madrigal groups – one of very few Renaissance composers for whom that is true.

==Notes==
==References==
* Arnold, Denis and Tim Carter. &quot;Marenzio, Luca.&quot; In The Oxford Companion to Music, edited by Alison Latham. Oxford Music Online, http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/subscriber/article/opr/t114/e4218 (accessed December 25, 2008).
* Alfred Einstein, &quot;The Italian Madrigal.&quot; Three volumes. Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University Press, 1949. 
* Bizzarini, Marco, &quot;Luca Marenzio: The Career of a Musician Between the Renaissance and the Counter-Reformation&quot;. Translated by James Chater. Aldershot, Ashgate, 2003. 
* James Chater, &quot;Luca Marenzio and the Italian Madrigal, 1577–1593.&quot; Two volumes. Ann Arbor, UMI Research Press, 1981. 
* Steven Ledbetter, James Chater, Roland Jackson: &quot;Marenzio, Luca.&quot; In Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online, http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/subscriber/article/grove/music/40081 (accessed January 4, 2009).
* Steven Ledbetter, Roland Jackson: &quot;Luca Marenzio&quot;, in &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980. 
* Gustave Reese, &quot;Music in the Renaissance&quot;. New York, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1954. 

==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* The Italian Madrigal Resource Center. https://italianmadrigal.com
* Listen to free recordings of songs from Umeå Akademiska Kör.
* Article on Marenzio at Early Music World</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q316532" start="0" end="13" title="Luca Marenzio" label="Luca Marenzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q316532" start="20" end="28" title="Luca Marenzio" label="Marentio"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="121" end="132" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193217" start="180" end="188" title="madrigal" label="madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="299" end="306" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="325" end="335" title="Claudio Monteverdi" label="Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458157" start="463" end="475" title="chromaticism" label="chromaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118216" start="642" end="660" title="Musica Transalpina" label="Musica Transalpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q594373" start="822" end="829" title="House of Gonzaga" label="Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q677173" start="831" end="835" title="House of Este" label="Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="841" end="847" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q18945596" start="928" end="945" title="Leonardo Cozzando" label="Leonardo Cozzando"/>
<link wikidata="Q104046" start="1002" end="1011" title="Coccaglio" label="Coccaglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="1031" end="1038" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1400" end="1416" title="Giovanni Contino" label="Giovanni Contino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="1536" end="1542" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q594373" start="1590" end="1597" title="House of Gonzaga" label="Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q683106" start="1863" end="1882" title="Cristoforo Madruzzo" label="Cristoforo Madruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527555" start="2126" end="2143" title="Luigi d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Luigi d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="2622" end="2629" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q677173" start="2647" end="2651" title="House of Este" label="Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q452580" start="2820" end="2836" title="Vincenzo I Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua" label="Vincenzo Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q891738" start="2841" end="2859" title="Margherita Farnese" label="Margherita Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q579283" start="2976" end="2996" title="Concerto delle donne" label="Concerto delle donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856074" start="3241" end="3251" title="Alfonso II d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Alfonso II"/>
<link wikidata="Q261915" start="3256" end="3276" title="Lucrezia di Cosimo de Medici" label="Lucrezia d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117831" start="3418" end="3423" title="scudi" label="scudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="4061" end="4080" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822655" start="4971" end="4992" title="Accademia Filarmonica di Verona" label="Accademia Filarmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q297483" start="5227" end="5255" title="Ferdinando I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Ferdinando I de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q465592" start="5688" end="5696" title="Florentine Camerata" label="Camerata"/>
<link wikidata="Q215308" start="5815" end="5829" title="Giulio Caccini" label="Giulio Caccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q207355" start="6507" end="6519" title="John Dowland" label="John Dowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="6827" end="6833" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="6982" end="7000" title="Sigismund III Vasa" label="Sigismund III Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="7004" end="7010" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073203" start="7029" end="7045" title="Annibale Stabile" label="Annibale Stabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="7161" end="7167" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q743376" start="7249" end="7256" title="Te Deum" label="Te Deum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515316" start="7756" end="7777" title="San Lorenzo in Lucina" label="San Lorenzo in Lucina"/>
<link wikidata="Q217295" start="7844" end="7850" title="mass (music)" label="masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="7852" end="7857" title="motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842899" start="7870" end="7890" title="madrigale spirituale" label="madrigali spirituali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904859" start="8674" end="8684" title="English Madrigal School" label="new school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273147" start="9117" end="9127" title="villanella" label="villanelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="9257" end="9262" title="motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734120" start="9887" end="9897" title="intermedio" label="intermedio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="9976" end="9988" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034045" start="10094" end="10104" title="canzonette" label="canzonette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273147" start="10121" end="10131" title="villanella" label="villanelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="10161" end="10171" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458157" start="10725" end="10737" title="chromaticism" label="chromaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192958" start="10775" end="10783" title="Carlo Gesualdo" label="Gesualdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212320" start="10896" end="10912" title="circle of fifths" label="circle of fifths"/>
<link wikidata="Q837294" start="10943" end="10953" title="enharmonic" label="enharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="10978" end="10984" title="chord (music)" label="chords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267651" start="11013" end="11020" title="C♯ (musical note)" label="C sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268931" start="11025" end="11031" title="D♭ (musical note)" label="D flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080022" start="11083" end="11092" title="musical temperament" label="tempering"/>
<link wikidata="Q667313" start="11149" end="11172" title="circulating temperament" label="circulating temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165788" start="11286" end="11299" title="word-painting" label="word-painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="11855" end="11860" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="11865" end="11873" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306338" start="12547" end="12561" title="Nicholas Yonge" label="Nicholas Yonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q726096" start="12769" end="12797" title="Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder" label="Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q438141" start="13063" end="13076" title="Thomas Morley" label="Thomas Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q682089" start="13078" end="13089" title="John Wilbye" label="John Wilbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q553908" start="13095" end="13109" title="Thomas Weelkes" label="Thomas Weelkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q164882" start="13209" end="13225" title="Hans Leo Hassler" label="Hans Leo Hassler"/>
<link wikidata="Q110294" start="13247" end="13272" title="Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck" label="Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131270" start="14493" end="14505" title="James Chater" label="James Chater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131270" start="14536" end="14548" title="James Chater" label="James Chater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131270" start="14684" end="14696" title="James Chater" label="James Chater"/>
<link wikidata="Q975127" start="15082" end="15095" title="Gustave Reese" label="Gustave Reese"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748818" wikidata="Q210412" url="?curid=748818" title="2nd Ring Road">
<text>The 2nd Ring Road () is the innermost ring road highway which encircles the city center of Beijing, People&#x27;s Republic of China. (The first ring road had been a circular tram route.)

The ring road can be divided into two parts: the original ring road (the southern section of which is now excluded from the current ring road), and the newly extended ring road. This article only covers the current (new) 2nd Ring Road.

==History and geography==

The 2nd Ring Road runs close to where Beijing&#x27;s city walls once stood; numerous junctions bear the old city gate&#x27;s name. A small number of these city gates themselves still stand: Southeast corner tower, Deshengmen and Yongdingmen (which has been rebuilt). Most of the old city walls were pulled down shortly after the People&#x27;s Republic of China was established in 1949.

Although it was suggested that the 2nd Ring Road was built over the old city walls, by comparing current city maps with old maps of Beijing, it has been found this is not exactly true. The road instead mostly follows the former moat that surrounded the city wall; in places, the moat survives as a canal. The 2nd ring road was completed in the 1980s.

All traffic lights were removed in the 1990s, and several new overpasses were built.

In 2001, the 2nd Ring Road was overhauled. It was fully re-surfaced, and greenery substantially increased.

Much of Line 2 of the Beijing Subway runs underneath the Second Ring Road. Many stations have exits on both sides of the road, with the exception of Andingmen.

===The Old 2nd Ring Road===
The former &quot;old 2nd Ring Road&quot; has an elliptical shape. Its northwest corner is at Xizhimen, the northeast corner is at Dongzhimen, and southern corners are at Dongbianmen and Xibianmen. The southern side is the so-called &quot;Metro Road&quot; which goes through Qianmen, at the southern end of Tian&#x27;anmen Square.

===The New 2nd Ring Road===
The new road is simply an extension of the western and eastern parts of the original 2nd Ring Road. It extends beyond Dongbianmen and Xibianmen, thus reaching Zuo&#x27;anmen to the southeast and the Caihuying overpass complex in the southwest. The extensions were known for a while as the &quot;external 2nd Ring Road&quot;, though this term is becoming more and more unpopular.

===Gates and the 2nd Ring Road===
The 2nd Ring Road passes the sites of many of the old city gates around Beijing. These include:

* Deshengmen
* Andingmen
* Dongzhimen
* Chaoyangmen
* Guangqumen
* Zuo&#x27;anmen
* Yongdingmen
* You&#x27;anmen
* Guang&#x27;anmen
* Fuchengmen
* Xizhimen

Only Deshengmen and Yongdingmen (rebuilt 2005) still stand; the others were demolished in the 1950s and 1960s.

Gates through which the former Inner 2nd Ring Road (&quot;Metro Road&quot;) passes are:

* Chongwenmen
* Zhengyangmen
* Xuanwumen

Only Zhengyangmen is still standing today.

==Road conditions==

===Surface conditions===
After completion in the 1980s, the design of the 2nd Ring Road was sufficient for its traffic load. However, as utilization increased in the late 20th century, the road surface rapidly deteriorated. Prior to 2001, the road gave motorists an uncomfortable bumpy ride. Since the total resurfacing, driving on the road has been much more pleasant. Partial resurfacing work is ongoing.

===Central location===
Located in the heart of the city, the 2nd Ring Road is also a transportation bottleneck. Traffic jams are common, and it is hard to find immediate alternative routes as the 2nd Ring has few direct links to expressways. For cars and larger vehicles, there is no way to cross the 2nd Ring Road except at full junctions, or by making a U-turn under an overpass; pedestrians, cycles and motorcycles can make use of pedestrian overpasses. The speed limit is 80 km/h except for sharply turning sections such as between Xiaojie Bridge and Dongzhimen. Speed checks are very frequent and cameras are often operating, some of the locations of these are known, while some are hidden beneath bridges or behind screens.

===Traffic jams===
Traffic jams on the 2nd Ring Road have become a part of daily life. Nevertheless, their intensity varies.

The northern stretch between &quot;Andingmen&quot; and &quot;Xiaojie Bridge&quot; is often jammed, particularly in the lead to the turn-off for the Airport Expressway. The same goes for part of the road around &quot;Deshengmen&quot; and all of the western side. The entire eastern side is frequently jammed due to its proximity to the Beijing CBD.

Less frequently jammed traffic can be found on the southern stretch of the 2nd Ring Road from &quot;Caihuying&quot; through &quot;Zuo&#x27;anmen&quot;.

While the 2nd Ring Road is often congested, unlike the 3rd Ring Road, it is never gridlocked. The 3rd Ring Road uses diamond interchanges, which includes traffic lights. These interchanges back up traffic and causes gridlock. The 2nd Ring Road instead employs mostly cloverleaf interchanges, which allows traffic to flow freely and without traffic lights, therefore eliminating traffic back up.

===Road condition monitors===
Electronic message signs (or screens) are placed throughout the 2nd Ring Road, displaying information about current traffic. The information is only given in simplified Chinese characters at present.

The western part of the 2nd Ring Road has &quot;smart&quot; electronic screens, automatically updated every five minutes. Traffic conditions are continuously monitored. Maps are also shown on them to notify drivers of road conditions at various parts of the road, including Jishuitan, Xizhimen, and Fuxingmen on the Chang&#x27;an Avenue.

Although only Chinese characters are used, the characters themselves are coloured red, yellow or green according to the type of message. This and the map displays make it somewhat easier for non-Chinese speakers to understand.

==Links to expressways==

The Badaling Expressway is linked to (from the side road) at Deshengmen. A direct ramp connection from both directions to the Airport Expressway was finished in 2006. The Jingkai Expressway is easily accessible by proceeding south to the complex-and-impressive Caihuying overpass. There are no direct connections from the 2nd Ring Road to the Jingshen Expressway, Jingjintang Expressway, or Jingcheng Expressway.

It is possible to get to the Jingshi Expressway by heading southwest at Guang&#x27;anmen. Jianguomen links via Jianguomen Outer Street to the Jingtong Expressway and ultimately the Jingha Expressway.

==List of exits==

[Heading in a clockwise direction as of the Northern 2nd Ring Road]

Notes:
* Exits present only in a clockwise direction are indicated by the symbol ↩; anticlockwise only, ↪; not yet open, ✕
* Exit sign symbols: ↗ = exit (✕ = unopened)

===North 2nd Ring Road===

* ↗ Beitaipingzhuang, Xinjiekou (Jishuitan Bridge)
* ↗ Madian &quot;-- connects to direct road to Badaling Expressway&quot; (Deshengmen Bridge)
* ↗ Anhua Bridge (Gulou Bridge, Zhonglou North Bridge)
* ↗ Jiangzhaikou (Andingmen Bridge)
* ↗ Yonghegong, Beixinqiao (Yonghegong Bridge)
* ↗ Hepingli (Xiaojie Bridge)
* ↗ Airport Expressway

===East 2nd Ring Road===
* ↗ Nongzhan Bridge, Beixinqiao (Dongzhimen Bridge)
* ↗ Changhong Bridge, Kuanjie (Dongsishitiao Bridge)
* ↗ Dongdaqiao (Chaoyangmen Bridge)
* ↗ Dongdan, Guomao Bridge (Jianguomen Bridge)
* ↗ (Dongbianmen Bridge)
* ↗ (Guangqumen Bridge)
* ↗ Temple of Heaven (Guangming Bridge)

===South 2nd Ring Road===
* ↗ (Zuo&#x27;anmen Bridge)
* ↗ Chongwenmen (Puhuangyu/Yuting Bridge)
* ↗ (Jingtai Bridge)
* ↗ (Yongdingmen Bridge)
* ↗ (Taoran Bridge)
* ↗ (Kaiyang Bridge)
* ↗ (You&#x27;anmen Bridge)
* ↗ Jingkai Expressway, Lize Bridge (Caihuying Bridge)

===West 2nd Ring Road===
* ↗ (Baizhifang Bridge)
* ↗ (Guang&#x27;anmen Bridge)
* ↗ (Tianningsi Bridge, Xibianmen Bridge)
* ↗ (Fuxingmen Bridge)
* ↗ (Yuetan South Bridge, Yuetan North Bridge)
* ↗ (Fuchengmen Bridge)
* ↗ (Guanyuan Bridge)
* ↗ (Xizhimen Bridge)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210412" start="4" end="17" title="2nd Ring Road" label="2nd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078163" start="38" end="47" title="Ring roads of Beijing" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468524" start="76" end="87" title="city center" label="city center"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="91" end="98" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="100" end="131" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="490" end="515" title="Beijing city fortifications" label="Beijing&amp;#x27;s city walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010215" start="642" end="664" title="Ming City Wall Relics Park" label="Southeast corner tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200624" start="666" end="676" title="Deshengmen" label="Deshengmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808040" start="681" end="692" title="Yongdingmen" label="Yongdingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="781" end="812" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q680973" start="1393" end="1399" title="Line 2 (Beijing Subway)" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q235319" start="1407" end="1421" title="Beijing Subway" label="Beijing Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754482" start="1534" end="1543" title="Andingmen Station" label="Andingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567887" start="1667" end="1675" title="Xizhimen" label="Xizhimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431711" start="1704" end="1714" title="Dongzhimen" label="Dongzhimen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1744" end="1755" title="Dongbianmen" label="Dongbianmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1760" end="1769" title="Xibianmen" label="Xibianmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q197703" start="1848" end="1855" title="Qianmen" label="Qianmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="1880" end="1902" title="Tian&amp;#x27;anmen Square" label="Tian&amp;#x27;anmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200624" start="2446" end="2456" title="Deshengmen" label="Deshengmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890808" start="2459" end="2468" title="Andingmen" label="Andingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431711" start="2471" end="2481" title="Dongzhimen" label="Dongzhimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q985767" start="2484" end="2495" title="Chaoyangmen" label="Chaoyangmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="2498" end="2508" title="Guangqumen" label="Guangqumen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2511" end="2525" title="Zuo&amp;#x27;anmen" label="Zuo&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808040" start="2528" end="2539" title="Yongdingmen" label="Yongdingmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2542" end="2556" title="You&amp;#x27;anmen" label="You&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613603" start="2559" end="2575" title="Guang&amp;#x27;anmen" label="Guang&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567923" start="2578" end="2588" title="Fuchengmen" label="Fuchengmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567887" start="2591" end="2599" title="Xizhimen" label="Xizhimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567915" start="2804" end="2815" title="Chongwenmen" label="Chongwenmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q197703" start="2818" end="2830" title="Zhengyangmen" label="Zhengyangmen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2833" end="2842" title=":zh:宣武门" label="Xuanwumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q197703" start="2849" end="2861" title="Zhengyangmen" label="Zhengyangmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111645" start="3417" end="3427" title="Bottleneck (traffic)" label="bottleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q25235" start="3799" end="3800" title="hour" label="h"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890808" start="4209" end="4218" title="Andingmen" label="Andingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200624" start="4390" end="4400" title="Deshengmen" label="Deshengmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017526" start="4623" end="4632" title="Caihuying" label="Caihuying"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4653" end="4667" title="Zuo&amp;#x27;anmen" label="Zuo&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668502" start="4731" end="4744" title="3rd Ring Road (Beijing)" label="3rd Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q628131" start="4793" end="4812" title="diamond interchange" label="diamond interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075207" start="4943" end="4965" title="cloverleaf interchange" label="cloverleaf interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="5260" end="5289" title="simplified Chinese characters" label="simplified Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976575" start="5577" end="5586" title="Jishuitan Station" label="Jishuitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567887" start="5588" end="5596" title="Xizhimen" label="Xizhimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567932" start="5602" end="5611" title="Fuxingmen" label="Fuxingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061850" start="5619" end="5639" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an Avenue" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4074911" start="5900" end="5919" title="Badaling Expressway" label="Badaling Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200624" start="5957" end="5967" title="Deshengmen" label="Deshengmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4073691" start="6022" end="6040" title="Airport Expressway (Beijing)" label="Airport Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q785218" start="6067" end="6085" title="Jingkai Expressway" label="Jingkai Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017526" start="6157" end="6166" title="Caihuying" label="Caihuying"/>
<link wikidata="Q179002" start="6239" end="6258" title="Jingshen Expressway" label="Jingshen Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q834122" start="6260" end="6282" title="Jingjintang Expressway" label="Jingjintang Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q785218" start="6287" end="6307" title="Jingcheng Expressway" label="Jingcheng Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q785361" start="6339" end="6357" title="Jingshi Expressway" label="Jingshi Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613603" start="6382" end="6398" title="Guang&amp;#x27;anmen" label="Guang&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270485" start="6400" end="6410" title="Jianguomen (Beijing)" label="Jianguomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191747" start="6421" end="6444" title="Jianguomen Outer Street" label="Jianguomen Outer Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369827" start="6452" end="6471" title="Jingtong Expressway" label="Jingtong Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179002" start="6491" end="6508" title="Jingha Expressway" label="Jingha Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6799" end="6815" title="Beitaipingzhuang" label="Beitaipingzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084298" start="6817" end="6826" title="Xinjiekou, Beijing" label="Xinjiekou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727688" start="6850" end="6856" title="Madian, Beijing" label="Madian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4074911" start="6893" end="6912" title="Badaling Expressway" label="Badaling Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200624" start="6920" end="6930" title="Deshengmen" label="Deshengmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741116" start="6957" end="6962" title="Gulou and Zhonglou (Beijing)" label="Gulou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6998" end="7010" title="Jiangzhaikou" label="Jiangzhaikou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890808" start="7012" end="7021" title="Andingmen" label="Andingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q692723" start="7034" end="7044" title="Yonghegong" label="Yonghegong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881502" start="7046" end="7056" title="Beixinqiao Subdistrict" label="Beixinqiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q692723" start="7058" end="7068" title="Yonghegong" label="Yonghegong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431697" start="7081" end="7089" title="Hepingli Subdistrict, Beijing" label="Hepingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4073691" start="7111" end="7129" title="Airport Expressway (Beijing)" label="Airport Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7160" end="7168" title="Nongzhan" label="Nongzhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881502" start="7177" end="7187" title="Beixinqiao Subdistrict" label="Beixinqiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431711" start="7189" end="7199" title="Dongzhimen" label="Dongzhimen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7212" end="7228" title="Changhong Bridge" label="Changhong Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7230" end="7237" title="Kuanjie" label="Kuanjie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296031" start="7239" end="7252" title="Dongsishitiao" label="Dongsishitiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q82803" start="7265" end="7275" title="Dongdaqiao" label="Dongdaqiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q985767" start="7277" end="7288" title="Chaoyangmen" label="Chaoyangmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295854" start="7301" end="7308" title="Dongdan, Beijing" label="Dongdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619668" start="7310" end="7316" title="Guomao, Beijing" label="Guomao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7349" end="7360" title="Dongbianmen" label="Dongbianmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812732" start="7374" end="7384" title="Guangqumen" label="Guangqumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q125445" start="7397" end="7413" title="Temple of Heaven" label="Temple of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7415" end="7431" title="Guangming Bridge" label="Guangming Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7465" end="7479" title="Zuo&amp;#x27;anmen" label="Zuo&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567915" start="7492" end="7503" title="Chongwenmen" label="Chongwenmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258998" start="7505" end="7514" title="Puhuangyu" label="Puhuangyu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7515" end="7521" title="Yuting" label="Yuting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7535" end="7549" title="Jingtai Bridge" label="Jingtai Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808040" start="7556" end="7567" title="Yongdingmen" label="Yongdingmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7581" end="7587" title="Taoran" label="Taoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340078" start="7601" end="7608" title="Kaiyang" label="Kaiyang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7622" end="7636" title="You&amp;#x27;anmen" label="You&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q785218" start="7649" end="7667" title="Jingkai Expressway" label="Jingkai Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7669" end="7680" title="Lize Bridge" label="Lize Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017526" start="7682" end="7691" title="Caihuying" label="Caihuying"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7731" end="7741" title="Baizhifang" label="Baizhifang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613603" start="7755" end="7771" title="Guang&amp;#x27;anmen" label="Guang&amp;#x27;anmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7785" end="7795" title="Tianningsi" label="Tianningsi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7804" end="7813" title="Xibianmen" label="Xibianmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567932" start="7827" end="7836" title="Fuxingmen" label="Fuxingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q680679" start="7850" end="7856" title="Yuetan" label="Yuetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q680679" start="7871" end="7877" title="Yuetan" label="Yuetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567923" start="7897" end="7907" title="Fuchengmen" label="Fuchengmen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7921" end="7929" title="Guanyuan" label="Guanyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567887" start="7943" end="7951" title="Xizhimen" label="Xizhimen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748820" wikidata="Q17984585" url="?curid=748820" title="Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad">
<text>Jama&#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad (), abbreviated as JTJ or Jama&#x27;at, was a Salafi jihadist militant group. It was founded in Jordan in 1999, and was led by Jordanian national Abu Musab al-Zarqawi for the entirety of its existence. During the Iraqi insurgency (2003–11), the group became a decentralized network with foreign fighters with a considerable Iraqi membership.

On 17 October 2004, al-Zarqawi pledged allegiance to Osama bin Laden&#x27;s al-Qaeda network, and the group became known as Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn (commonly known as al-Qaeda in Iraq or Tanzim). After several mergers with other groups and the formation of the Mujahideen Shura Council, it changed its name several times until it called itself Islamic State of Iraq (ISI) in 2006.

== Origins ==

Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was a Jordanian Jihadist who traveled to Afghanistan to fight within the Soviet–Afghan War, but arrived after the departure of the Soviet troops, and soon returned to his homeland. He eventually returned to Afghanistan, where he ran an Islamic militant training camp near Herat.

A report released by the Washington Institute for Near East Policy in mid-2014 describes al-Zarqawi, in association with other Jordanians and Sunni Jihadist militants, as starting JTJ in 1999 with its training camp in Herat, and with &quot;a small amount of seed money&quot; from bin Laden &quot;which continued until 9/11&quot;.

== Ideology and motivation ==
Al-Zarqawi&#x27;s interpretation of Islamic takfir—accusing other Muslims of heresy and thereby justifying his killing—was extreme, which caused friction between him and bin Laden.

Al-Zarqawi&#x27;s political motives included what he considered the British Mandate for Palestine as a &quot;gift to the Jews so they can rape the land and humiliate our people&quot;, the United Nation&#x27;s support for American &quot;oppressors of Iraq&quot;, and the &quot;humiliation [of] our [Muslim] nation&quot;.

== History ==
=== In Jordan (1999–2001) ===
Al-Zarqawi started JTJ with the intention of overthrowing the &#x27;apostate&#x27; Kingdom of Jordan, which he considered to be un-Islamic. After toppling Jordan&#x27;s monarchy, presumably he would turn to the rest of the Levant.

For these purposes he developed numerous contacts and affiliates in several countries. His network may have been involved in the late 1999 plot to bomb the Millennium celebrations in the United States and Jordan.

=== In Jordan and Iraq (2001–2002) ===

Following the 2001 US-led invasion of Afghanistan, al-Zarqawi moved to Iraq, where he reportedly received medical treatment in Baghdad for an injured leg.

Al-Zarqawi was in Baghdad from May until late November 2002, when he traveled to Iran and northeastern Iraq. The United States 2006 Senate Report on Pre-war Intelligence on Iraq concluded: &quot;Postwar information indicates that Saddam Hussein attempted, unsuccessfully, to locate and capture al-Zarqawi and that the regime did not have a relationship with, harbor, or turn a blind eye toward al-Zarqawi.&quot;

Al-Zarqawi and his operatives are held responsible by the United States for the assassination of US diplomat Laurence Foley in Jordan in October 2002.

=== Involvement in the Iraq War (2003–2004) ===
Following the US invasion of Iraq and the ensuing insurgency, Jama&#x27;at became a decentralized militant network fighting against the coalition forces and their Iraqi allies. Jama&#x27;at included a growing number of foreign fighters and a considerable Iraqi membership, including remnants of Ansar al-Islam.

Many foreign fighters arriving in Iraq were not initially associated with Jama&#x27;at, but once they were in the country they became dependent on al-Zarqawi&#x27;s local contacts.

Jama&#x27;at&#x27;s tactics included suicide bombings, often using car bombs, kidnappings, the planting of improvised explosive devices, attacks using rocket-propelled grenades, small arms and mortars, and beheading Iraqi and foreign hostages and distributing video recordings of these acts on the Internet.

The group targeted Iraqi security forces and those assisting the occupation, Iraqi interim officials, Iraqi Shia and Kurdish political and religious figures and institutions, Shia civilians, foreign civilian contractors, United Nations and humanitarian workers, and also Sunni Muslim civilians.

=== Pledge of allegiance to al-Qaeda ===
On 17 October 2004, al-Zarqawi pledged allegiance to Osama bin Laden&#x27;s al-Qaeda network, and the group became known as Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn (commonly known as al-Qaeda in Iraq). Al-Zarqawi died in a US targeted airstrike in June 2006 on an isolated safe house north of Baghdad at 6:15 p.m. local time.

== Activities ==
=== Attacks ===
After the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq and the establishment of a governing Provisional Authority, an insurgency quickly emerged. Dozens of insurgent attacks were claimed by, or attributed to, JTJ in the following months:

* 7 August 2003: Jordanian embassy bombing in Baghdad which killed 17 and injured at least 40. The Jamestown Foundation considered Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Jama&#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad responsible for this attack.
* 19 August 2003: Canal Hotel bombing that killed chief of the United Nations Mission to Iraq Sérgio Vieira de Mello and 22 others at the UN headquarters in Baghdad. More than 100 were injured. Zarqawi claimed responsibility for this attack in April 2004, saying the U.N. &quot;gave Palestine to the Jews so they can humiliate our people&quot; and are &quot;friends of the &quot;[American]&quot; oppressors&quot;.
* 12 November 2003: The truck bombing in Nasiriyah which killed 17 Italian paramilitary policemen partaking in the U.S.-led &#x27;Multi-National Force&#x27;, and 10 civilians and injured at least 100. The Jamestown Foundation considered Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Jama&#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad responsible for this attack.
* 2 March 2004: Series of bombings in Baghdad and Karbala that killed some 178 Shi&#x27;ite civilians and wounded at least 500 during the holy Day of Ashura. The Washington Institute for Near East Policy held &quot;Zarqawi&#x27;s group&quot; responsible.
* 19 April 2004: Failed plot to explode chemical bombs in Amman, Jordan, said to be financed by Zarqawi&#x27;s network.
* 24 April 2004: In a statement published on the Muntada al-Ansar Islamist web site, Zarqawi took responsibility for a series of suicide boat bombings of oil pumping stations in the Persian Gulf.
* 18 May 2004: Car bomb assassination of Iraqi Governing Council President Ezzedine Salim in Baghdad. The Jama&#x27;at group stated on an Islamist website that they were &quot;&quot;determined to lift the humiliation from our nation (...) Another lion has removed the rotten head of those who betray God and sell their religion to the Americans and their allies&quot;.&quot;
* 18 June 2004: The suicide car bombing in Baghdad near an Iraqi Army recruitment center that killed 35 civilians, and wounded 145. Jama&#x27;at was blamed.
* 1 August 2004: six churches in Baghdad and Mosul were attacked, 12 people killed and 71 wounded. Iraq&#x27;s national security adviser, Mowaffaq al-Rubaie, blamed the attacks on Abu Musab al-Zarqawi. 
* 14 September 2004: Car bomb killed 47 and injured nearly 100 police recruits on Haifa Street in Baghdad.
* 30 September 2004: Baghdad bombing which killed 41 people, mostly children. Jama&#x27;at claimed responsibility for attacks on the day, but it was unclear if this was included.
* The October 2004 massacre of 49 unarmed Iraqi National Guard recruits was claimed by JTJ.
* 3 December 2004: Failed attempt to blow up an Iraqi–Jordanian border crossing, for which al-Zarqawi and two of his associates were sentenced to death &quot;in absentia&quot; by a Jordanian court in 2006

=== Inciting sectarian violence ===
Alleged sectarian attacks by the organization included the Imam Ali Mosque bombing in 2003 and the 2004 Day of Ashura bombings (Ashoura massacre) and Karbala and Najaf bombings in 2004. These were precursors to a more widespread campaign of sectarian violence after the organization transitioned to become al-Qaida in Iraq, with Al-Zarqawi purportedly declaring an all-out war on Shias,&lt;ref name=&quot;NYTimes09/15&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; while claiming responsibility for the Shia mosque bombings.

=== Beheading/killing non-Iraqi hostages ===
* 7 May 2004: Nick Berg, American civilian beheaded. A video of the killing was published on the Internet; the CIA said it was likely that Abu Musab al-Zarqawi personally had wielded the knife 
* 22 June 2004: Kim Sun-il, South Korean civilian, executed by beheading.
* 8 July 2004: Georgi Lazov and Ivaylo Kepov, Bulgarian civilians beheaded
* 2 August 2004: Murat Yuce, Turkish civilian shot dead, by Abu Ayyub al-Masri.
* 13 September 2004: Durmus Kumdereli, Turkish civilian beheaded
* 20 September 2004: Eugene Armstrong, American civilian beheaded. Presumably claimed by Zarqawi and his men. Some sources claimed it was done by Al-Zarqawi personally. It was shown in Fitna, a LiveLeak film in 2008.
* 21 September 2004: Jack Hensley, American civilian beheaded. Presumably by Zarqawi and his men.
* 7 October 2004: Kenneth Bigley, British civilian beheaded. Presumably by Zarqawi and his men.
* 29 October 2004: Shosei Koda, Japanese civilian beheaded. An Islamist website that was used by al-Zarqawi&#x27;s group had posted video of Koda shortly after the abduction. 
The Turkish translator Aytullah Gezmen was also abducted by Jama&#x27;at, but released after &quot;repenting.&quot;

== U.S. fighting Jama&#x27;at ==
In September 2004, the U.S. conducted many airstrikes targeting Al-Zarqawi, calling the hunt for Al-Zarqawi its &quot;highest priority&quot;.

== Legacy ==

The group pledged allegiance to Osama bin Laden&#x27;s al-Qaeda network in a letter in October 2004 and changed its name to &quot;Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn&quot;.

That same month, the group, now popularly referred to as al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), kidnapped and killed Japanese citizen Shosei Koda. In November, al-Zarqawi&#x27;s network was the main target of the US Operation Phantom Fury in Fallujah, but its leadership managed to escape the American siege and subsequent storming of the city.

The Lebanese-Palestinian militant group Fatah al-Islam, which was defeated by Lebanese government forces during the 2007 Lebanon conflict, was linked to AQI and led by al-Zarqawi&#x27;s former companion Mustafa Ramadan Darwish who had fought alongside him in Iraq.

The group may have been linked to the little-known group called &quot;Tawhid and Jihad in Syria&quot;, and may have influenced the Palestinian resistance group in Gaza called Tawhid and Jihad Brigades.

== See also ==
* Abu Ayyub al-Masri
* Terrorism in Iraq
* Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations
* Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant

== References ==
== External links ==
* Brutal kidnappers gaining in popularity The Guardian on 21 September 2004
* Profile: Tawhid and Jihad group BBC News on 8 October 2004
* Purported Zarqawi letter Coalition Provisional Authority</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17984585" start="0" end="32" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad" label="Jama&amp;#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984585" start="52" end="55" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad" label="JTJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984585" start="59" end="71" title="Jama&amp;#x27;at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad" label="Jama&amp;#x27;at"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380905" start="79" end="94" title="Salafi jihadist" label="Salafi jihadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="160" end="166" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181049" start="179" end="199" title="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi" label="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="246" end="272" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–11)" label="Iraqi insurgency (2003–11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q804061" start="415" end="425" title="Bay&amp;#x27;ah" label="allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="429" end="444" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="452" end="460" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="500" end="543" title="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn" label="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993709" start="657" end="681" title="Mujahideen Shura Council (Iraq)" label="Mujahideen Shura Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206631" start="740" end="761" title="Islamic State of Iraq" label="Islamic State of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q181049" start="793" end="813" title="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi" label="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="830" end="838" title="Jihadism" label="Jihadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="855" end="866" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="887" end="904" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="1086" end="1091" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778471" start="1119" end="1160" title="Washington Institute for Near East Policy" label="Washington Institute for Near East Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="1236" end="1241" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="1242" end="1250" title="Jihadism" label="Jihadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1412" end="1416" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1491" end="1496" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q962658" start="1499" end="1505" title="takfir" label="takfir"/>
<link wikidata="Q857060" start="1532" end="1538" title="Heresy in Islam" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1705" end="1734" title="Mandate for Palestine#Establishment of a national home for the Jewish people" label="British Mandate for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="2064" end="2084" title="Apostacy" label="&amp;#x27;apostate&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="2225" end="2231" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598087" start="2373" end="2413" title="2000 millennium attack plots" label="plot to bomb the Millennium celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="2502" end="2537" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="2001 US-led invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="2615" end="2622" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2725" end="2729" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450018" start="2776" end="2821" title="Senate Report on Pre-war Intelligence on Iraq" label="Senate Report on Pre-war Intelligence on Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2874" end="2888" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807980" start="3166" end="3180" title="Laurence Foley" label="Laurence Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="3271" end="3290" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="US invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="3299" end="3317" title="Iraqi insurgency (2003–11)" label="ensuing insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q568914" start="3552" end="3566" title="Ansar al-Islam in Kurdistan" label="Ansar al-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217327" start="3788" end="3804" title="suicide bombings" label="suicide bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="3818" end="3826" title="car bomb" label="car bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="3858" end="3885" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="3902" end="3926" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="3929" end="3939" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="3944" end="3950" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204494" start="3957" end="3966" title="Islamist beheading" label="beheading"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849914" start="4079" end="4100" title="Iraqi security forces" label="Iraqi security forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q804061" start="4436" end="4446" title="Bay&amp;#x27;ah" label="allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="4473" end="4481" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="4521" end="4564" title="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn" label="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="4771" end="4796" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="U.S.-led invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="4834" end="4855" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="Provisional Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601499" start="4998" end="5034" title="2003 Jordanian embassy bombing in Baghdad" label="Jordanian embassy bombing in Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090146" start="5076" end="5100" title="The Jamestown Foundation" label="The Jamestown Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181049" start="5112" end="5132" title="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi" label="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116108" start="5217" end="5236" title="Canal Hotel bombing" label="Canal Hotel bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q334835" start="5293" end="5315" title="Sérgio Vieira de Mello" label="Sérgio Vieira de Mello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629102" start="5633" end="5650" title="2003 Nasiriyah bombing" label="The truck bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38811" start="5654" end="5663" title="Nasiriyah" label="Nasiriyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5680" end="5687" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="5743" end="5763" title="Multi-National Force – Iraq" label="Multi-National Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090146" start="5814" end="5838" title="The Jamestown Foundation" label="The Jamestown Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181049" start="5850" end="5870" title="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi" label="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q722990" start="5953" end="5971" title="2004 Iraq Ashura bombings" label="Series of bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q199909" start="5987" end="5994" title="Karbala" label="Karbala"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="6080" end="6093" title="Day of Ashura" label="Day of Ashura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778471" start="6099" end="6140" title="Washington Institute for Near East Policy" label="Washington Institute for Near East Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="6232" end="6246" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="6250" end="6255" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936973" start="6361" end="6377" title="Muntada al-Ansar" label="Muntada al-Ansar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="6494" end="6506" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672361" start="6549" end="6572" title="Iraqi Governing Council" label="Iraqi Governing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q983370" start="6583" end="6597" title="Ezzedine Salim" label="Ezzedine Salim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312055" start="6899" end="6922" title="June 2004 Baghdad bombing" label="The suicide car bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q109657226" start="7057" end="7104" title="2004 Iraq churches attacks" label="six churches in Baghdad and Mosul were attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927211" start="7178" end="7196" title="Mowaffaq al-Rubaie" label="Mowaffaq al-Rubaie"/>
<link wikidata="Q181049" start="7220" end="7240" title="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi" label="Abu Musab al-Zarqawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549952" start="7273" end="7305" title="14 September 2004 Baghdad bombing" label="killed 47 and injured nearly 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165288" start="7325" end="7337" title="Haifa Street" label="Haifa Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634531" start="7371" end="7386" title="30 September 2004 Baghdad bombing" label="Baghdad bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955169" start="7571" end="7591" title="Iraqi National Guard" label="Iraqi National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="7685" end="7700" title="border control" label="border crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="7779" end="7790" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q838359" start="7922" end="7937" title="Imam Ali Shrine" label="Imam Ali Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="7967" end="7980" title="Day of Ashura" label="Day of Ashura"/>
<link wikidata="Q722990" start="7991" end="8007" title="Ashoura massacre" label="Ashoura massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774758" start="8104" end="8122" title="sectarian violence" label="sectarian violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="8169" end="8185" title="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn" label="al-Qaida in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q130483754" start="8423" end="8432" title="Nick Berg" label="Nick Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="8520" end="8523" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q496210" start="8619" end="8629" title="Kim Sun-il" label="Kim Sun-il"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="8631" end="8642" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8709" end="8721" title="Ivaylo Kepov" label="Ivaylo Kepov"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="8723" end="8731" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8769" end="8779" title="Murat Yuce" label="Murat Yuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="8781" end="8788" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q334821" start="8812" end="8830" title="Abu Ayyub al-Masri" label="Abu Ayyub al-Masri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8853" end="8869" title="Durmus Kumdereli" label="Durmus Kumdereli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468404" start="8918" end="8934" title="Eugene Armstrong" label="Eugene Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q245063" start="9082" end="9087" title="Fitna (film)" label="Fitna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468404" start="9135" end="9147" title="Jack Hensley" label="Jack Hensley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117105" start="9230" end="9244" title="Kenneth Bigley" label="Kenneth Bigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9246" end="9253" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575987" start="9327" end="9338" title="Shosei Koda" label="Shosei Koda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9340" end="9345" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9488" end="9495" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="9823" end="9838" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="9921" end="9964" title="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn" label="Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076058" start="10030" end="10046" title="al-Qaeda in Iraq" label="al-Qaeda in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575987" start="10092" end="10103" title="Shosei Koda" label="Shosei Koda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330136" start="10174" end="10196" title="Second Battle of Fallujah" label="Operation Phantom Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="10200" end="10208" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q658247" start="10344" end="10358" title="Fatah al-Islam" label="Fatah al-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q786595" start="10420" end="10441" title="2007 Lebanon conflict" label="2007 Lebanon conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="10733" end="10737" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123015" start="10745" end="10770" title="Jahafil Al-Tawhid Wal-Jihad fi Filastin" label="Tawhid and Jihad Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q334821" start="10790" end="10808" title="Abu Ayyub al-Masri" label="Abu Ayyub al-Masri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10811" end="10828" title="Terrorism in Iraq" label="Terrorism in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397667" start="10831" end="10875" title="Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations" label="Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda link allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="10878" end="10914" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10996" end="11008" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="11064" end="11072" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="11118" end="11149" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="Coalition Provisional Authority"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748825" wikidata="Q1474233" url="?curid=748825" title="List of auxiliaries of the United States Navy">
<text>This is a list of [[Auxiliary ship|auxiliaries]] of the United States Navy. It covers the various types of ships that support the frontline combat vessels of the United States Navy.

Auxiliary ships which function as hospital ships and as oilers are to be found in their own articles: List of United States Navy hospital ships and List of United States Navy oilers. Escort carriers, amphibious warfare vessels, and some mine warfare vessels were also originally classed as auxiliaries but were later given their own hull classification symbols outside the auxiliary series (which all begin with an &#x27;A&#x27;). Links to these and other list articles of similar ships can be found throughout this article.

Yard and district craft also function as auxiliaries but generally are smaller and less capable than their ocean-going counterparts, and so they generally remain in harbors and coastal areas. Their hull classification symbols begin with a &#x27;Y&#x27;.

Ship status is indicated as either currently active [A], ready reserve [R], inactive [I], or precommissioning [P]. Ships in the inactive category include only ships in the inactive reserve, ships which have been disposed from US service have no listed status. Ships in the precommissioning category include ships under construction or on order.

Listed ship classes will often state &#x27;MA type&#x27; or &#x27;MC type&#x27;. The difference is that &#x27;MC Type&#x27; refers to ships designed by the United States Maritime Commission aka MarCom, while &#x27;MA Type&#x27; refers to ships designed or converted under MarCom&#x27;s successor agency, the United States Maritime Administration or MarAd. They are in fact the same designs, and the year 1950 is the date at which MarAd succeeded MarCom.

==Historical overview==
Prior to the creation of the auxiliary hull classification system, ships that performed such tasks had no symbol or code to identify them, only informal designations such as &quot;Fleet Collier No. 1&quot;.

===World War I===
During World War I the Navy created the Section patrol (SP) and identification number (ID) system to register civilian vessels for naval acquisition. The ID series can be considered a forerunner of the current auxiliary hull numbering system, and some ships with ID numbers were later given &#x27;A&#x27; hull symbols.

Also during WWI a series of mass-produced ships were designed by the Emergency Fleet Corporation, but few were completed before the end of the war and even fewer became naval auxiliaries.

===Pre-World War II===
Until World War II the US auxiliary fleet was notable for being composed of non-standard ships which had been purchased &quot;ad-hoc&quot;. Very few were designed specifically for their intended role.

Interesting examples from the 1920&#x27;s of rare early auxiliaries deliberately designed for their roles include the destroyer tenders USS &quot;Dobbin&quot; (AD-3) and USS &quot;Whitney&quot; (AD-4), the repair ship USS &quot;Medusa&quot; (AR-1), and the submarine tender USS &quot;Holland&quot; (AS-3): these 4 ships had the same length hulls and similar superstructures, so they were likely of the same basic design.

In the late 1930&#x27;s the Navy began the construction of 22 large tenders and repair ships to a new basic design: all were nearly identical in hull form, power plant, and superstructure (but the seaplane tenders had a large hangar that the others lacked):
* 5 destroyer tenders (AD)s of the &quot;Dixie&quot;-class
* 4 repair ships (AR)s of the &quot;Vulcan&quot;-class
* 7 submarine tenders (AS)s of the &quot;Fulton&quot;-class
* 2 seaplane tenders (AV)s of the &quot;Curtiss&quot;-class
* 4 seaplane tenders (AV)s of the slightly longer &quot;Currituck&quot; class

The last of these 22 ships (the submarine tender &quot;Sperry&quot;) was scrapped in 2011.

Also at this time the Navy began the construction of 4 large net layers (AN)s and 3 minelayers (CM)s to a different basic design, but changing requirements resulted in all but one minelayer being redesignated as transports (AP)s and then converted into Landing ships, vehicle (LSV)s.

===World War II===

During the naval build-up for World War II over 700 vessels of Maritime Commission (MarCom, later MarAd) standard designs were converted to US Navy auxiliaries, as were a few Landing Ships Medium (LSM)s: 
* 58 Type B barracks barges: all APL
* 83 Type C1 ships: 2 AE, 3 AG, 2 AGOR, 2 AGP, 3 AH, 61 AK, 2 AP, 4 APC, 1 ARG, 3 AVS
* 59 Type C2 ships: 15 AE, 3 AF, 22 AK, 5 AKS, 13 AP, 1 AVS
* 63 Type C3 ships: 12 AD, 29 AP, 5 AR, 11 AS, 6 AV
* 42 Type C4 ships: 6 AH, 2 AK, 34 AP
* 107 Type EC2 Liberty ships: 63 AK, 4 AKN, 17 AKS, 5 AR, 14 ARG, 2 ARV, 2 AVS 
* 2 Type ET1 Liberty ships: both AW 
* 26 Type R ships: all AF
* 88 Type S3 ships (most LSTs): 14 AGP, 5 AKS, 7 APB, 1 APL, 13 ARB, 2 ARC, 39 ARL, 3 ARST, 2 ARVA, 2 ARVE
* 76 T1 tankers: all AOG
* 4 T2 tankers: 1 AG, 1 AOG, 2 AW
* 79 Type V ships: all AT
* 34 Type VC2 Victory ships: 3 AG, 29 AK, 2 AKS
* 4 LSMs: all ARSD

===Post World War II===
During the Cold War over 100 United States Maritime Administration (MarAd) standard designs were converted to US Navy auxiliaries:
* 8 Type C1 ships: 1 AF, 5 AGM, 2 AGS
* 3 Type C2 ship: 2 AE, 1 AG
* 4 Type C3 ships / CVEs: all AKV
* 4 Type C4 ships: 1 AG, 3 AGM
* 8 Type C5 ships: 3 ACS, 3 AK, 2 AVB
* 7 Type C6 ships: all ACS
* 7 Type C7 ships: 3 AK, 4 AKR
* 20 Type EC2 Liberty ships: 1 AGM, 16 AGR, 3 AGTR
* 2 Type R ships: both AF
* 2 Type S3 ships (LSTs): 1 AG, 1 AVB
* 17 Type S4 ships: 2 AGS, 13 AKV, 2 ARC
* 3 T2 tankers: all AGM
* 19 T3 tankers / CVEs: all AKV
* 31 Type VC2 Victory ships: 11 AG, 4 AF, 8 AGM, 4 AGS, 2 AGTR, 2 AKV
* 2 LSMs: 1 AG, 1 ARC

Modern auxiliaries have been designed to reduce operating costs by introducing scales of economies with larger ships and by reducing manning requirements (a trend begun in 1949 with the introduction of manning non-commissioned ships with civilian crews under the Military Sealift Command and its predecessors - such ships carry the &#x27;T-&#x27; prefix on their hull symbols and the USNS prefix rather than USS; ships with MV or SS prefixes are under long-term charter with the Navy rather than under Navy ownership).

==Crane ships (AB)==
*USS &quot;Kearsarge&quot; (AB-1), ex-BB-5

==Colliers (AC)==

* USS &quot;Hannibal&quot; (1898), later AG-1
* USS &quot;Justin&quot; (1898)
* USS &quot;Leonidas&quot; (1898)
* USS &quot;Marcellus&quot; (1879)
* USS &quot;Merrimac&quot; (1898)
* USS &quot;Quincy&quot; (1918)
* USS &quot;Saturn&quot; (1898), later AG-4
* USS &quot;Southery&quot; (1898)
* USS &quot;Sterling&quot; (1898)
* USS &quot;Vestal&quot; (AC-1), later AR-4
* USS &quot;Ontario&quot; (AC-2), later AR-3
* USS &quot;Jupiter&quot; (AC-3), later CV-1 as &quot;Langley&quot;, AV-3
* USS &quot;Cyclops&quot; (AC-4), lost March 1918, 306 killed
* USS &quot;Vulcan&quot; (AC-5)
* USS &quot;Mars&quot; (AC-6)
* USS &quot;Hector&quot; (AC-7)
* USS &quot;Neptune&quot; (AC-8)
* USS &quot;Proteus&quot; (AC-9)
* USS &quot;Nereus&quot; (AC-10)
* USS &quot;Orion&quot; (AC-11)
* USS &quot;Jason&quot; (AC-12), later AV-2
* USS &quot;Abarenda&quot; (AC-13), later AG-14
* USS &quot;Ajax&quot; (AC-14), later AG-15
* USS &quot;Brutus&quot; (AC-15)
* USS &quot;Caesar&quot; (AC-16)
* USS &quot;Nero&quot; (AC-17)
==Auxiliary minelayers (ACM)==
==Auxiliary crane ships (T-ACS)==
unknown class: MA type C6-S-MA1qd
* [R]
* [R]
* [I]

&quot;Gopher State&quot;-class: MA type C5-S-73b
* [R]
* [I]
* [R]

unknown class: MA type C6-S-1aq
* [I]

unknown class: MA type C6-S-MA60d
* [I]
* , later X-Band Transportable Radar Ship (XTR-1) SS &quot;Pacific Tracker&quot;

==Auxiliary aircraft carriers (ACV)==

The Auxiliary aircraft carriers (ACV) were designated as Auxiliary aircraft escort vessels (AVG) until 20 August 1942 and then were redesignated Escort aircraft carriers (CVE) on 15 July 1943.

==Destroyer tenders (AD)==



* USS &quot;Dixie&quot; (AD-1)
* USS &quot;Melville&quot; (AD-2)
&quot;Dobbin&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Dobbin&quot; (AD-3)
* USS &quot;Whitney&quot; (AD-4)
Unknown classes

* USS &quot;Prairie&quot; (AD-5)
* USS &quot;Panther&quot; (AD-6)
* USS &quot;Leonidas&quot; (AD-7)
* USS &quot;Buffalo&quot; (AD-8)
* USS &quot;Black Hawk&quot; (AD-9)
* USS &quot;Bridgeport&quot; (AD-10), ex-ID-3009, ex-AR-2
&quot;Altair&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Altair&quot; (AD-11)
* USS &quot;Denebola&quot; (AD-12)
* USS &quot;Rigel&quot; (AD-13), later ARb-1, AR-11
&quot;Dixie&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Dixie&quot; (AD-14)
* USS &quot;Prairie&quot; (AD-15)
* USS &quot;Piedmont&quot; (AD-17)
* USS &quot;Sierra&quot; (AD-18)
* USS &quot;Yosemite&quot; (AD-19)
&quot;Cascade&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Cascade&quot; (AD-16)

&quot;Hamul&quot;-class: MC type C3

* USS &quot;Hamul&quot; (AD-20), ex-AK-30
* USS &quot;Markab&quot; (AD-21), ex-AK-31, later AR-23
&quot;Klondike&quot;-class: MC type C3

* USS &quot;Klondike&quot; (AD-22), later AR-22
* USS &quot;Arcadia&quot; (AD-23)
* USS &quot;Everglades&quot; (AD-24)
* USS &quot;Frontier&quot; (AD-25)
&quot;Shenandoah&quot;-class: MC type C3 

* USS &quot;Shenandoah&quot; (AD-26)
* USS &quot;Yellowstone&quot; (AD-27)
* USS &quot;Grand Canyon&quot; (AD-28), later AR-28
* USS &quot;Isle Royale&quot; (AD-29)
* USS &quot;Great Lakes&quot; (AD-30), canceled
* USS &quot;Tidewater&quot; (AD-31)
* USS &quot;New England&quot; (AD-32)
* USS &quot;Canopus&quot; (AD-33), canceled
* USS &quot;Arrowhead&quot; (AD-35), canceled
* USS &quot;Bryce Canyon&quot; (AD-36)
&quot;Alcor&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Alcor&quot; (AD-34), ex-AG-34

&quot;Samuel Gompers&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Samuel Gompers&quot; (AD-37)
* USS &quot;Puget Sound&quot; (AD-38)
&quot;Yellowstone&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Yellowstone&quot; (AD-41)
* USS &quot;Acadia&quot; (AD-42)
* USS &quot;Cape Cod&quot; (AD-43)
* USS &quot;Shenandoah&quot; (AD-44)
* (AD-45) - canceled unnamed
==Degaussing ships (ADG)==
==Ammunition ships (AE)==


Ammunition ships have been replaced by the more capable Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE).

* USS &quot;Pyro&quot; (AE-1)
* USS &quot;Nitro&quot; (AE-2)
* &quot;Major General Henry Gibbins&quot; (AE-7), ex-ID-3661, ex-AK-33, not commissioned

&quot;Lassen&quot;-class: MC types C2, C2-T, C2-N

* USS &quot;Lassen&quot; (AE-3)
* USS &quot;Mount Baker&quot; (AE-4)
* USS &quot;Rainier&quot; (AE-5)
* USS &quot;Shasta&quot; (AE-6)
* USS &quot;Mauna Loa&quot; (AE-8)
* USS &quot;Mazama&quot; (AE-9)

Unknown class: MC type C1-A
* USS &quot;Sangay&quot; (AE-10)
&quot;Mount Hood&quot;-class: MC type C2-S-AJ1

* USS &quot;Mount Hood&quot; (AE-11), exploded on 10 November 1944, 372 killed on multiple vessels
* USS &quot;Wrangell&quot; (AE-12)
* USS &quot;Akutan&quot; (AE-13)
* USS &quot;Firedrake&quot; (AE-14)
* USS &quot;Vesuvius&quot; (AE-15)
* USS &quot;Mount Katmai&quot; (AE-16)
* USS &quot;Great Sitkin&quot; (AE-17)
* USS &quot;Paricutin&quot; (AE-18)
* USS &quot;Diamond Head&quot; (AE-19)

&quot;Fomalhaut&quot;-class: MC type C1-A
* USS &quot;Fomalhaut&quot; (AE-20), ex-AKA-5
&quot;Suribachi&quot;-class
:The &quot;Suribachi&quot; class were the first ammunition ships specifically designed for underway replenishment.

* USS &quot;Suribachi&quot; (AE-21)
* USS &quot;Mauna Kea&quot; (AE-22)

&quot;Nitro&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Nitro&quot; (AE-23)
* USS &quot;Pyro&quot; (AE-24)
* USS &quot;Haleakala&quot; (AE-25)

&quot;Andromeda&quot;-class: MA type C2-S-B1

* USS &quot;Virgo&quot; (AE-30), ex-AKA-20
* USS &quot;Chara&quot; (AE-31), ex-AKA-58

&quot;Kilauea&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Kilauea&quot; (AE-26)
* USS &quot;Butte&quot; (AE-27)
* USS &quot;Santa Barbara&quot; (AE-28)
* USS &quot;Mount Hood&quot; (AE-29)
* USS &quot;Flint&quot; (AE-32)
* USS &quot;Shasta&quot; (AE-33)
* USS &quot;Mount Baker&quot; (AE-34)
* USS &quot;Kiska&quot; (AE-35)
==Auxiliary floating drydock==
===Large auxiliary repair docks (ABSD)===
Reclassified as Large Auxiliary Floating Dry Docks (AFDB) in August 1946.

* USS &quot;Artisan&quot; (ABSD-1)
* USS &quot;ABSD-2&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-3&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-4&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-5&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-6&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-7&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-8&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-9&quot;
* USS &quot;ABSD-10&quot;
===Large auxiliary floating dry docks (AFDB)===
* USS &quot;Artisan&quot; (AFDB-1)
* USS &quot;AFDB-2&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDB-3&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDB-4&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDB-5&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDB-6&quot;
* USS &quot;Machinist&quot; (AFDB-8)
* USS &quot;AFDB-9&quot;
===Small auxiliary floating dry docks (AFDL)===
* USS &quot;Endeavor&quot; (AFDL-1)
* USS &quot;AFDL-2&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-3&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-4&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-5&quot;
* USS &quot;Dynamic&quot; (AFDL-6)
* USS &quot;Ability&quot; (AFDL-7)
* USS &quot;AFDL-8&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-9&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-10&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-11&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-12&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-13&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-14&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-15&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-16&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-17&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-18&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-19&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-20&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-21&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-22&quot;
* USS &quot;Adept&quot; (AFDL-23)
* USS &quot;AFDL-24&quot;
* USS &quot;Undaunted&quot; (AFDL-25)
* USS &quot;AFDL-26&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-27&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-28&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-29&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-30&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-31&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-32&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-33&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-34&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-35&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-36&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-37&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-38&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-39&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-40&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-41&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-42&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-43&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-44&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-45&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDL-46&quot;
* USS &quot;Reliance&quot; (AFDL-47)
* USS &quot;Diligence&quot; (AFDL-48)
===Medium auxiliary floating dry docks (AFDM)===
All AFDMs were classified as YFDs until 1945.

* USS &quot;AFDM-1&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDM-2&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDM-3&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDM-4&quot;
* USS &quot;Resourceful&quot; (AFDM-5)
* USS &quot;Competent&quot; (AFDM-6)
* USS &quot;Sustain&quot; (AFDM-7)
* USS &quot;Richland&quot; (AFDM-8)
* USS &quot;AFDM-9&quot;
* USS &quot;Resolute&quot; (AFDM-10) [I]
* USS &quot;AFDM-11&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDM-12&quot;
* USS &quot;AFDM-13&quot;
* USS &quot;Steadfast&quot; (AFDM-14)
===Auxiliary repair docks (ARD)===
* USS &quot;ARD-1&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-2&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-3&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-4&quot;
* USS &quot;Waterford&quot; (ARD-5)
* USS &quot;ARD-6&quot;
* USS &quot;West Milton&quot; (ARD-7)
* USS &quot;ARD-8&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-9&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-10&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-11&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-12&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-13&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-14&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-15&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-16&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-17&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-18&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-19&quot;
* USS &quot;White Sands&quot; (ARD-20), later T-AGDS-1
* USS &quot;ARD-21&quot;
* USS &quot;Windsor&quot; (ARD-22)
* USS &quot;ARD-23&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-24&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-25&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-26&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-27&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-28&quot;
* USS &quot;Arco&quot; (ARD-29)
* USS &quot;San Onofre&quot; (ARD-30)
* USS &quot;ARD-31&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-32&quot;
* USS &quot;ARD-33&quot;
===Medium auxiliary repair docks (ARDM)===

* USS &quot;Oak Ridge&quot; (ARDM-1)
* USS &quot;Alamogordo&quot; (ARDM-2)
* USS &quot;Endurance&quot; (ARDM-3)
* &quot;Shippingport&quot; (ARDM-4) [A]
* &quot;Arco&quot; (ARDM-5) [A]
=== Yard floating drydocks (YFD) ===
All YFDs were reclassified as AFDMs in 1945.

==Provisions store ships (AF, T-AF)==


* USS &quot;Bridge&quot; (AF-1)
* USS &quot;Celtic&quot; (AF-2)
* USS &quot;Culgoa&quot; (AF-3)
* USS &quot;Glacier&quot; (AF-4)
* USS &quot;Pompey&quot; (AF-5)
* USS &quot;Rappahannock&quot; (AF-6), ex-ID-1854
* USS &quot;Arctic&quot; (AF-7), ex-ID-3806
* USS &quot;Boras&quot; (AF-8)
* USS &quot;Yukon&quot; (AF-9)
* USS &quot;Aldebaran&quot; (AF-10)
* USS &quot;Polaris&quot; (AF-11)
* USS &quot;Mizar&quot; (AF-12)
* USS &quot;Tarazed&quot; (AF-13)
* USS &quot;Uranus&quot; (AF-14)
* USS &quot;Talamanca&quot; (AF-15)
* USS &quot;Pastores&quot; (AF-16), ex-ID-4540
* USS &quot;Antigua&quot; (AF-17)
* USS &quot;Calamares&quot; (AF-18), ex-ID-3662
* USS &quot;Roamer&quot; (AF-19)
* USS &quot;Pontiac&quot; (AF-20)
* USS &quot;Merak&quot; (AF-21)
* USS &quot;Ariel&quot; (AF-22)
* USS &quot;Cygnus&quot; (AF-23)
* USS &quot;Delphinus&quot; (AF-24)
* USS &quot;Taurus&quot; (AF-25)
* USS &quot;Octans&quot; (AF-26)
* USS &quot;Pictor&quot; (AF-27)
* USS &quot;Saturn&quot; (AF-40), ex-AK-49
&quot;Hyades&quot;-class: MC type C2-S-E1

* USS &quot;Hyades&quot; (AF-28)
* USS &quot;Graffias&quot; (AF-29)
&quot;Adria&quot;-class: MC type R1-M-AV3

* USS &quot;Adria&quot; (AF-30)
* USS &quot;Arequipa&quot; (AF-31), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Corduba&quot; (AF-32)
* USS &quot;Karin&quot; (AF-33), Operation Castle participant
* USS &quot;Kerstin&quot; (AF-34)
* USS &quot;Latona&quot; (AF-35)
* USS &quot;Lioba&quot; (AF-36)
* USS &quot;Malabar&quot; (AF-37)
* USS &quot;Merapi&quot; (AF-38)
* USS &quot;Palisana&quot; (AF-39)
* USS &quot;Athanasia&quot; (AF-41)
* USS &quot;Bondia&quot; (AF-42)
* USS &quot;Gordonia&quot; (AF-43)
* USS &quot;Laurentia&quot; (AF-44)
* USS &quot;Lucidor&quot; (AF-45)
* USS &quot;Octavia&quot; (AF-46)
* USS &quot;Valentine&quot; (AF-47)
&quot;Alstede&quot;-class: MC type R2-S-BV1 or C2-S-B1

* USS &quot;Alstede&quot; (AF-48)
* USS &quot;Zelima&quot; (AF-49)
* USNS &quot;Blue Jacket&quot; (T-AF-51)
* USNS &quot;Golden Eagle&quot; (T-AF-52) / USS &quot;Arcturus&quot; (AF-52)
* USS &quot;Pictor&quot; (AF-54)
* USS &quot;Aludra&quot; (AF-55)
* USS &quot;Sirius&quot; (AF-60)
* USS &quot;Procyon&quot; (AF-61)
* USS &quot;Bellatrix&quot; (AF-62)
Unknown class: MC type C2-S-B1 
* USNS &quot;Bald Eagle&quot; (T-AF-50)

&quot;Grommet Reefer&quot;-class: MA type C1-M-AV1
* USNS &quot;Grommet Reefer&quot; (T-AF-53), wrecked off Livorno, Italy, 15 December 1952

&quot;Denebola&quot;-class: MA type VC2-S-AP2

* USS &quot;Denebola&quot; (AF-56)
* USS &quot;Regulus&quot; (AF-57)
* USNS &quot;Asterion&quot; (T-AF-63)
* USNS &quot;Perseus&quot; (T-AF-64)
&quot;Rigel&quot;-class: MA type R3-S-4A 

* USS &quot;Rigel&quot; (AF-58)
* USS &quot;Vega&quot; (AF-59)
==Combat stores ships (AFS, T-AFS)==

Combat stores ships have been replaced by the more capable Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE).

&quot;Mars&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Mars&quot; (AFS-1)
* USS &quot;Sylvania&quot; (AFS-2)
* USS &quot;Niagara Falls&quot; (AFS-3)
* USS &quot;White Plains&quot; (AFS-4)
* USS &quot;Concord&quot; (AFS-5)
* USS &quot;San Diego&quot; (AFS-6)
* USS &quot;San Jose&quot; (AFS-7)
&quot;Sirius&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Sirius&quot; (T-AFS-8)
* USNS &quot;Spica&quot; (T-AFS-9)
* USNS &quot;Saturn&quot; (T-AFS-10)
==Miscellaneous ships (AG, T-AG)==
&quot;For similar lists of &#x27;miscellaneous&#x27; ships see:&quot; 
:&quot;List of unclassified miscellaneous vessels of the United States Navy (IX)&quot;
&quot;and&quot;
* USS &quot;Hannibal&quot; (AG-1), survey ship
* USS &quot;Lebanon&quot; (AG-2), collier, supply ship, target tug
* USS &quot;Nanshan&quot; (AG-3), collier
* USS &quot;Saturn&quot; (AG-4), collier
* USS &quot;General Alava&quot; (AG-5), war prize, cargo ship
* USS &quot;Dubuque&quot; (AG-6), later IX-9, PG-17
* USS &quot;Paducah&quot; (AG-7), later IX-23, PG-18
* USS &quot;Mahanna&quot; (AG-8), cargo ship
* USS &quot;Great Northern&quot; (AG-9), transport
* USS &quot;Antares&quot; (AG-10), later AKS-3
* USS &quot;Procyon&quot; (AG-11), later IX-38
* USS &quot;Gold Star&quot; (AG-12), ex-AK-12
* USS &quot;Pensacola&quot; (AG-13), ex-AK-7
* USS &quot;Abarenda&quot; (AG-14), ex-AC-13
* USS &quot;Ajax&quot; (AG-15), seaplane tender, ex-AC-14
* USS &quot;Utah&quot; (AG-16), target ship, ex-BB-31, sunk Pearl Harbor 7 December 1941, 58 killed

* USS &quot;Wyoming&quot; (AG-17), training ship, ex-BB-32
* USS &quot;Stoddert&quot; (AG-18), target ship, ex- and later DD-302
* USS &quot;Boggs&quot; (AG-19), ex-DD-136, later and ex-DMS-3
* USS &quot;Kilty&quot; (AG-20), ex- and later DD-137, later APD-15
* USS &quot;Lamberton&quot; (AG-21), ex-DD-119, later and ex-DMS-2
* USS &quot;Radford&quot; (AG-22), target ship, ex- and later DD-120

* USS &quot;Sequoia&quot; (AG-23), presidential yacht
* USS &quot;Semmes&quot; (AG-24), electronics test ship, ex-DD-189

* USS &quot;Potomac&quot; (AG-25), presidential yacht
* USS &quot;Cuyahoga&quot; (AG-26), presidential yacht tender, ex-WSC-157, later WIX-157
* USS &quot;Robert L. Barnes&quot; (AG-27), ex-AO-14, captured Guam December 1941
* USS &quot;Manley&quot; (AG-28), ex-DD-74, later APD-1, DD-74
* USS &quot;Bear&quot; (AG-29), ex-polar research ship
* USS &quot;Bowditch&quot; (AG-30), survey ship, later AGS-4

* USS &quot;Argonne&quot; (AG-31), flagship, ex-AP-4, AS-10
* USS &quot;Sumner&quot; (AG-32), survey ship, ex-AS-2, later AGS-5
* USS &quot;Kaula&quot; (AG-33), SeaBee cargo ship
* USS &quot;Alcor&quot; (AG-34), later AR-10, AD-34
* USS &quot;Calypso&quot; (AG-35), presidential yacht tender, ex-WPC-104
* USS &quot;Manasquan&quot; (AG-36), weather ship, ex-ID-3568
* USS &quot;Manomet&quot; (AG-37), ex-ID-4215B, later AK-51
* USS &quot;Mantinicus&quot; (AG-38), later AK-52, AP-75
* USS &quot;Menemsha&quot; (AG-39), weather ship, later WAG-274
* USS &quot;Monomoy&quot; (AG-40), weather ship, later WAG-275
* USS &quot;Midway&quot; (AG-41), cargo ship
* USS &quot;Camanga&quot; (AG-42), cargo ship, ex-ID-3496
* USS &quot;Majaba&quot; (AG-43), cargo ship, later IX-102
* USS &quot;Malanao&quot; (AG-44), cargo ship
* USS &quot;Taganak&quot; (AG-45), cargo ship, ex-ID-1792
* USS &quot;Tuluran&quot; (AG-46), cargo ship, ex-ID-2995
* USS &quot;Manhasset&quot; (AG-47), weather ship, ex-YAG-8, later WIX-276
* USS &quot;Muskeget&quot; (AG-48), weather ship, ex-YAG-9, later WAG-48, sunk 9 September 1942 by U-755, entire crew killed

* USS &quot;Anacapa&quot; (AG-49), Q-ship (armed decoy)
* USS &quot;Kopara&quot; (AG-50), ex-AK-62
* USS &quot;Besboro&quot; (AG-66), cargo ship
* USS &quot;Antaeus&quot; (AG-67), ex-AS-21, later AH-18
* USS &quot;Basilan&quot; (AG-68), later ARG-12
* USS &quot;Burias&quot; (AG-69), later ARG-13
* USS &quot;Zaniah&quot; (AG-70), stores-barracks-distilling-repair ship, ex-AK-120
* USS &quot;Baham&quot; (AG-71), stores-barracks-distilling-repair ship, ex-AK-122
* USS &quot;Parris Island&quot; (AG-72), ex-PCE–901
* USS &quot;Belle Isle&quot; (AG-73), electronics repair ship, later AKS-21
* USS &quot;Coasters Harbor&quot; (AG-74), electronics repair ship, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant, later AKS-22
* USS &quot;Cuttyhunk Island&quot; (AG-75), transport, later AKS-23
* USS &quot;Avery Island&quot; (AG-76), transport, Operation Crossroads participant, later AKS-24
* USS &quot;Indian Island&quot; (AG-77), transport, later AKS-25
* USS &quot;Kent Island&quot; (AG-78), transport, later AKS-26
* USS &quot;Wright&quot; / &quot;San Clemente&quot; (AG-79), flagship, ex-AZ-1, AV-1
* USS &quot;Du Pont&quot; (AG-80), target ship, ex-DD-152
* USS &quot;J. Fred Talbott&quot; (AG-81), target ship, ex-DD-156
* USS &quot;Schenck&quot; (AG-82), target ship, ex-DD-159
* USS &quot;Kennison&quot; (AG-83), target ship, ex-DD-138
* USS &quot;Hatfield&quot; (AG-84), target tow, ex-DD-231
* USS &quot;Fox&quot; (AG-85), target ship, ex-DD-234
* USS &quot;Bulmer&quot; (AG-86), target ship, ex-DD-222
* USS &quot;MacLeish&quot; (AG-87), target ship, ex-DD-220
* USS &quot;Burton Island&quot; (AG-88), later AGB-1
* USS &quot;Edisto&quot; (AG-89), later AGB-2
* USS &quot;Atka&quot; (AG-90), later AGB-3
* USS &quot;Dahlgren&quot; (AG-91), mine warfare test ship, ex-DD-187
* USS &quot;Gwinnett&quot; (AG-92), ex-AK-185, later AVS-5
* USS &quot;Nicollet&quot; (AG-93), ex-AK-199, later AVS-6
* USS &quot;Pontotoc&quot; (AG-94), ex-AK-206, later AVS-7
* USS &quot;Litchfield&quot; (AG-95), ex-DD-336
* USS &quot;Broome&quot; (AG-96), ex-DD-210
* USS &quot;Simpson&quot; (AG-97), target tow, ex-DD-221
* USS &quot;Ramsay&quot; (AG-98), training carrier plane guard, ex-DD-124, DM-16
* USS &quot;Preble&quot; (AG-99), plane guard, ex-DD-345, DM-20
* USS &quot;Sicard&quot; (AG-100), target ship, ex-DD-346, DM-21
* USS &quot;Pruitt&quot; (AG-101), target ship, ex-DD-347, DM-22
* USS &quot;Babbitt&quot; (AG-102), experimental sonar ship, ex-DD-128
* USS &quot;Upshur&quot; (AG-103), plane guard, ex-DD-144, DM-20
* USS &quot;Elliot&quot; (AG-104), target tow, ex-DD-146, DMS-4
* USS &quot;Hogan&quot; (AG-105), target ship, ex-DD-178, DMS-6
* USS &quot;Howard&quot; (AG-106), plane guard, ex-DD-179, DMS-7
* USS &quot;Stansbury&quot; (AG-107), training ship, ex-DD-180, DMS-8
* USS &quot;Chandler&quot; (AG-108), target tow, ex-DD-206, DMS-9
* USS &quot;Zane&quot; (AG-109), target tow, ex-DD-337, DMS-14
* USS &quot;Trever&quot; (AG-110), ex-DD-339, DMS-16
* USS &quot;Hamilton&quot; (AG-111), mine warfare test ship, ex-DD-141, DMS-18
* USS &quot;Breckinridge&quot; (AG-112), plane guard, ex-DD-148
* USS &quot;Barney&quot; (AG-113), target ship, ex-DD-149
* USS &quot;Biddle&quot; (AG-114), ex-DD-151
* USS &quot;Ellis&quot; (AG-115), plane guard, ex-DD-154
* USS &quot;Cole&quot; (AG-116), plane guard, ex-DD-155
* USS &quot;Whipple&quot; (AG-117), target ship, ex-DD-217
* USS &quot;McCormick&quot; (AG-118), ex-DD-223
* USS &quot;John D. Ford&quot; (AG-119), plane guard, ex-DD-228
* USS &quot;Paul Jones&quot; (AG-120), ex-DD-230
* USS &quot;Humboldt&quot; (AG-121), press information ship, ex- and later AVP-21
* USS &quot;Matagorda&quot; (AG-122), press information ship, ex- and later AVP-22
* USS &quot;Rockaway&quot; (AG-123), press information ship, ex- and later AVP-29
* USS &quot;Maumee&quot; (AG-124), station fuel ship, ex-AO-2
* USS &quot;Patoka&quot; (AG-125), minecraft tender, ex-AO-9, ex-AV-6
* USS &quot;McDougal&quot; (AG-126), experimental radar gunnery ship, ex-DD-358
* USS &quot;Winslow&quot; (AG-127), experimental antiaircraft ordnance ship, ex-DD-359

* USS &quot;Mississippi&quot; (AG-128), training ship, ex-BB-41
* USS &quot;Whitewood&quot; (AG-129), Arctic survey ship, ex-YN-84, AN-63
* USS &quot;Camano&quot; (AG-130), ex-US Army FS-256, later AKL-1
* USS &quot;Deal&quot; (AG-131), ex-USA FS-263, later AKL-2
* USS &quot;Elba&quot; (AG-132), ex-USA FS-267, later AKL-3
* USS &quot;Errol&quot; (AG-133), ex-USA FS-274, later AKL-4
* USS &quot;Estero&quot; (AG-134), ex-USA FS-275, later AKL-5
* USS &quot;Jekyl&quot; (AG-135), ex-USA FS-282, later AKL-6
* USS &quot;Metomkin&quot; (AG-136), ex-USA FS-316, later AKL-7
* USS &quot;Roque&quot; (AG-137), ex-USA FS-347, later AKL-8
* USS &quot;Ryer&quot; (AG-138), ex-USA FS-361, later AKL-9
* USS &quot;Sharps&quot; (AG-139), ex-USA FS-385, later AKL-10

* USS &quot;Whidbey&quot; (AG-141), clinic, medical survey vessel, epidemiological disease control ship, ex-USA FS-395
* USS &quot;Nashawena&quot; (AG-142), cable layer, ex-USA BSP-2098 barge, later YAG-35
* USS &quot;Mark&quot; (AG-143), ex-USA FS-214, later AKL-12
* USS &quot;Hewell&quot; (AG-145), ex-USA FS-391, later AKL-14
* USS &quot;Electron&quot; (AG-146), electronics parts issue ship, ex-&quot;LST-1070&quot;, later AKS-27
* USS &quot;Proton&quot; (AG-147), electronics parts issue ship, ex-&quot;LST-1078&quot;, later AKS-28
* USS &quot;Colington&quot; (AG-148), stores issue ship, ex-&quot;LST-1085&quot;, later AKS-29
* USS &quot;League Island&quot; (AG-149), stores issue ship, ex-&quot;LST-1097&quot;, later AKS-30
* USS &quot;Chimon&quot; (AG-150), stores issue ship, ex-&quot;LST-1102&quot;, later AKS-31
* USS &quot;Richard E. Kraus&quot; (AG-151), experimental electronics ship, ex- and later DD-849

* USS &quot;Timmerman&quot; (AG-152), experimental ship (engines and superstructure), ex-DD-828, EDD-828

* USS &quot;Compass Island&quot; (E-AG-153), ex-YAG-56, inertial navigation test ship
* USS &quot;Observation Island&quot; (EAG-154), ex-YAG-57, Polaris missile test ship, later T-AGM-23
* (EAG-155), ex-SS &quot;Prairie Mariner&quot;, ex-YAG-58, conversion to Jupiter ballistic missile ship canceled
* (AG-156), intended but not used for USS &quot;Hunting&quot; ex-LSM-398, later E-AG-398

* USS &quot;King County&quot; (AG-157), Regulus II missile test ship, ex-&quot;LST-857&quot;
* USS &quot;Glover&quot; (AG-158)
* USS &quot;Oxford&quot; (AG-159), SIGINT ship, later AGTR-1
* USNS &quot;Range Tracker&quot; (T-AG-160), missile range tracking ship, later T-AGM-1
* USNS &quot;Range Recoverer&quot; (T-AG-161), missile range tracking ship, ex-USA FS-278, later T-AGM-2, YFRT-524
* USNS &quot;Mission Capistrano&quot; (T-AG-162), sonar test ship, ex-T‑AO‑112
* USS &quot;Glover&quot; (AG-163)

* USNS &quot;Kingsport&quot; (T-AG-164), satellite communication ship, ex-T-AK-239
* USS &quot;Georgetown&quot; (AG-165), SIGINT ship, later AGTR-2
* USS &quot;Jamestown&quot; (AG-166), SIGINT ship, later AGTR-3
* USS &quot;Belmont&quot; (AG-167), SIGINT ship, later AGTR-4
* USS &quot;Liberty&quot; (AG-168), SIGINT ship, later AGTR-5
* USNS &quot;Pvt. Jose F. Valdez&quot; (T-AG-169) SIGINT ship, ex-APc-119
* USNS &quot;LT. James E. Robinson&quot; (T-AG-170), cable transport ship, ex-T-AKV-3, later T-AK-274
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Joseph E. Muller&quot; (T-AG-171), SIGINT ship
* USNS &quot;Phoenix&quot; (T-AG-172), depot ship
* USNS &quot;Provo&quot; (T-AG-173), depot ship
* USNS &quot;Cheyenne&quot; (T-AG-174), depot ship
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Curtis F. Shoup&quot; (T-AG-175), survey ship
* USS &quot;Peregrine&quot; (AG-176), experimental mine warfare ship, ex-AM-373, MSF-373
* USNS &quot;Shearwater&quot; (T-AG-177), survey support ship, ex-USA FS-411
* USNS &quot;Flyer&quot; (T-AG-178), SOSUS survey ship
* USNS &quot;Havenford&quot; (T-AG-179), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Antioch&quot; (T-AG-180), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Adelphi&quot; (T-AG-181), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Lynn&quot; (T-AG-182), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Clarksburg&quot; (T-AG-183), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Clemson&quot; (T-AG-184), cargo ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Carthage&quot; (T-AG-185), cargo ship, canceled, museum ship
* USNS &quot;Bessemer&quot; (T-AG-186), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Milford&quot; (T-AG-187), depot ship, canceled
* USNS &quot;Rollins&quot; (T-AG-189), depot ship, canceled
* USS &quot;Spokane&quot; (T-AG-191), sonar test ship, ex-CL-120
* USNS &quot;S P Lee&quot; (T-AG-192), acoustics research ship, ex-T-AGS-31

* USNS &quot;Glomar Explorer&quot; (T-AG-193), deep-sea drillship
* USNS &quot;Vanguard&quot; (T-AG-194), missile range tracking ship, ex-T-AO-122, later T-AGM-19
* USNS &quot;Hayes&quot; (T-AG-195), acoustics research ship, ex-T-AGOR-16 [I]
* USS &quot;Hunting&quot; (E-AG-398), sonar research ship, ex-LSM-398, ex-AG-156
* USS &quot;Alacrity&quot; (AG-520), ex-AM-520, MSO-520
* USS &quot;Assurance&quot; (AG-521), ex-AM-521, MSO-521
* USNS &quot;Vice Adm. K. R. Wheeler&quot; (T-AG-5001) [A], Offshore Petroleum Distribution System (OPDS) ship

==Icebreakers (AGB)==
* USS &quot;Burton Island&quot; (AGB-1), ex-AG-88, later WAGB-283
* USS &quot;Edisto&quot; (AGB-2), ex-AG-89, later WAGB-284
* USS &quot;Atka&quot; (AGB-3), ex-AG-90, later WAGB-280
* USS &quot;Glacier&quot; (AGB-4), later WAGB-4
* USS &quot;Staten Island&quot; (AGB-5), later WAGB-278

==Amphibious force command ships (AGC)==
==Deep submergence support ship (T-AGDS)==

* USNS &quot;White Sands&quot; (T-AGDS-1), ex-ARD-20
* USNS &quot;Point Loma&quot; (T-AGDS-2), ex-AKD-1

==Hydrofoil research ship (AGEH)==
* USS &quot;Plainview&quot; (AGEH-1)

==Environmental research ships (AGER)==

Signals intelligence collection vessels.
&quot;Banner&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Banner&quot; (AGER-1), ex-AKL-25
* USS &quot;Pueblo&quot; (AGER-2) [I], ex-AKL-44, captured by North Korea 23 January 1968, 1 killed, North Korean museum ship, still in commission
* USS &quot;Palm Beach&quot; (AGER-3), ex-AKL-45

==Command ships (AGF)==

* USS &quot;Valcour&quot; (AGF-1), ex-AVP-55
* USS &quot;La Salle&quot; (AGF-3), ex-LPD-3
* USS &quot;Coronado&quot; (AGF-11), ex-LPD-11

==Missile range instrumentation ships (T-AGM)==


* USNS &quot;Range Tracker&quot; (T-AGM-1), Operation Dominic nuclear test participant
* USNS &quot;Range Recoverer&quot; (T-AGM-2), ex-T-AG-161
* USNS &quot;Longview&quot; (T-AGM-3)
* USNS &quot;Richfield&quot; (T-AGM-4)
* USNS &quot;Sunnyvale&quot; (T-AGM-5)
* USNS &quot;Watertown&quot; (T-AGM-6)
* USNS &quot;Huntsville&quot; (T-AGM-7)
* USNS &quot;Wheeling&quot; (T-AGM-8)
* USNS &quot;General H. H. Arnold&quot; (T-AGM-9), ex-AP-139
* USNS &quot;General Hoyt S. Vandenberg&quot; (T-AGM-10), ex-AP-145
* USNS &quot;Twin Falls&quot; (T-AGM-11), later T-AGS-37
* USNS &quot;American Mariner&quot; (T-AGM-12)
* USNS &quot;Sword Knot&quot; (T-AGM-13)
* USNS &quot;Rose Knot&quot; (T-AGM-14)
* USNS &quot;Coastal Sentry&quot; (T-AGM-15)
* USNS &quot;Coastal Crusader&quot; (T-AGM-16), ex-AK-220, later AGS-36
* USNS &quot;Timber Hitch&quot; (T-AGM-17)
* USNS &quot;Sampan Hitch&quot; (T-AGM-18)
* USNS &quot;Vanguard&quot; (T-AGM-19)
* USNS &quot;Redstone&quot; (T-AGM-20)
* USNS &quot;Mercury&quot; (T-AGM-21)
* USNS &quot;Range Sentinel&quot; (T-AGM-22)
* USNS &quot;Observation Island&quot; (T-AGM-23), ex-EAG-154, ex-AG-154
* USNS &quot;Invincible&quot; (T-AGM-24), ex-T-AGOS-10 [I]
* USNS &quot;Howard O. Lorenzen&quot; (T-AGM-25) [A]
==Major communications relay ships (AGMR)==

* USS &quot;Annapolis&quot; (AGMR-1), ex-CVE-107
* USS &quot;Arlington&quot; (AGMR-2), ex-&quot;Saipan&quot; as ex-CVL-48, ex-CC-3

==Oceanographic research ships (T-AGOR)==



* USNS &quot;Josiah Willard Gibbs&quot; (T-AGOR-1), former AVP-51
* T-AGOR-2 built for Norway
&quot;Robert D. Conrad&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Robert D. Conrad&quot; (T-AGOR-3)
* USNS &quot;James M. Gilliss&quot; (T-AGOR-4)
* USNS &quot;Charles H. Davis&quot; (T-AGOR-5)
* USNS &quot;Sands&quot; (T-AGOR-6)
* USNS &quot;Lynch&quot; (T-AGOR-7)
* USNS &quot;Thomas G. Thompson&quot; (T-AGOR-9)
* USNS &quot;Thomas Washington&quot; (T-AGOR-10)
* USNS &quot;De Steiguer&quot; (T-AGOR-12)
* USNS &quot;Bartlett&quot; (T-AGOR-13)
&quot;Eltanin&quot;-class: MC type C1-ME2-13a
* USNS &quot;Eltanin&quot; (T-AGOR-8), ex-T-AK-270
* USNS &quot;Mizar&quot; (T-AGOR-11), ex-T-AK-272

&quot;Melville&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Melville&quot; (T-AGOR-14)
* USNS &quot;Knorr&quot; (T-AGOR-15)

&quot;Hayes&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Hayes&quot; (T-AGOR-16), later T-AG-195

&quot;Diver&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Chain&quot; (T-AGOR-17), former ARS-20
* USNS &quot;Snatch&quot; (T-AGOR-18), former ARS-27

&quot;Gyre&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Gyre&quot; (T-AGOR-21)
* USNS &quot;Moana Wave&quot; (T-AGOR-22)

&quot;Thomas G. Thompson&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Thomas G. Thompson&quot; (T-AGOR-23) [A]
* USNS &quot;Roger Revelle&quot; (T-AGOR-24) [A]
* USNS &quot;Atlantis&quot; (T-AGOR-25) [A]

&quot;Kilo Moana&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Kilo Moana&quot; (T-AGOR-26) [A]

&quot;Neil Armstrong&quot;-class
* [A]
* [A]

==Ocean surveillance ships (T-AGOS)==
Underwater acoustics collection vessels.

&quot;Stalwart&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Stalwart&quot; (T-AGOS-1)
* USNS &quot;Contender&quot; (T-AGOS-2)
* USNS &quot;Vindicator&quot; (T-AGOS-3)
* USNS &quot;Triumph&quot; (T-AGOS-4)
* USNS &quot;Assurance&quot; (T-AGOS-5)
* USNS &quot;Persistent&quot; (T-AGOS-6)
* USNS &quot;Indomitable&quot; (T-AGOS-7)
* USNS &quot;Prevail&quot; (T-AGOS-8), later IX-537
* USNS &quot;Assertive&quot; (T-AGOS-9)
* USNS &quot;Invincible&quot; (T-AGOS-10), later T-AGM-24
* USNS &quot;Audacious&quot; (T-AGOS-11)
* USNS &quot;Bold&quot; (T-AGOS-12)
* USNS &quot;Adventurous&quot; (T-AGOS-13)
* USNS &quot;Worthy&quot; (T-AGOS-14), later USAV &quot;Worthy&quot;
* USNS &quot;Titan&quot; (T-AGOS-15)
* USNS &quot;Capable&quot; (T-AGOS-16)
* USNS &quot;Tenacious&quot; (T-AGOS-17)
* USNS &quot;Relentless&quot; (T-AGOS-18)
&quot;Victorious&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Victorious&quot; (T-AGOS-19) [A]
* USNS &quot;Able&quot; (T-AGOS-20) [A]
* USNS &quot;Effective&quot; (T-AGOS-21) [A]
* USNS &quot;Loyal&quot; (T-AGOS-22) [A]
&quot;Impeccable&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Impeccable&quot; (T-AGOS-23) [A]

==Motor torpedo boat tenders (AGP)==

* USS &quot;Niagara&quot; (AGP-1), ex-CMc-2, PG-52, sunk by air attack Tulagi 23 May 1943, no fatalities
* USS &quot;Hilo&quot; (AGP-2), ex-PG-58
* USS &quot;Jamestown&quot; (AGP-3), ex-PG-55
* USS &quot;Portunus&quot; (AGP-4), ex-&quot;LST-330&quot;
* USS &quot;Varuna&quot; (AGP-5), ex-&quot;LST-14&quot;
* USS &quot;Oyster Bay&quot; (AGP-6), ex-AVP-28, later AVP-28
* USS &quot;Mobjack&quot; (AGP-7), ex-AVP-27, later USC&amp;GS &quot;Pioneer&quot;
* USS &quot;Wachapreague&quot; (AGP-8), ex-AVP-56
* USS &quot;Willoughby&quot; (AGP-9), ex-AVP-57
* USS &quot;Orestes&quot; (AGP-10), ex-&quot;LST-135&quot;
* USS &quot;Silenus&quot; (AGP-11), ex-&quot;LST-604&quot;
* USS &quot;Acontius&quot; (AGP-12)
* USS &quot;Cyrene&quot; (AGP-13)
* USS &quot;Alecto&quot; (AGP-14). ex-&quot;LST-977&quot;
* USS &quot;Callisto&quot; (AGP-15), ex-&quot;LST-966&quot;
* USS &quot;Antigone&quot; (AGP-16), ex-&quot;LST-773&quot;
* USS &quot;Brontes&quot; (AGP-17), ex-&quot;LST-1125&quot;
* USS &quot;Chiron&quot; (AGP-18), ex-&quot;LST-1133&quot;
* USS &quot;Pontus&quot; (AGP-20), ex-&quot;LST-201&quot;
* USS &quot;Garrett County&quot; (AGP-786), ex-LST-786
* USS &quot;Harnett County&quot; (AGP-821), ex-LST-821
* USS &quot;Hunterdon County&quot; (AGP-838), ex-LST-838
* USS &quot;Graham County&quot; (AGP-1176), ex-LST-1176
==Radar picket ships (AGR)==
&quot;Guardian&quot;-class: MC type Z-EC2-S-C5

:All &quot;Guardian&quot;-class ships were originally classed as YAGR but were then reclassed as AGR in 1958.

* USS &quot;Guardian&quot; (AGR-1)
* USS &quot;Lookout&quot; (AGR-2)
* USS &quot;Skywatcher&quot; (AGR-3)
* USS &quot;Searcher&quot; (AGR-4)
* USS &quot;Scanner&quot; (AGR-5)
* USS &quot;Locator&quot; (AGR-6)
* USS &quot;Picket&quot; (AGR-7)
* USS &quot;Interceptor&quot; (AGR-8)
* USS &quot;Investigator&quot; (AGR-9)
* USS &quot;Outpost&quot; (AGR-10)
* USS &quot;Protector&quot; (AGR-11)
* USS &quot;Vigil&quot; (AGR-12)
* USS &quot;Interdictor&quot; (AGR-13)
* USS &quot;Interpreter&quot; (AGR-14)
* USS &quot;Interrupter&quot; / &quot;Tracer&quot; (AGR-15)
* USS &quot;Watchman&quot; (AGR-16)
==Surveying ships (AGS)==


* USS &quot;Pathfinder&quot; (AGS-1)
* USS &quot;Hydrographer&quot; (AGS-2)
* USS &quot;Oceanographer&quot; (AGS-3), ex-SP-159, ex-PG-85
* USS &quot;Bowditch&quot; (AGS-4), ex-AG-30, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant,
* USS &quot;Sumner&quot; (AGS-5), ex-AG-32
* USS &quot;Derickson&quot; (AGS-6)
* USS &quot;Littlehales&quot; (AGS-7)
* USS &quot;Dutton&quot; (AGS-8), ex-PCS-1396, Operation Crossroads participant, later AGSC-8
* USS &quot;Amistead Rust&quot; (AGS-9)
* USS &quot;John Blish&quot; (AGS-10), ex-PCS-1457, later AGSC-10
YMS-135-subclass
* USS &quot;Chauvenet&quot; (AGS-11), ex-YMS-195
* USS &quot;Harkness&quot; (AGS-12), ex-YMS-242, later AGSC-12
* USS &quot;James M. Gilliss&quot; (AGS-13), ex-YMS-262, Operation Crossroads participant, later AGSC-13
* USS &quot;Simon Newcomb&quot; (AGS-14), ex-YMS-263, later AGSC-14

&quot;Artemis&quot;-class: MC type S4–SE2–BE1

* USS &quot;Tanner&quot; (AGS-15), ex-AKA-34
* USS &quot;Maury&quot; (AGS-16), ex-AKA-36
&quot;Auk&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Pursuit&quot; (AGS-17), ex-AM-108
* USS &quot;Requisite&quot; (AGS-18), ex-AM-109
* USS &quot;Sheldrake&quot; (AGS-19), ex-AM-62
* USS &quot;Prevail&quot; (AGS-20), ex-AM-107
&quot;Bowditch&quot;-class: MA type VC2-S-AP3

* USNS &quot;Bowditch&quot; (T-AGS-21)
* USNS &quot;Dutton&quot; (T-AGS-22)
* USNS &quot;Michelson&quot; (T-AGS-23)
Other classes

* USS &quot;Seranno&quot; (AGS-24)
* USNS &quot;Kellar&quot; (T-AGS-25)
&quot;Silas Bent&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Silas Bent&quot; (T-AGS-26), Project SHAD chemical/biological test participant
* USNS &quot;Kane&quot; (T-AGS-27)
* USNS &quot;Wilkes&quot; (T-AGS-33)
* USNS &quot;Wyman&quot; (T-AGS-34)
Other classes

* USS &quot;Towhee&quot; (AGS-28), ex-MSF-388
* USNS &quot;Chauvenet&quot; (T-AGS-29)
* USS &quot;San Pablo&quot; (AGS-30), ex-AVP-30
* USNS &quot;S. P. Lee&quot; (T-AGS-31), Project SHAD participant
* USNS &quot;Harkness&quot; (T-AGS-32)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. George D. Keathley&quot; (T-AGS-35), ex-T-APC-117
* USS &quot;Coastal Crusader&quot; (AGS-36), ex-AK-220, T-AGM-16
* USNS &quot;Twin Falls&quot; (T-AGS-37), ex-T-AGM-11
* USNS &quot;H. H. Hess&quot; (T-AGS-38)
* USNS &quot;Maury&quot; (T-AGS-39)
* USNS &quot;Tanner&quot; (T-AGS-40)
* USNS &quot;Waters&quot; (T-AGS-45) [A]
* USS &quot;Rehoboth&quot; (AGS-50), ex-AVP-50
* USNS &quot;John McDonnell&quot; (T-AGS-51)
* USNS &quot;Littlehales&quot; (T-AGS-52)
&quot;Pathfinder&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Pathfinder&quot; (T-AGS-60) [A]
* USNS &quot;Sumner&quot; (T-AGS-61) [I]
* USNS &quot;Bowditch&quot; (T-AGS-62) [A]
* USNS &quot;Henson&quot; (T-AGS-63) [A]
* USNS &quot;Bruce C. Heezen&quot; (T-AGS-64) [A]
* USNS &quot;Mary Sears&quot; (T-AGS-65) [A]
* USNS &quot;Marie Tharp&quot; (T-AGS-66) [A], formerly USNS &quot;Maury&quot;
* USNS &quot;Robert Ballard&quot; (T-AGS-67) [P]
==Coastal survey ships (AGSC)==

* USS &quot;Dutton&quot; (AGSC-8), ex-AGS-8
* USS &quot;John Blish&quot; (AGSC-10), ex-AGS-10
* USS &quot;Harkness&quot; (AGSC-12), ex-AGS-12, later AMCU-12
* USS &quot;James M. Gilliss&quot; (AGSC-13), ex-AGS-13, later AMCU-13
* USS &quot;Simon Newcomb&quot; (AGSC-14), ex-AGS-14
* USS &quot;Littlehales&quot; (AGSC-15), ex-YF-854
==Submarine and special warfare support vessel (T-AGSE)==
&quot;Black Powder&quot;-class

* [A]
* [A]
* [A]
* [A]
==Auxiliary submarines (AGSS)==


* &quot;Cod&quot; (AGSS-224), ex-SS-224, later IXSS-224, museum ship
* &quot;Rasher&quot; (AGSS-269), ex-SS-269, SSR-269, later IXSS-269
* &quot;Bowfin&quot; (AGSS-287), ex-SS-287, later IXSS-287, museum ship
* &quot;Ling&quot; (AGSS-297), ex-SS-297, later IXSS-297, museum ship
* &quot;Lionfish&quot; (AGSS-298), ex-SS-298, later IXSS-298, museum ship
* &quot;Roncador&quot; (AGSS-301), ex-SS-301, later IXSS-301
* &quot;Charr&quot; (AGSS-328), ex-SS-328, later IXSS-328
* &quot;Carp&quot; (AGSS-338), ex-SS-338, later IXSS-338
* &quot;Chopper&quot; (AGSS-342), ex-SS-342, later IXSS-342
* &quot;Pampanito&quot; (AGSS-383), ex-SS-383, later IXSS-383, museum ship
* &quot;Torsk&quot; (AGSS-423), ex-SS-423, later IXSS-423, museum ship
* &quot;Runner&quot; (AGSS-476), ex-SS-476, later IXSS-476
* &quot;Requin&quot; (AGSS-481), ex-SS-481, SSR-481, later IXSS-471, museum ship

&quot;Albacore&quot; class
* , museum ship

&quot;Dolphin&quot; class
* , museum ship

==Technical research ships (AGTR)==

Signals intelligence collection vessels.

&quot;Oxford&quot;-class: MA type Z–EC2–S–C5
* USS &quot;Oxford&quot; (AGTR-1), ex-AG-159
* USS &quot;Georgetown&quot; (AGTR-2), ex-AG-165
* USS &quot;Jamestown&quot; (AGTR-3), ex-AG-166
&quot;Belmont&quot;-class: MA type VC2-S-AP3
* USS &quot;Belmont&quot; (AGTR-4), ex-AG-167
* USS &quot;Liberty&quot; (AGTR-5), ex-AG-168, damaged on 8 June 1967 by Israeli aircraft and torpedo boats, CTL, 34 killed

==Hospital ships (AH)==

==Dry cargo ships (AK, T-AK)==

* USS &quot;Houston&quot; (AK-1)
* USS &quot;Kittery&quot; (AK-2)
* USS &quot;Newport News&quot; (AK-3)
* USS &quot;Bath&quot; (AK-4)
* USS &quot;Gulfport&quot; (AK-5), ex-SP-2989
* USS &quot;Beaufort&quot; (AK-6), ex-ID-3008
* USS &quot;Pensacola&quot; (AK-7), later AG-13
* USS &quot;Astoria&quot; (AK-8), ex-ID-2005
* USS &quot;Long Beach&quot; (AK-9), ex-ID-2136
* USS &quot;Quincy&quot; (AK-10)
* USS &quot;Robert L. Barnes&quot; (AK-11), ex-ID-3088, later AO-14, AG-27
* USS &quot;Arcturus&quot; (AK-12) / USS &quot;Gold Star&quot; (AK-12), later AG-12
* USS &quot;Capella&quot; (AK-13)
* USS &quot;Regulus&quot; (AK-14)
* USS &quot;Sirius&quot; (AK-15)
* USS &quot;Spica&quot; (AK-16)
* USS &quot;Vega&quot; (AK-17)
* USS &quot;Arcturus&quot; (AK-18), later AKA-1
* USS &quot;Procyon&quot; (AK-19), later AKA-2
* USS &quot;Bellatrix&quot; (AK-20), later AKA-3
* USS &quot;Electra&quot; (AK-21), later AKA-4
* USS &quot;Fomalhaut&quot; (AK-22), later AKA-5, AE-20
* USS &quot;Alchiba&quot; (AK-23), later AKA-6
* USS &quot;Alcyone&quot; (AK-24), later AKA-7
* USS &quot;Algorab&quot; (AK-25), later AKA-8
* USS &quot;Alhena&quot; (AK-26), later AKA-9
* USS &quot;Almaack&quot; (AK-27), later AKA-10
* USS &quot;Betelgeuse&quot; (AK-28), later AKA-11
* USS &quot;Delta&quot; (AK-29), later AR-9
* USS &quot;Hamul&quot; (AK-30), later AD-20
* USS &quot;Markab&quot; (AK-31), later AD-21, AR-23
* , not commissioned
* &quot;West Elcasco&quot; (AK-33), ex-ID-3661, not commissioned, later AE-7
* Meigs (AK-34), ex-ID-4490, not commissioned
* &quot;Liberty&quot; (AK-35), ex-ID-3461, not commissioned
* , not commissioned
* , ex-ID-3696, not commissioned
* USS &quot;Mendocino&quot; (AK-39)
* USS &quot;Hercules&quot; (AK-41)
* USS &quot;Mercury&quot; (AK-42)
* USS &quot;Jupiter&quot; (AK-43), later AVS-8
* USS &quot;Aroostook&quot; (AK-44), ex-ID-1256, ex-CM-3
* USS &quot;Stratford&quot; (AK-45)
* USS &quot;Pleiades&quot; (AK-46)
* USS &quot;Aquila&quot; (AK-47)
* USS &quot;Pegasus&quot; (AK-48)
* USS &quot;Saturn&quot; (AK-49), later AF-40
* USS &quot;Aries&quot; (AK-51), ex-AG-37
* USS &quot;Matinicus&quot; (AK-52), ex-AG-38, later AP-75
* USS &quot;Libra&quot; (AK-53), later AKA-12
* USS &quot;Pollux&quot; (AK-54), later AKS-4
* USS &quot;Titana&quot; (AK-55), later AKA-13
* USS &quot;Oberon&quot; (AK-56), later AKA-14
* USS &quot;Thomas Jefferson&quot; (AK-57)
* USS &quot;Kopara&quot; (AK-62), later AG-50
* USS &quot;Asterion&quot; (AK-63)
* USS &quot;Andromeda&quot; (AK-64), later AKA-15
* USS &quot;Aquarius&quot; (AK-65), later AKA-16
* USS &quot;Centaurus&quot; (AK-66), later AKA-17
* USS &quot;Cepheus&quot; (AK-67), later AKA-18
* USS &quot;Thuban&quot; (AK-68), later AKA-19
* USS &quot;Virgo&quot; (AK-69), later AKA-20, AE-30
* USS &quot;Crater&quot; (AK-70)
* USS &quot;Adhara&quot; (AK-71)
* USS &quot;Aludra&quot; (AK-72)
* USS &quot;Arided&quot; (AK-73)
* USS &quot;Carina&quot; (AK-74)
* USS &quot;Cassiopeia&quot; (AK-75)
* USS &quot;Celeno&quot; (AK-76)
* USS &quot;Cetus&quot; (AK-77)
* USS &quot;Deimos&quot; (AK-78)
* USS &quot;Draco&quot; (AK-79)
* USS &quot;Enceladus&quot; (AK-80)
* (not commissioned)
* USS &quot;Hydra&quot; (AK-82)
* (not commissioned)
* (not commissioned)
* (not commissioned)
* (not commissioned)
* USNS &quot;Sagitta&quot; (T-AK-87)
* (not commissioned)
* USS &quot;Vela&quot; (AK-89)
* USS &quot;Albireo&quot; (AK-90)
* USS &quot;Cor Caroli&quot; (AK-91)
* USS &quot;Eridanus&quot; (AK-92)
* USS &quot;Etamin&quot; (AK-93)
* USS &quot;Mintaka&quot; (AK-94)
* USS &quot;Murzim&quot; (AK-95)
* USS &quot;Sterope&quot; (AK-96)
* USS &quot;Serpens&quot; (AK-97), destroyed by explosion 29 January 1945, 255 killed
* USS &quot;Auriga&quot; (AK-98)
* USS &quot;Bootes&quot; (AK-99)
* USS &quot;Lynx&quot; (AK-100)
* USS &quot;Asterion&quot; (AK-100) – duplicate number for Q-ship (armed decoy), ex-ID-2228
* USS &quot;Lyra&quot; (AK-101)
* USS &quot;Atik&quot; (AK-101) – duplicate number for Q-ship (armed decoy), sunk by torpedo 26 March 1942, ex-ID-1608
* USS &quot;Triangulum&quot; (AK-102)
* USS &quot;Sculptor&quot; (AK-103)
* USS &quot;Ganymede&quot; (AK-104)
* USS &quot;Naos&quot; (AK-105)
* USS &quot;Caelum&quot; (AK-106)
* USS &quot;Hyperion&quot; (AK-107)
* USS &quot;Rotanin&quot; (AK-108)
* USS &quot;Allioth&quot; (AK-109), later IX-204, AVS-4
* USS &quot;Alkes&quot; (AK-110)
* USS &quot;Giansar&quot; (AK-111)
* USS &quot;Grumium&quot; (AK-112), later IX-174, AVS-3
* USS &quot;Rutilicus&quot; (AK-113)
* USS &quot;Alkaid&quot; (AK-114)
* USS &quot;Crux&quot; (AK-115)
* USS &quot;Alderamin&quot; (AK-116)
* USS &quot;Zaurak&quot; (AK-117)
* USS &quot;Shaula&quot; (AK-118)
* USS &quot;Matar&quot; (AK-119)
* USS &quot;Zaniah&quot; (AK-120), later AG-70
* USS &quot;Sabik&quot; (AK-121)
* USS &quot;Baham&quot; (AK-122), later AG-71
* USS &quot;Menkar&quot; (AK-123)
* USS &quot;Azimech&quot; (AK-124)
* USS &quot;Lesuth&quot; (AK-125)
* USS &quot;Megrez&quot; (AK-126)
* USS &quot;Alnitah&quot; (AK-127)
* USS &quot;Leonis&quot; (AK-128)
* USS &quot;Phobos&quot; (AK-129)
* USS &quot;Arkab&quot; (AK-130)
* USS &quot;Melucta&quot; (AK-131)
* USS &quot;Propus&quot; (AK-132)
* USS &quot;Seginus&quot; (AK-133)
* USS &quot;Syrma&quot; (AK-134)
* USS &quot;Venus&quot; (AK-135)
* USS &quot;Ara&quot; (AK-136)
* USS &quot;Ascella&quot; (AK-137)
* USS &quot;Cheleb&quot; (AK-138)
* USS &quot;Pavo&quot; (AK-139)
* USS &quot;Situla&quot; (AK-140)
* USS &quot;Alamosa&quot; (AK-156)
* USS &quot;Alcona&quot; (AK-157)
* USS &quot;Amador&quot; (AK-158)
* USS &quot;Antrim&quot; (AK-159)
* USS &quot;Autauga&quot; (AK-160)
* USS &quot;Beaverhead&quot; (AK-161)
* USS &quot;Beltrami&quot; (AK-162)
* USS &quot;Blount&quot; (AK-163)
* USS &quot;Brevard&quot; (AK-164)
* USS &quot;Bullock&quot; (AK-165)
* USS &quot;Cabell&quot; (AK-166)
* USS &quot;Caledonia&quot; (AK-167)
* USS &quot;Charlevoix&quot; (AK-168)
* USS &quot;Chatham&quot; (AK-169)
* USS &quot;Chicot&quot; (AK-170)
* USS &quot;Claiborne&quot; (AK-171)
* USS &quot;Clarion&quot; (AK-172)
* USS &quot;Codington&quot; (AK-173)
* USS &quot;Colquitt&quot; (AK-174)
* USS &quot;Craighead&quot; (AK-175)
* USS &quot;Doddridge&quot; (AK-176) (cancelled   8/16/45)
* USS &quot;Duval&quot; (AK-177) (cancelled   8/16/45)
* USS &quot;Fairfield&quot; (AK-178)
* USS &quot;Faribault&quot; (AK-179)
* USS &quot;Fentress&quot; (AK-180)
* USS &quot;Flagler&quot; (AK-181)
* USS &quot;Gadsden&quot; (AK-182)
* USS &quot;Glacier&quot; (AK-183)
* USS &quot;Grainger&quot; (AK-184)
* USS &quot;Gwinnett&quot; (AK-185), later AG-92, AVS-5
* USS &quot;Habersham&quot; (AK-186)
* USS &quot;Hennepin&quot; (AK-187)
* USS &quot;Herkimer&quot; (AK-188)
* USS &quot;Hidalgo&quot; (AK-189)
* USS &quot;Kenosha&quot; (AK-190)
* USS &quot;Lebanon&quot; (AK-191)
* USS &quot;Lehigh&quot; (AK-192)
* USS &quot;Lancaster&quot; (AK-193)
* USS &quot;Marengo&quot; (AK-194)
* USS &quot;Midland&quot; (AK-195)
* USS &quot;Minidoka&quot; (AK-196)
* USS &quot;Muscatine&quot; (AK-197)
* USS &quot;Muskingum&quot; (AK-198)
* USS &quot;Nicollet&quot; (AK-199), later AG-93, AVS-6
* USS &quot;Pembina&quot; (AK-200)
* USS &quot;Pemiscot&quot; (AK-201)
* USS &quot;Pinellas&quot; (AK-202)
* USS &quot;Pipestone&quot; (AK-203)
* USS &quot;Pitkin&quot; (AK-204)
* USS &quot;Poinsett&quot; (AK-205)
* USS &quot;Pontotoc&quot; (AK-206), later AG-94, AVS-7
* USS &quot;Richland&quot; (AK-207)
* USS &quot;Rockdale&quot; (AK-208)
* USS &quot;Schuyler&quot; (AK-209)
* USS &quot;Screven&quot; (AK-210)
* USS &quot;Sebastian&quot; (AK-211)
* USS &quot;Somerset&quot; (AK-212)
* USS &quot;Sussex&quot; (AK-213)
* USS &quot;Tarrant&quot; (AK-214)
* USS &quot;Tipton&quot; (AK-215)
* USS &quot;Traverse&quot; (AK-216) (cancelled 8/45)
* USS &quot;Tulare&quot; (AK-217) (cancelled 8/45)
* USS &quot;Washtenaw&quot; (AK-218)
* USS &quot;Westchester&quot; (AK-219) (cancelled 8/45)
* USS &quot;Wexford&quot; (AK-220), later T-AGM-16, AGS-36
* USS &quot;Kenmore&quot; (AK-221), ex-AP-162
* USS &quot;Livingston&quot; (AK-222), ex-AP-163
* USS &quot;De Grasse&quot; (AK-223), ex-AP-164
* USS &quot;Prince Georges&quot; (AK-224), ex-AP-165
* USS &quot;Allegan&quot; (AK-225)
* USS &quot;Appanoose&quot; (AK-226)
* USS &quot;Boulder Victory&quot; (AK-227)
* USS &quot;Provo Victory&quot; (AK-228)
* USS &quot;Las Vegas Victory&quot; (AK-229)
* USS &quot;Manderson Victory&quot; (AK-230)
* USS &quot;Bedford Victory&quot; (AK-231)
* USS &quot;Mayfield Victory&quot; (AK-232)
* USS &quot;Newcastle Victory&quot; (AK-233)
* USS &quot;Bucyrus Victory&quot; (AK-234)
* USS &quot;Red Oak Victory&quot; (AK-235)
* USS &quot;Lakewood Victory&quot; (AK-236)
* USNS &quot;Greenville Victory&quot; (T-AK-237)
* USNS &quot;Haiti Victory&quot; (T-AK-238)
* USNS &quot;Kingsport Victory&quot; (T-AK-239), later T-AG-164
* USNS &quot;Private John R. Towle&quot; (T-AK-240)
* USNS &quot;Private Francis X. McGraw&quot; (T-AK-241)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Andrew Miller&quot; (T-AK-242)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Archer T. Gammon&quot; (T-AK-243)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Morris E. Crain&quot; (T-AK-244)
* USNS &quot;Captain Arlo L. Olson&quot; (T-AK-245)
* USNS &quot;Col. William J. O&#x27;Brien&quot; (T-AK-246)
* USNS &quot;Private John F. Thorson&quot; (T-AK-247)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. George Peterson&quot; (T-AK-248)
* USNS &quot;Short Splice&quot; (T-AK-249)
* USNS &quot;Private Frank J. Petrarca&quot; (T-AK-250), Operation Dominic nuclear test participant
* USNS &quot;Lt. George W. G. Boyce&quot; (T-AK-251)
* USNS &quot;Lt. Robert Craig&quot; (T-AK-252)
* USNS &quot;Private Joe E. Mann&quot; (T-AK-253)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Truman Kimbro&quot; (T-AK-254)
* USNS &quot;Private Leonard C. Brostrom&quot; (T-AK-255)
* USNS &quot;Dalton Victory&quot; (T-AK-256)
* USS &quot;Altair&quot; (AK-257)
* USS &quot;Antares&quot; (AK-258)
* USS &quot;Alcor&quot; (AK-259)
* USS &quot;Betelgeuse&quot; (AK-260)
* USS &quot;Alchiba&quot; (AK-261)
* USS &quot;Algorab&quot; (AK-262)
* USS &quot;Aquarius&quot; (AK-263)
* USS &quot;Centaurus&quot; (AK-264)
* USS &quot;Cepheus&quot; (AK-265)
* USS &quot;Serpens&quot; (AK-266)
* USNS &quot;Marine Fiddler&quot; (T-AK-267)
* USNS &quot;Comet&quot; (T-AK-269)
* USNS &quot;Eltanin&quot; (T-AK-270)
* USNS &quot;Mirfak&quot; (T-AK-271)
* USNS &quot;Mizar&quot; (T-AK-272), later T-AGOR-11
* USNS &quot;Taurus&quot; (T-AK-273), ex-LSD-23, later T-LSV-8
* USNS &quot;Lt. James E. Robinson&quot; (T-AK-274), ex-T-AG-170
* USNS &quot;Pvt. Joseph F. Merrell&quot; (T-AK-275)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Jack J. Pendleton&quot; (T-AK-276), grounded 23 September 1973, CTL
* USNS &quot;Schuyler Otis Bland&quot; (T-AK-277)
* USNS &quot;Norwalk&quot; (T-AK-279)
* USNS &quot;Furman&quot; (T-AK-280)
* USNS &quot;Victoria&quot; (T-AK-281)
* USNS &quot;Marshfield&quot; (T-AK-282)
* USNS &quot;Wyandot&quot; (T-AK-283), ex-T-AKA-92
* USNS &quot;Northern Light&quot; (T-AK-284)
* USNS &quot;Southern Cross&quot; (T-AK-285)
* USNS &quot;Vega&quot; (T-AK-286)
* USNS &quot;Algol&quot; (T-AK-287), later T-AKR-287
* USNS &quot;Bellatrix&quot; (T-AK-288), later T-AKR-288
* USNS &quot;Denebola&quot; (T-AK-289), later T-AKR-289
* USNS &quot;Pollux&quot; (T-AK-290), later T-AKR-290
* USNS &quot;Altair&quot; (T-AK-291), later T-AKR-291
* USNS &quot;Regulus&quot; (T-AK-292), later T-AKR-292
* USNS &quot;Capella&quot; (T-AK-293), later T-AKR-293
* USNS &quot;Antares&quot; (T-AK-294), later T-AKR-294
* USNS &quot;Cleveland&quot; (T-AK-851)
* USNS &quot;Austral Rainbow&quot; (T-AK-1005)
* USNS &quot;Cape Nome&quot; (T-AK-1014)
* USNS &quot;Marine Adder&quot; (T-AK-2005), ex-T-AP-193
* USNS &quot;Pioneer Commander&quot; (T-AK-2016)
* USNS &quot;Pioneer Contractor&quot; (T-AK-2018)
* USNS &quot;Pioneer Crusader&quot; (T-AK-2019)
* USNS &quot;Buyer&quot; (T-AK-2033)
* USNS &quot;Gulf Shipper&quot; (T-AK-2035)
* USNS &quot;Gulf Trader&quot; (T-AK-2036)
* 
* USNS &quot;Green Valley&quot; (T-AK-2049)
* USNS &quot;Green Wave&quot; (T-AK-2050)
* USNS &quot;American Cormorant&quot; (T-AK-2062)
* USNS &quot;Green Harbour&quot; (T-AK-2064)
* MV &quot;Cpl. Louis J. Hauge Jr.&quot; (T-AK-3000)
* 
* 
* [I]
* [I]
* [I]
* USNS &quot;2nd Lt John P. Bobo&quot; (T-AK-3008) [A]
* [A]
* [A]
* [A]
* [A]
* USNS &quot;1st Lt. Harry L. Martin&quot; (T-AK-3015)
* USNS &quot;LCPL Roy M. Wheat&quot; (T-AK-3016)
* USNS &quot;GySgt. Fred W. Stockham&quot; (T-AK-3017), ex-T-AKR-299 as &quot;Soderman&quot;
* [A]
* [A]
* [A]
* 
* USNS &quot;Cape Adventurer&quot; (T-AK-5005)
* USNS &quot;Cape Aide&quot; (T-AK-5006)
* USNS &quot;Cape Ambassador&quot; (T-AK-5007)
* USNS &quot;Banner&quot; (T-AK-5008)
* USNS &quot;Cape Ann&quot; (T-AK-5009) [I]
* USNS &quot;Cape Avinoff&quot; (T-AK-5013) [I]
* USNS &quot;Agent&quot; (T-AK-5015)
* USNS &quot;Lake&quot; (T-AK-5016)
* USNS &quot;Pride&quot; (T-AK-5017)
* USNS &quot;Scan&quot; (T-AK-5018)
* USNS &quot;Cape John&quot; (T-AK-5022)
* USNS &quot;Del Viento&quot; (T-AK-5026)
* [I]
* USNS &quot;Cape Chalmers&quot; (T-AK-5036) [I]
* USNS &quot;Cape Canso&quot; (T-AK-5037)
* USNS &quot;Cape Charles&quot; (T-AK-5038)
* USNS &quot;Cape Clear&quot; (T-AK-5039)
* USNS &quot;Cape Canaveral&quot; (T-AK-5040)
* USNS &quot;Cape Cod&quot; (T-AK-5041)
* USNS &quot;Cape Carthage&quot; (T-AK-5042)
* USNS &quot;Cape Catoche&quot; (T-AK-5043)
* USNS &quot;Gulf Banker&quot; (T-AK-5044)
* USNS &quot;Gulf Farmer&quot; (T-AK-5045)
* USNS &quot;Gulf Merchant&quot; (T-AK-5046)
* USNS &quot;Del Monte&quot; (T-AK-5049) [I]
* USNS &quot;Del Valle&quot; (T-AK-5050)
* USNS &quot;Cape Bover&quot; (T-AK-5057) [I]
* [I]
* [I]
* 
* USNS &quot;Cape Catawba&quot; (T-AK-5074)
* [I]
* USNS &quot;LTC Calvin P. Titus&quot; (T-AK-5089)
* USNS &quot;SP5 Eric G. Gibson&quot; (T-AK-5091)
* [A]
* [A]
* MT &quot;SLNC Corsica&quot; (T-AK-5423) [A]
* USNS &quot;Jeb Stuart&quot; (T-AK-9204)
* MV &quot;Strong Virginian&quot; (T-AK-9205)
* USNS &quot;Buffalo Soldier&quot; (T-AK-9301)
* USNS &quot;American Merlin&quot; (T-AK-9302)
* USNS &quot;American Kestrel&quot; (T-AK-9651)
* USNS &quot;Noble Star&quot; (T-AK-9653)
* USNS &quot;Green Ridge&quot; (T-AK-9655)
* USNS &quot;Advantage&quot; (T-AK-9682)
===Attack cargo ships (AKA)===
==Cargo ship dock (T-AKD)==
The &quot;Point Barrow&quot; was similar in design to the amphibious warfare Landing Ships Dock (LSD)s, but with a hull strengthened for sailing in Arctic ice. 
* USNS &quot;Point Barrow&quot; (T-AKD-1), Operation Dominic nuclear test participant, later T-AGDS-2 as &quot;Point Loma&quot;

==Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE)==

Advanced Auxiliary Dry Cargo Ships (T-AKE) are designed to deliver ammunition, provisions, stores, spare parts, potable water and petroleum products via underway replenishment; they effectively combine the missions of Ammunition Ships (AE) and Combat Stores Ships (AFS, T-AFS) along with a limited refueling capability.

&quot;Lewis and Clark&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Lewis and Clark&quot; (T-AKE-1) [A]
* USNS &quot;Sacagawea&quot; (T-AKE-2) [A]
* USNS &quot;Alan Shepard&quot; (T-AKE-3) [A]
* USNS &quot;Richard E. Byrd&quot; (T-AKE-4) [A]
* USNS &quot;Robert E. Peary&quot; (T-AKE-5) [A]
* USNS &quot;Amelia Earhart&quot; (T-AKE-6) [A]
* USNS &quot;Carl Brashear&quot; (T-AKE-7) [A]
* USNS &quot;Wally Schirra&quot; (T-AKE-8) [A]
* USNS &quot;Matthew Perry&quot; (T-AKE-9) [A]
* USNS &quot;Charles Drew&quot; (T-AKE-10) [A]
* USNS &quot;Washington Chambers&quot; (T-AKE-11) [A]
* USNS &quot;William McLean&quot; (T-AKE-12) [A]
* USNS &quot;Medgar Evers&quot; (T-AKE-13) [A]
* USNS &quot;Cesar Chavez&quot; (T-AKE-14) [A]
==Small cargo ships (AKL)==

* USS &quot;Camano&quot; (AKL-1), ex-AG-130
* USS &quot;Deal&quot; (AKL-2), ex-AG-131
* USS &quot;Elba&quot; (AKL-3), ex-AG-132
* USS &quot;Errol&quot; (AKL-4), ex-AG-133
* USS &quot;Estero&quot; (AKL-5), ex-AG-134
* USS &quot;Jekyl&quot; (AKL-6), ex-AG-135
* USS &quot;Metomkin&quot; (AKL-7), ex-AG-136
* USS &quot;Roque&quot; (AKL-8), ex-AG-137
* USS &quot;Ryer&quot; (AKL-9), ex-AG-138
* USS &quot;Sharps&quot; (AKL-10), ex-AG-139
* USS &quot;Torry&quot; (AKL-11), ex-AG-140
* USS &quot;Mark&quot; (AKL-12), ex-AG-143
* USNS &quot;Tingles&quot; (T-AKL-13)
* USS &quot;Hewell&quot; (AKL-14), ex-AG-145
* USS &quot;AKL-15&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-16&quot;
* USNS &quot;New Bedford&quot; (AKL-17), later IX-308
* USS &quot;AKL-18&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-19&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-AKL-20&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-21&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-22&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-23&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-24&quot;
* USS &quot;Banner&quot; (AKL-25), later AGER-1
* USS &quot;AKL-26&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-AKL-27&quot;
* USS &quot;Brule&quot; (AKL-28)
* USS &quot;AKL-29&quot;
* USNS &quot;AKL-30&quot; (T-AKL-30)
* USS &quot;AKL-31&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-32&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-33&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-34&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-35&quot;
* USS &quot;AKL-36&quot;
* USS &quot;Alcyone&quot; (AKL-37)
* USS &quot;Alhena&quot; (AKL-38)
* USS &quot;Almaack&quot; (AKL-39)
* USS &quot;Deimos&quot; (AKL-40)
* USS &quot;AKL-41&quot;
* USS &quot;Renate&quot; (AKL-42)
* USS &quot;AKL-43&quot;
* USS &quot;Pueblo&quot; (AKL-44), later AGER-2 [I]
* USS &quot;Palm Beach&quot; (AKL-45), later AGER-3
* USNS &quot;Redbud&quot; (T-AKL-398), ex-WLB-398
==Net cargo ships (AKN)==

&quot;Indus&quot; class: MC type EC2-S-C1

* USS &quot;Indus&quot; (AKN-1)
* USS &quot;Sagittarius&quot; (AKN-2)
* USS &quot;Tuscana&quot; (AKN-3)
* USS &quot;Zebra&quot; (AKN-5), ex-IX-107
Other classes
* USS &quot;Keokuk&quot; (AKN-4), ex-AN-5, ex-CM-8, ex-CMc-6
* USS &quot;Galilea&quot; (AKN-6), ex-&quot;Montauk&quot; (LSV-6)

==Vehicle cargo ships (T-AKR)==


* USNS &quot;Comet&quot; (T-AKR-7), ex-LSV-7
* USNS &quot;Meteor&quot; (T-AKR-9), ex-LSV-9
Cape-I-class: MA Type C7-S-95

* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
Cape-T-class

* [R]
* [R]
&quot;Algol&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Algol&quot; (T-AKR-287), ex-T-AK-287 [R]
* USNS &quot;Bellatrix&quot; (T-AKR-288), ex-T-AK-288 [R]
* USNS &quot;Denebola&quot; (T-AKR-289), ex-T-AK-289 [R]
* USNS &quot;Pollux&quot; (T-AKR-290), ex-T-AK-290 [R]
* USNS &quot;Altair&quot; (T-AKR-291), ex-T-AK-291 [R]
* USNS &quot;Regulus&quot; (T-AKR-292), ex-T-AK-292 [R]
* USNS &quot;Capella&quot; (T-AKR-293), ex-T-AK-293 [R]
* USNS &quot;Antares&quot; (T-AKR-294), ex-T-AK-294 [R]
&quot;Shughart&quot;-Class

* USNS &quot;Shughart&quot; (T-AKR-295) [I]
* USNS &quot;Yano&quot; (T-AKR-297) [I]
* USNS &quot;Soderman&quot; (T-AKR-299), later T-AK-3017 as &quot;GySgt Fred W. Stockham&quot;
&quot;Gordon&quot;-Class

* USNS &quot;Gordon&quot; (T-AKR-296) [R]
* USNS &quot;Gilliland&quot; (T-AKR-298) [R]
&quot;Bob Hope&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Bob Hope&quot; (T-AKR-300) [R]
* USNS &quot;Fisher&quot; (T-AKR-301) [R]
* USNS &quot;Seay&quot; (T-AKR-302) [A]
* USNS &quot;Mendonca&quot; (T-AKR-303) [R]
* USNS &quot;Pililaau&quot; (T-AKR-304) [A]
* USNS &quot;Brittin&quot; (T-AKR-305) [R]
* USNS &quot;Benavidez&quot; (T-AKR-306) [R]
&quot;Watson&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Watson&quot; (T-AKR-310) [A]
* USNS &quot;Sisler&quot; (T-AKR-311) [A]
* USNS &quot;Dahl&quot; (T-AKR-312) [A]
* USNS &quot;Red Cloud&quot; (T-AKR-313) [A]
* USNS &quot;Charlton&quot; (T-AKR-314) [A]
* USNS &quot;Watkins&quot; (T-AKR-315) [A]
* USNS &quot;Pomeroy&quot; (T-AKR-316) [A]
* USNS &quot;Soderman&quot; (T-AKR-317) [A]
Other classes

* [R]
* [I]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [I]
* [I]
* [I]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [A]
* 
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R], used to destroy Syrian chemical weapons in 2014
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
* [R]
==General stores issue ships (AKS)==
* USS &quot;Antares&quot; (AKS-3), ex-AG-10

&quot;Castor&quot; and Unknown classes: all MC type C2 
* USS &quot;Castor&quot; (AKS-1)
* USS &quot;Pollux&quot; (AKS-2), wrecked Newfoundland 18 February 1942, 93 killed
* USS &quot;Pollux&quot; (AKS-4), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Mercury&quot; (AKS-20)

&quot;Acubens&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1

* USS &quot;Acubens&quot; (AKS-5)
* USS &quot;Kochab&quot; (AKS-6)
* USS &quot;Luna&quot; (AKS-7)
* USS &quot;Talita&quot; (AKS-8)
* USS &quot;Volans&quot; (AKS-9)
* USS &quot;Cybele&quot; (AKS-10)
* USS &quot;Gratia&quot; (AKS-11)
* USS &quot;Hecuba&quot; (AKS-12)
* USS &quot;Hesperia&quot; (AKS-13), Operation Crossroads participant 
* USS &quot;Iolanda&quot; (AKS-14)
* USS &quot;Liguria&quot; (AKS-15)
&quot;LST&quot;-542 class

* USS &quot;Blackford&quot; (AKS-16), ex-&quot;LST-1111&quot;, later APB-45
* USS &quot;Dorchester&quot; (AKS-17), ex-&quot;LST-1112&quot;, later APB-46
* USS &quot;Kingman&quot; (AKS-18), ex-&quot;LST-1113&quot;, later APB-47
* USS &quot;Presque Isle&quot; (AKS-19), ex-&quot;LST-678&quot;, later APB-44
&quot;Belle Isle&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1

* USS &quot;Belle Isle&quot; (AKS-21), ex-AG-73
* USS &quot;Coasters Harbor&quot; (AKS-22), ex-AG-74
* USS &quot;Cuttyhunk Island&quot; (AKS-23), ex-AG-75
* USS &quot;Avery Island&quot; (AKS-24), ex-AG-76
* USS &quot;Indian Island&quot; (AKS-25), ex-AG-77
* USS &quot;Kent Island&quot; (AKS-26), ex-AG-78
&quot;LST&quot;-542 class

* USS &quot;Electron&quot; (AKS-27), ex-&quot;LST-1070&quot;, AG-146
* USS &quot;Proton&quot; (AKS-28), ex-&quot;LST-1078&quot;, AG-147
* USS &quot;Colington&quot; (AKS-29), ex-&quot;LST-1085&quot;, AG-148
* USS &quot;League Island&quot; (AKS-30), ex-&quot;LST-1097&quot;, AG-149
* USS &quot;Chimon&quot; (AKS-31), ex-&quot;LST-1102&quot;, AG-150
&quot;Antares&quot;-class: MA type VC2-S-AP3
* USS &quot;Altair&quot; (AKS-32)
* USS &quot;Antares&quot; (AKS-33)

==Technical stores issue ships (AKST)==
Appeared in a Ship Characteristics Board project list under projects SCB 81 and SCB 108, not assigned to any ship

==Aircraft transports (AKV, T-AKV)==

* USS &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; (AKV-1), ex-APV-1
* USS &quot;Hammondsport&quot; (AKV-2), ex-APV-2

&quot;LT. James E. Robinson&quot; class: MA type VC2-S-AP1 

* USNS &quot;LT. James E. Robinson&quot; (T-AKV-3), later T-AK-274, T-AG-170
* USNS &quot;Pvt. Joseph F. Merrell&quot; (T-AKV-4), later T-AK-275
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Jack J. Pendleton&quot; (T-AKV-5), later T-AK-276
Other classes

* USNS &quot;Albert M. Boe&quot; (T-AKV-6)
* USNS &quot;Cardinal O&#x27;Connell&quot; (T-AKV-7)
: MA type T3

* USS &quot;Kula Gulf&quot; (AKV-8), ex-CVE-108
* USS &quot;Cape Gloucester&quot; (AKV-9), ex-CVE-109
* USS &quot;Salerno Bay&quot; (AKV-10), ex-CVE-110
* USS &quot;Vella Gulf&quot; (AKV-11), ex-CVE-111
* USS &quot;Siboney&quot; (AKV-12), ex-CVE-112
* USS &quot;Puget Sound&quot; (AKV-13), ex-CVE-113
* USS &quot;Rendova&quot; (AKV-14), ex-CVE-114
* USS &quot;Bairoko&quot; (AKV-15), ex-CVE-115
* USS &quot;Badoeng Strait&quot; (AKV-16), ex-CVE-116
* USS &quot;Saidor&quot; (AKV-17), ex-CVE-117
* USS &quot;Sicily&quot; (AKV-18), ex-CVE-118
* USS &quot;Point Cruz&quot; (AKV-19), ex-CVE-119
* USS &quot;Mindoro&quot; (AKV-20), ex-CVE-120
* USS &quot;Rabaul&quot; (AKV-21), ex-CVE-121, CVHE-121
* USS &quot;Palau&quot; (AKV-22), ex-CVE-122
* USS &quot;Tinian&quot; (AKV-23), ex-CVE-123, CVHE-123

: MA type S4-S2-BB3

* USS &quot;Nehenta Bay&quot; (AKV-24), ex-CVE-74
* USS &quot;Hoggatt Bay&quot; (AKV-25), ex-CVE-75
* USS &quot;Kadashan Bay&quot; (AKV-26), ex-CVE-76
* USS &quot;Marcus Island&quot; (AKV-27), ex-CVE-77
* USS &quot;Savo Island&quot; (AKV-28), ex-CVE-78
* USS &quot;Rudyerd Bay&quot; (AKV-29), ex-CVE-81
* USS &quot;Sitkoh Bay&quot; (AKV-30), ex-CVE-86
* USS &quot;Takanis Bay&quot; (AKV-31), ex-CVE-89
* USS &quot;Lunga Point&quot; (AKV-32), ex-CVE-94
* USS &quot;Hollandia&quot; (AKV-33), ex-CVE-97
* USS &quot;Kwajalein&quot; (AKV-34), ex-CVE-98
* USS &quot;Bougainville&quot; (AKV-35), ex-CVE-100
* USS &quot;Matanikau&quot; (AKV-36), ex-CVE-101
&quot;Commencement Bay&quot; class

* USS &quot;Commencement Bay&quot; (AKV-37), ex-CVE-105, CVHE-105
* USS &quot;Block Island&quot; (AKV-38), ex-CVE-106, LPH-1
* USS &quot;Gilbert Islands&quot; (AKV-39), ex-CVE-107, later AGMR-1

: MA types C3-S-A1 and C3-S-A2

* USS &quot;Card&quot; (T-AKV-40), ex-AVG-11, ACV-11, CVE-11, CVHE-11, CVU-11, T-CVU-11, sunk 2 May 1964 Saigon, Vietnam, 5 killed, repaired
* USNS &quot;Core&quot; (T-AKV-41), ex-AVG-13, ACV-13, CVE-13, CVHE-13, CVU-13
* USNS &quot;Breton&quot; (T-AKV-42), ex-AVG-23, ACV-23, CVE-23
* USNS &quot;Croatan&quot; (T-AKV-43), ex-AVG-25, ACV-25, CVE-25
==Auxiliary minesweepers==
===Minesweepers (AM)===
===Auxiliary Base Minesweepers (AMb)===
===Coastal Minesweepers (AMc)===
===Coastal Minesweepers (Underwater Locator) (AMCU)===
===Ocean Minesweepers (AMS)===
==Net laying ships (AN)==


* USS &quot;Monitor&quot; (AN-1), later AP-160, LSV-5, MCS-5
* USS &quot;Montauk&quot; (AN-2), later AP-161, LSV-6, AKN-6
* USS &quot;Osage&quot; (AN-3), later AP-108, LSV-3, MCS-3
* USS &quot;Saugus&quot; (AN-4), later AP-109, LSV-4, MCS-4
* USS &quot;Keokuk&quot; (AN-5), later CM-8, CMc-6, AKN-4
All of the following ships were originally classed as Yard Net Tenders, see for the original hull numbers.

&quot;Aloe&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Aloe&quot; (AN-6)
* USS &quot;Ash&quot; (AN-7)
* USS &quot;Boxwood&quot; (AN-8)
* USS &quot;Butternut&quot; (AN-9), Operation Wigwam nuclear test participant, later ANL-9, YAG-60
* USS &quot;Catalpa&quot; (AN-10)
* USS &quot;Chestnut&quot; (AN-11)
* USS &quot;Cinchona&quot; (AN-12)
* USS &quot;Buckeye&quot; (AN-13)
* USS &quot;Buckthorn&quot; (AN-14)
* USS &quot;Ebony&quot; (AN-15)
* USS &quot;Eucalyptus&quot; (AN-16)
* USS &quot;Chinquapin&quot; (AN-17)
* USS &quot;Gum Tree&quot; (AN-18)
* USS &quot;Holly&quot; (AN-19)
* USS &quot;Elder&quot; (AN-20), Operation Ivy nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Larch&quot; (AN-21)
* USS &quot;Locust&quot; (AN-22)
* USS &quot;Mahogany&quot; (AN-23)
* USS &quot;Mango&quot; (AN-24)
* USS &quot;Hackberry&quot; (AN-25)
* USS &quot;Mimosa&quot; (AN-26)
* USS &quot;Mulberry&quot; (AN-27)
* USS &quot;Palm&quot; (AN-28)
* USS &quot;Hazel&quot; (AN-29)
* USS &quot;Redwood&quot; (AN-30)
* USS &quot;Rosewood&quot; (AN-31)
* USS &quot;Sandalwood&quot; (AN-32)
* USS &quot;Nutmeg&quot; (AN-33)
* USS &quot;Teaberry&quot; (AN-34)
* USS &quot;Teak&quot; (AN-35)
* USS &quot;Pepperwood&quot; (AN-36)
* USS &quot;Yew&quot; (AN-37)
&quot;Ailanthus&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Ailanthus&quot; (AN-38), wrecked Aleutians 26 February 1944
* USS &quot;Bitterbush&quot; (AN-39)
* USS &quot;Anaqua&quot; (AN-40)
* USS &quot;Baretta&quot; (AN-41)
* USS &quot;Cliffrose&quot; (AN-42)
* USS &quot;Satinleaf&quot; (AN-43)
* USS &quot;Corkwood&quot; (AN-44)
* USS &quot;Cornel&quot; (AN-45)
* USS &quot;Mastic&quot; (AN-46)
* USS &quot;Canotia&quot; (AN-47)
* USS &quot;Lancewood&quot; (AN-48)
* USS &quot;Papaya&quot; (AN-49)
* USS &quot;Cinnamon&quot; (AN-50)
* USS &quot;Silverbell&quot; (AN-51)
* USS &quot;Snowbell&quot; (AN-52), wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945
* USS &quot;Spicewood&quot; (AN-53)
* USS &quot;Manchineel&quot; (AN-54)
* USS &quot;Torchwood&quot; (AN-55)
* USS &quot;Winterberry&quot; (AN-56)
* USS &quot;Viburnum&quot; (AN-57)
* USS &quot;Abele&quot; (AN-58)
* USS &quot;Terebinth&quot; (AN-59)
* USS &quot;Catclaw&quot; (AN-60)
* USS &quot;Chinaberry&quot; (AN-61)
* USS &quot;Hoptree&quot; (AN-62)
* USS &quot;Whitewood&quot; (AN-63), later AG-129
* USS &quot;Palo Blanco&quot; (AN-64)
* USS &quot;Palo Verde&quot; (AN-65)
* USS &quot;Pinon&quot; (AN-66)
* USS &quot;Shellbark&quot; (AN-67)
* USS &quot;Silverleaf&quot; (AN-68)
* USS &quot;Stagbush&quot; (AN-69)
* USS &quot;Allthorn&quot; (AN-70)
* USS &quot;Tesota&quot; (AN-71)
* USS &quot;Yaupon&quot; (AN-72)
* USS &quot;Precept&quot; (AN-73)
* USS &quot;Boxelder&quot; (AN-74)
* USS &quot;Prefect&quot; (AN-75)
* USS &quot;Satinwood&quot; (AN-76)
* USS &quot;Seagrape&quot; (AN-77)
&quot;Cohoes&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Cohoes&quot; (AN-78)
* USS &quot;Etlah&quot; (AN-79), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Suncook&quot; (AN-80), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Manayunk&quot; (AN-81)
* USS &quot;Marietta&quot; (AN-82)
* USS &quot;Nahant&quot; (AN-83)
* USS &quot;Naubuc&quot; (AN-84)
* USS &quot;Oneota&quot; (AN-85), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Passaconaway&quot; (AN-86)
* USS &quot;Passaic&quot; (AN-87)
* USS &quot;Shakamaxon&quot; (AN-88), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Tonawanda&quot; (AN-89)
* USS &quot;Tunxis&quot; (AN-90)
* USS &quot;Waxsaw&quot; (AN-91)
* USS &quot;Yazoo&quot; (AN-92)
===Net layer (ANL)===
* USS &quot;Butternut&quot; (ANL-9), ex-YN-4, ex-AN-9, later YAG-60

==Fleet oilers (AO, T-AO)==
==Fast combat support ships (AOE, T-AOE)==
==Gasoline tankers (AOG, T-AOG)==

All AOG tankers were MarCom (MC) T1 tankers, with the exception of these former commercial ships: the &quot;Halawa&quot;-class, AOG-13, AOG-14, AOG-16 and AOG-47.

&quot;Patapsco&quot;-class: MC type T1-MT-M1

* USS &quot;Patapsco&quot; (AOG-1), inadvertent Operation Castle nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Kern&quot; (AOG-2)
* USS &quot;Rio Grande&quot; (AOG-3)
* USS &quot;Wabash&quot; (AOG-4)
* USS &quot;Susquehanna&quot; (AOG-5)
* USS &quot;Agawam&quot; (AOG-6), Operation Ivy nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Elkhorn&quot; (AOG-7)
* USS &quot;Genesee&quot; (AOG-8)
* USS &quot;Kishwaukee&quot; (AOG-9)
* USS &quot;Nemasket&quot; (AOG-10)
* USS &quot;Tombigbee&quot; (AOG-11), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Chehalis&quot; (AOG-48), exploded and sank, Tutuila, American Samoa, 7 October 1949, 6 killed
* USS &quot;Chestatee&quot; (AOG-49)
* USS &quot;Chewaucan&quot; (AOG-50)
* USS &quot;Maquoketa&quot; (AOG-51)
* USS &quot;Mattabesset&quot; (AOG-52)
* USS &quot;Namakogon&quot; (AOG-53)
* USS &quot;Natchaug&quot; (AOG-54)
* USS &quot;Nespelen&quot; (AOG-55)
* USS &quot;Noxubee&quot; (AOG-56)
* USS &quot;Pecatonica&quot; (AOG-57)
* USS &quot;Pinnebog&quot; (AOG-58)
* USS &quot;Wacissa&quot; (AOG-59)
&quot;Halawa&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Halawa&quot; (AOG-12)
* USS &quot;Conasauga&quot; (AOG-15)
&quot;Mettawee&quot;-class: MC type T1-M-A2

* USS &quot;Mettawee&quot; (AOG-17)
* USS &quot;Pasquotank&quot; (AOG-18)
* USS &quot;Sakatonchee&quot; (AOG-19)
* USS &quot;Seekonk&quot; (AOG-20)
* USS &quot;Sequatchie&quot; (AOG-21)
* USS &quot;Wautauga&quot; (AOG-22)
* USS &quot;Ammonusuc&quot; (AOG-23)
* USS &quot;Sheepscot&quot; (AOG-24), wrecked off Iwo Jima 6 June 1945
* USS &quot;Calamus&quot; (AOG-25)
* USS &quot;Chiwaukum&quot; (AOG-26)
* USS &quot;Escatawpa&quot; (AOG-27)
* USS &quot;Gualala&quot; (AOG-28)
* USS &quot;Hiwassee&quot; (AOG-29)
* USS &quot;Kalamazoo&quot; (AOG-30)
* USS &quot;Kanawha&quot; (AOG-31)
* USS &quot;Narraguagas&quot; (AOG-32)
* USS &quot;Ochlockonee&quot; (AOG-33)
* USS &quot;Oconee&quot; (AOG-34)
* USS &quot;Ogeechee&quot; (AOG-35)
* USS &quot;Ontonagon&quot; (AOG-36)
* USS &quot;Yahara&quot; (AOG-37)
* USS &quot;Ponchatoula&quot; (AOG-38)
* USS &quot;Quastinet&quot; (AOG-39)
* USS &quot;Sacandaga&quot; (AOG-40)
* USS &quot;Tetonkaha&quot; (AOG-41)
* USS &quot;Towaliga&quot; (AOG-42)
* USS &quot;Tularosa&quot; (AOG-43)
* USS &quot;Wakulla&quot; (AOG-44)
* USS &quot;Yacona&quot; (AOG-45)
* USS &quot;Waupaca&quot; (AOG-46)
* USS &quot;Manokin&quot; (AOG-60)
* USS &quot;Sakonnet&quot; (AOG-61)
* USS &quot;Conemaugh&quot; (AOG-62)
* USS &quot;Klaskanine&quot; (AOG-63)
&quot;Klickitat&quot;-class: MC type T1-M-BT1

* USS &quot;Klickitat&quot; (AOG-64)
* USS &quot;Michigamme&quot; (AOG-65)
* USS &quot;Nanticoke&quot; (AOG-66)
* USS &quot;Peconic&quot; (AOG-68)
* USS &quot;Petaluma&quot; (AOG-69), not commissioned
* USS &quot;Piscataqua&quot; (AOG-70), not commissioned
Other / unknown classes

* USS &quot;Kaloli&quot; (AOG-13)
* USS &quot;Aroostook&quot; (AOG-14)
* USS &quot;Guyandot&quot; (AOG-16)
* USS &quot;Shikellamy&quot; (AOG-47), ex-AO-90
* USS &quot;Nordaway&quot; (AOG-67)
* USS &quot;Quinnebaug&quot; (AOG-71)
* USS &quot;Sebasticook&quot; (AOG-72)
* USS &quot;Kiamichi&quot; (AOG-73)
* USS &quot;Tellico&quot; (AOG-74)
* USS &quot;Truckee&quot; (AOG-75)
* USNS &quot;Tonti&quot; (T-AOG-76)
* USNS &quot;Rincon&quot; (T-AOG-77)
* USNS &quot;Nodaway&quot; (T-AOG-78)
* USNS &quot;Petaluma&quot; (T-AOG-79)
* USNS &quot;Piscataqua&quot; (T-AOG-80)
* USNS &quot;Alatna&quot; (T-AOG-81), Operation Dominic nuclear test participant
* USNS &quot;Chattahoochee&quot; (T-AOG-82)
==Light replenishment oilers (T-AOL)==
==Replenishment oilers (AOR)==
==Oiler submarines (AOSS)==
==Oil transporters (T-AOT)==
==Transports (AP, T-AP)==
* USS &quot;Henderson&quot; (AP-1), later AH-9
* USS &quot;Doyen&quot; (AP-2), later APA-1
* USS &quot;Hancock&quot; (AP-3), later IX-12
* USS &quot;Argonne&quot; (AP-4), later AS-10
* USS &quot;Chaumont&quot; (AP-5), later AH-10
* USS &quot;William Ward Burrows&quot; (AP-6)
* USS &quot;Wharton&quot; (AP-7), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Harris&quot; (AP-8), later APA-2
* USS &quot;Zeilin&quot; (AP-9), later APA-3
* USS &quot;McCawley&quot; (AP-10), later APA-4
* USS &quot;Barnett&quot; (AP-11), later APA-5
* USS &quot;Heywood&quot; (AP-12), later APA-6
* USS &quot;George F. Elliott&quot; (AP-13), ex-ID-3514, sunk by aircraft near Guadalcanal 8 August 1942
* USS &quot;Fuller&quot; (AP-14), later APA-7
* USS &quot;William P. Biddle&quot; (AP-15), later APA-8
* USS &quot;Neville&quot; (AP-16), ex-SP-2676, later APA-9
* USS &quot;Harry Lee&quot; (AP-17), later APA-10
* USS &quot;Catlin&quot; (AP-19), ex-ID-3018
* USS &quot;Munargo&quot; (AP-20)
* USS &quot;Wakefield&quot; (AP-21)
* USS &quot;Mount Vernon&quot; (AP-22)
* USS &quot;West Point&quot; (AP-23)
* USS &quot;Orizaba&quot; (AP-24), ex-ID-1536
* USS &quot;Leonard Wood&quot; (AP-25), later APA-12
* USS &quot;Joseph T. Dickman&quot; (AP-26), later APA-13
* USS &quot;Hunter Liggett&quot; (AP-27), later APA-14
* USS &quot;Kent&quot; (AP-28), ex-ID-3804
* USS &quot;U. S. Grant&quot; (AP-29), ex-ID-3011
* USS &quot;Henry T. Allen&quot; (AP-30), later APA-15, AG-90
* USS &quot;Chateau Thierry&quot; (AP-31)
* USS &quot;St Mihiel&quot; (AP-32)
* USS &quot;Republic&quot; (AP-33), ex-ID-3014
* USS &quot;J. Franklin Bell&quot; (AP-34), later APA-16
* USS &quot;American Legion&quot; (AP-35), later APA-17
* &quot;Santa Ana&quot; (AP-36), ex-ID-2869, not commissioned
* USS &quot;President Jackson&quot; (AP-37), later APA-18
* USS &quot;President Adams&quot; (AP-38), later APA-19
* USS &quot;President Hayes&quot; (AP-39), later APA-20
* USS &quot;Crescent City&quot; (AP-40), later APA-21
* USS &quot;Stratford&quot; (AP-41)
* USS &quot;Tasker H. Bliss&quot; (AP-42), sunk by torpedo Morocco 12 November 1942, 31 killed
* USS &quot;Hugh L. Scott&quot; (AP-43), sunk by torpedo Morocco 12 November 1942, 59 killed
* Willard A. Holbrook (AP-44), not commissioned
* &quot;Thomas H. Barry&quot; (AP-45), not commissioned
* James Parker (AP-46), not commissioned
* J.W. McAndrew (AP-47), not commissioned
* &quot;Frederick Funston&quot; (AP-48), later APA-89
* &quot;James O&#x27;Hara&quot; (AP-49), later APA-90
* USS &quot;Joseph Hewes&quot; (AP-50), later APA-22
* USS &quot;John Penn&quot; (AP-51), later APA-23
* USS &quot;Edward Rutledge&quot; (AP-52), later APA-24
* USS &quot;Lafayette&quot; (AP-53), ex-&quot;Normandie&quot;, burned and sank 9 February 1942
* USS &quot;Hermitage&quot; (AP-54)
* USS &quot;Arthur Middleton&quot; (AP-55), later APA-25
* USS &quot;Samuel Chase&quot; (AP-56), later APA-26
* USS &quot;George Clymer&quot; (AP-57), later APA-27
* USS &quot;Charles Carroll&quot; (AP-58), later APA-28
* USS &quot;Thomas Stone&quot; (AP-59), later APA-29
* USS &quot;Thomas Jefferson&quot; (AP-60), later APA-30
* USS &quot;Monticello&quot; (AP-61)
* USS &quot;Kenmore&quot; (AP-62), later AH-11
* USS &quot;Rochambeau&quot; (AP-63)
* USS &quot;Monrovia&quot; (AP-64), later APA-31
* USS &quot;Calvert&quot; (AP-65), later APA-32
* USS &quot;Ancon&quot; (AP-66), later AGC-4
* USS &quot;Dorothea L. Dix&quot; (AP-67)
* &quot;Alameda&quot; (AP-68) (name assigned, never used)
* USS &quot;Elizabeth C. Stanton&quot; (AP-69)
* USS &quot;Florence Nightingale&quot; (AP-70)
* USS &quot;Lyon&quot; (AP-71)
* USS &quot;Susan B. Anthony&quot; (AP-72)
* USS &quot;Leedstown&quot; (AP-73), sunk by torpedoes Algiers 9 November 1942, 8 killed
* USS &quot;Lejeune&quot; (AP-74)
* USS &quot;Gemini&quot; (AP-75), ex-AG-38, ex-AK-52
* USS &quot;Anne Arundel&quot; (AP-76)
* USS &quot;Thurston&quot; (AP-77)
* USS &quot;Bayfield&quot; (AP-78), later APA-33
* USS &quot;Bolivar&quot; (AP-79), later APA-34
* USS &quot;Callaway&quot; (AP-80), later APA-35
* USS &quot;Cambria&quot; (AP-81), later APA-36
* USS &quot;Cavalier&quot; (AP-82), later APA-37
* USS &quot;Chilton&quot; (AP-83), later APA-38
* USS &quot;Clay&quot; (AP-84), later APA-39
* USS &quot;Custer&quot; (AP-85), later APA-40
* USS &quot;DuPage&quot; (AP-86), later APA-41
* USS &quot;Elmore&quot; (AP-87), later APA-42
* USS &quot;Fayette&quot; (AP-88), later APA-43
* USS &quot;Fremont&quot; (AP-89), later APA-44
* USS &quot;Henrico&quot; (AP-90), later APA-45
* USS &quot;Knox&quot; (AP-91), later APA-46
* USS &quot;Lamar&quot; (AP-92), later APA-47
* USS &quot;Leon&quot; (AP-93), later APA-48
* USS &quot;Ormsby&quot; (AP-94), later APA-49
* USS &quot;Pierce&quot; (AP-95), later APA-50
* USS &quot;Sheridan&quot; (AP-96), later APA-51
* USS &quot;Sumter&quot; (AP-97), later APA-52
* USS &quot;Warren&quot; (AP-98), later APA-53
* USS &quot;Wayne&quot; (AP-99), later APA-54
* USS &quot;Windsor&quot; (AP-100), later APA-55
* USS &quot;Wood&quot; (AP-101), later APA-56
* USS &quot;Hotspur&quot; (AP-102)
* USS &quot;President Polk&quot; (AP-103)
* USS &quot;President Monroe&quot; (AP-104)
* USS &quot;George F. Elliott&quot; (AP-105)
* USS &quot;Catskill&quot; (AP-106), ex-CM-6, later LSV-1
* USS &quot;Ozark&quot; (AP-107), ex-CM-7, later LSV-2
* USS &quot;Osage&quot; (AP-108), ex-AN-3, later LSV-3
* USS &quot;Saugus&quot; (AP-109), ex-AN-4, later LSV-4
* USS &quot;General John Pope&quot; (AP-110)
* USS &quot;General A. E. Anderson&quot; (AP-111)
* USS &quot;General W. A. Mann&quot; (AP-112)
* USS &quot;General H. W. Butner&quot; (AP-113)
* USS &quot;General William Mitchell&quot; (AP-114)
* USS &quot;General George M. Randall&quot; (AP-115)
* USS &quot;General M. C. Meigs&quot; (AP-116)
* USS &quot;General W. H. Gordon&quot; (AP-117)
* USS &quot;General W. P. Richardson&quot; (AP-118)
* USS &quot;General William Weigel&quot; (AP-119)
* USS &quot;Admiral W. S. Benson&quot; (AP-120) / USNS &quot;General Daniel I. Sultan&quot; (T-AP-120)
* USS &quot;Admiral W. L. Capps&quot; (AP-121) / USNS &quot;General Hugh J. Gaffey&quot; (T-AP-121), later IX-507
* USS &quot;Admiral R. E. Coontz&quot; (AP-122) / USNS &quot;General Alexander M. Patch&quot; (T-AP-122)
* USS &quot;Admiral E. W. Eberle&quot; (AP-123) / USNS &quot;General Simon B. Buckner&quot; (T-AP-123)
* USS &quot;Admiral C. F. Hughes&quot; (AP-124) / USNS &quot;General Edwin D. Patrick&quot; (T-AP-124)
* USS &quot;Admiral H. T. Mayo&quot; (AP-125) / USNS &quot;General Nelson M. Walker&quot; (T-AP-125)
* USS &quot;Admiral Hugh Rodman&quot; (AP-126) / USNS &quot;General Maurice Rose&quot; (T-AP-126)
* USS &quot;Admiral W. S. Sims&quot; (AP-127) / USNS &quot;General William O. Darby&quot; (T-AP-127), later IX-510
* USS &quot;Admiral D. W. Taylor&quot; (AP-128) (cancelled 12/16/44)
* USS &quot;Admiral F. B. Upham&quot; (AP-129) (cancelled 12/16/44)
* USS &quot;General G. O. Squier&quot; (AP-130)
* USS &quot;General T. H. Bliss&quot; (AP-131)
* USS &quot;General J. R. Brooke&quot; (AP-132)
* USS &quot;General Oswald H. Ernst&quot; (AP-133)
* USS &quot;General R. L. Howze&quot; (AP-134)
* USS &quot;General W. M. Black&quot; (AP-135)
* USS &quot;General H. L. Scott&quot; (AP-136)
* USS &quot;General S. D. Sturgis&quot; (AP-137)
* USS &quot;General C. G. Morton&quot; (AP-138)
* USS &quot;General R. E. Callan&quot; (AP-139), later T-AGM-9
* USS &quot;General M. B. Stewart&quot; (AP-140)
* USS &quot;General A. W. Greely&quot; (AP-141)
* USS &quot;General C. H. Muir&quot; (AP-142)
* USS &quot;General H. B. Freeman&quot; (AP-143)
* USS &quot;General H. F. Hodges&quot; (AP-144)
* USS &quot;General Harry Taylor&quot; (AP-145), later T-AGM-10
* USS &quot;General W. F. Hase&quot; (AP-146)
* USS &quot;General E. T. Collins&quot; (AP-147), Operation Ivy nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;General M. L. Hersey&quot; (AP-148)
* USS &quot;General J. H. McRae&quot; (AP-149)
* USS &quot;General M. M. Patrick&quot; (AP-150)
* USS &quot;General W. C. Langfitt&quot; (AP-151)
* USS &quot;General Omar Bundy&quot; (AP-152)
* USS &quot;General R. M. Blatchford&quot; (AP-153)
* USS &quot;General LeRoy Eltinge&quot; (AP-154)
* USS &quot;General A. W. Brewster&quot; (AP-155)
* USS &quot;General D. E. Aultman&quot; (AP-156)
* USS &quot;General C. C. Ballou&quot; (AP-157)
* USS &quot;General W. G. Haan&quot; (AP-158)
* USS &quot;General Stuart Heintzelman&quot; (AP-159)
* USS &quot;Monitor&quot; (AP-160), ex-AN-1, later LSV-5
* USS &quot;Montauk&quot; (AP-161), ex-AN-2, later LSV-6
* USS &quot;Kenmore&quot; (AP-162), later AK-221
* USS &quot;Livingston&quot; (AP-163), later AK-222
* USS &quot;De Grasse&quot; (AP-164), later AK-223
* USS &quot;Prince Georges&quot; (AP-165), later AK-224
* USS &quot;Comet&quot; (AP-166)
* USS &quot;John Land&quot; (AP-167)
* USS &quot;War Hawk&quot; (AP-168)
* USS &quot;Golden City&quot; (AP-169)
* USS &quot;Winged Arrow&quot; (AP-170)
* USS &quot;Storm King&quot; (AP-171)
* USS &quot;Cape Johnson&quot; (AP-172)
* USS &quot;Herald of the Morning&quot; (AP-173)
* USS &quot;Arlington&quot; (AP-174)
* USS &quot;Starlight&quot; (AP-175)
* USS &quot;General J. C. Breckinridge&quot; (AP-176)
* USS &quot;Europa&quot; (AP-177)
* USNS &quot;Frederick Funston&quot; (T-AP-178), ex-APA-89
* USNS &quot;James O&#x27;Hara&quot; (T-AP-179), ex-APA-90
* USNS &quot;David C. Shanks&quot; (T-AP-180), Operation Ivy participant
* USNS &quot;Fred C. Ainsworth&quot; (T-AP-181), Operation Castle participant
* USNS &quot;George W. Goethals&quot; (T-AP-182)
* USNS &quot;Henry Gibbins&quot; (T-AP-183)
* USNS &quot;Private Elden H. Johnson&quot; (T-AP-184), ex-APH-2
* USNS &quot;Private William H. Thomas&quot; (T-AP-185), ex-APH-3
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Charles E. Mower&quot; (T-AP-186), ex-APH-1
* USNS &quot;Private Joe P. Martinez&quot; (T-AP-187)
* USNS &quot;Aiken Victory&quot; (T-AP-188)
* USNS &quot;Lt. Raymond O. Beaudoin&quot; (T-AP-189)
* USNS &quot;Private Sadao S. Munemori&quot; (T-AP-190)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Howard E. Woodford&quot; (T-AP-191)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Sylvester Antolak&quot; (T-AP-192)
* USNS &quot;Marine Adder&quot; (T-AP-193), later T-AK-2005
* USNS &quot;Marine Lynx&quot; (T-AP-194)
* USNS &quot;Marine Phoenix&quot; (T-AP-195)
* USNS &quot;Barrett&quot; (T-AP-196)
* USNS &quot;Geiger&quot; (T-AP-197)
* USNS &quot;Upshur&quot; (T-AP-198)
* USNS &quot;Marine Carp&quot; (T-AP-199)
* USNS &quot;Marine Serpent&quot; (T-AP-202)


===Attack transports (APA)===
==Self-propelled barracks ships (APB)==

&quot;Benewah&quot;-class

:All ships of this class were based on LST hulls, but less than half were converted from actual LSTs.
* USS &quot;Benewah&quot; (APB-35)
* USS &quot;Colleton&quot; (APB-36)
* USS &quot;Echols&quot; (APB-37), later IX-504
* USS &quot;Marlboro&quot; (APB-38)
* USS &quot;Mercer&quot; (APB-39), later IX-502, APL-39
* USS &quot;Nueces&quot; (APB-40), later IX-503, APL-40
* USS &quot;Wythe&quot; (APB-41)
* USS &quot;Yavapai&quot; (APB-42)
* USS &quot;Yolo&quot; (APB-43), ex-&quot;LST-677&quot;
* USS &quot;Presque Isle&quot; (APB-44), ex-&quot;LST-678&quot;, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Blackford&quot; (APB-45), ex-&quot;LST-1111&quot;, ex-AKS-16
* USS &quot;Dorchester&quot; (APB-46), ex-&quot;LST-1112&quot;, ex-AKS-17
* USS &quot;Kingman&quot; (APB-47), ex-&quot;LST-1113&quot;, ex-AKS-18
* USS &quot;Vandenburgh&quot; (APB-48)
* USS &quot;Accomac&quot; (APB-49), ex-&quot;LST-710&quot;
* USS &quot;Cameron&quot; (APB-50), ex-&quot;LST-928&quot;
Other class
* USS &quot;DuPage&quot; (APB-51)

==Coastal transports (APC)==

* USNS &quot;Sgt. Jonah E. Kelley&quot; (T-APC-116)
* USNS &quot;Sgt. George D. Keathley&quot; (T-APC-117), later T-AGS-35
* USNS &quot;Sgt. Joseph E. Muller&quot; (T-APC-118)
* USNS &quot;Pvt. Jose F. Valdez&quot; (T-APC-119)
==Small coastal transports (APc)==
APc-1-class small coastal transports:

* USS &quot;APc-1&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-2&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-3&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-4&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-5&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-6&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-7&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-8&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-9&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-10&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-11&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-12&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-13&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-14&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-15&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-16&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-17&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-18&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-19&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-20&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-21&quot;, ex-AMc-172, sunk by Japanese aircraft off Arawe New Britain 17 December 1943
* USS &quot;APc-22&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-23&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-24&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-25&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-26&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-27&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-28&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-29&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-30&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-31&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-32&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-33&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-34&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-35&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-36&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-37&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-38&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-39&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-40&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-41&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-42&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-43&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-44&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-45&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-46&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-47&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-48&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-49&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-50&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-51&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-52&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-53&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-54&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-55&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-56&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-57&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-58&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-59&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-60&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-61&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-62&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-63&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-64&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-65&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-66&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-67&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-68&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-69&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-70&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-71&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-72&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-73&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-74&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-75&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-76&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-77&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-78&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-79&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-80&quot; - USS &quot;APc-84&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;APc-85&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-86&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-87&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-88&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-89&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-90&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-91&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-92&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-93&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-94&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-95&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-96&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-97&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-98&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-99&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;APc-100&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;APc-101&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-102&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-103&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-104&quot; - USS &quot;APc-107&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;APc-108&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-109&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-110&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-111&quot;
* USS &quot;APc-112&quot; - USS &quot;APc-115&quot;, canceled
==High-speed transports (APD)==
==Evacuation transports (APH)==

==Barracks craft (APL)==

* USS &quot;APL-1&quot;

&quot;APL-2&quot;-class

* USS &quot;APL-2&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-3&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-4&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-5&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-6&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-7&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-8&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-9&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-10&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-11&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-12&quot;, wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945
* USS &quot;APL-13&quot;, wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945
* USS &quot;APL-14&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-15&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-16&quot;, canceled
&quot;APL-17&quot;-class

* USS &quot;APL-17&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-18&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-19&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-20&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-21&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-22&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-23&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-24&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-25&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-26&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-27&quot;, Operation Crossroads nuclear test target
* USS &quot;APL-28&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-29&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-30&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-31&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-32&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-33&quot;, wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945
* USS &quot;APL-34&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-35&quot;, converted to APB
* USS &quot;APL-36&quot;, converted to APB
* USS &quot;APL-37&quot;, converted to APB
* USS &quot;APL-38&quot;, converted to APB
* USS &quot;APL-39&quot;, converted to APB
* USS &quot;APL-40&quot;, converted to APB
&quot;APL-41&quot;-class

* USS &quot;APL-41&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-42&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-43&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-44&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-45&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-46&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-47&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-48&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-49&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-50&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-51&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;APL-52&quot;, canceled
&quot;APL-53&quot; class

* USS &quot;APL-53&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-54&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-55&quot;, later YRBM-18
* USS &quot;APL-56&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-57&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-58&quot; [A]
Other classes
* USS &quot;APL-59&quot;, ex-LST-53
* USS &quot;APL-60&quot;, ex-&quot;Pursuivant&quot;

&quot;APL-61&quot;-class

* USS &quot;APL-61&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-62&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-63&quot;
* USS &quot;APL-64&quot;
&quot;APL-65&quot; class
* USS &quot;APL-65&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-66&quot; [A]

&quot;APL-67&quot;-class

* USS &quot;APL-67&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-68&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-69&quot; [A]
* USS &quot;APL-70&quot; [P]
* USS &quot;APL-71&quot; [P]
==Mechanized artillery transports (APM)==
APM was the original hull designation of what became the Landing Ship, Dock (LSD).
==Convoy rescue craft (APR)==
APR was the original hull symbol intended for the patrol craft escorts that were converted to rescue crews from ships attacked in convoys, but they were instead redesignated as PCERs.
==Transport submarines (APS, APSS)==

==Transport and aircraft ferries (APV)==
* USS &quot;Kitty Hawk&quot; (APV-1), later AKV-1
* USS &quot;Hammondsport&quot; (APV-2), later AKV-2
* USS &quot;Lakehurst&quot; (APV-3)

==Repair ships (AR)==


* USS &quot;Medusa&quot; (AR-1)
* USS &quot;Bridgeport&quot; (AR-2), ex-ID-3009, later AD-10
* USS &quot;Prometheus&quot; (AR-3), ex-AC-2
* USS &quot;Vestal&quot; (AR-4), ex-AC-1
* USS &quot;Alcor&quot; (AR-10), ex-AG-34, later AD-34
&quot;Vulcan&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Vulcan&quot; (AR-5)
* USS &quot;Ajax&quot; (AR-6), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant 
* USS &quot;Hector&quot; (AR-7)
* USS &quot;Jason&quot; (AR-8), ex-ARH-1
&quot;Delta&quot;-class: MC type C3
* USS &quot;Delta&quot; (AR-9), ex-AK-29
* USS &quot;Briareus&quot; (AR-12)

&quot;Altair&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Rigel&quot; (AR-11), ex-AD-13, ARb-1

&quot;Amphion&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Amphion&quot; (AR-13)
* USS &quot;Cadmus&quot; (AR-14)
* USS &quot;Deucalion&quot; (AR-15), canceled 12 August 1945
* USS &quot;Mars&quot; (AR-16), canceled 12 August 1945
&quot;Xanthus&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1

* (AR-17) HMS Assistance (F173)
* (AR-18) HMS Diligence (F174)
* USS &quot;Xanthus&quot; (AR-19)
* USS &quot;Laertes&quot; (AR-20)
* USS &quot;Dionysus&quot; (AR-21)
&quot;Klondike&quot;-class: MC type C3
* USS &quot;Klondike&quot; (AR-22), ex-AD-22
* USS &quot;Markab&quot; (AR-23), ex-AD-21

&quot;Shenandoah&quot;-class: MA type C3
* USS &quot;Grand Canyon&quot; (AR-28), ex-AD-28

==Battle damage repair ships (ARB)==
* USS &quot;Aristaeus&quot; (ARB-1), ex-&quot;LST-329&quot;
* USS &quot;Oceanus&quot; (ARB-2), ex-&quot;LST-328&quot;
* USS &quot;Phaon&quot; (ARB-3), ex-&quot;LST-15&quot;, Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Zeus&quot; (ARB-4), ex-&quot;LST-132&quot;
* USS &quot;Midas&quot; (ARB-5), ex-&quot;LST-514&quot;
* USS &quot;Nestor&quot; (ARB-6), ex-&quot;LST-491&quot;, wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945
* USS &quot;Sarpedon&quot; (ARB-7), ex-&quot;LST-956&quot;
* USS &quot;Telamon&quot; (ARB-8), ex-&quot;LST-976&quot;, Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Ulysses&quot; (ARB-9), ex-&quot;LST-967&quot;
* USS &quot;Demeter&quot; (ARB-10), ex-&quot;LST-1121&quot;
* USS &quot;Diomedes&quot; (ARB-11), ex-&quot;LST-1119&quot;
* USS &quot;Helios&quot; (ARB-12), ex-&quot;LST-1127&quot;
* USS &quot;ARB-13&quot;, ex-&quot;LST-50&quot;
==Base repair ship (ARb)==
* USS &quot;Rigel&quot; (ARb-1), ex-AD-13, later AR-11

==Cable repair ships (ARC)==

* USS &quot;Portunus&quot; (ARC-1), ex-&quot;LSM–275&quot;
* USS &quot;Yamacraw&quot; (ARC-5), ex-ACM-9

&quot;Aeolus&quot;-class: MA type S4–SE2–BE1
* USS &quot;Aeolus&quot; (ARC-3), ex-AKA-47
* USS &quot;Thor&quot; (ARC-4), ex-AKA-49

&quot;Neptune&quot;-class: MA type S3-S2-BP1
* USNS &quot;Neptune&quot; (T-ARC-2)
* USNS &quot;Albert J. Myer&quot; (T-ARC-6)

&quot;Zeus&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Zeus&quot; (T-ARC-7) [A]

Two other Navy vessels performed cable support operations without the ARC hull classification: USS &quot;Nashawena&quot; (AG-142 / YAG-35) and &quot;Kailua&quot; (IX-71).

==Internal combustion engine repair ships (ARG)==
&quot;Aroostook&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Oglala&quot; (ARG-1), ex-CM-4

&quot;Luzon&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1

* USS &quot;Luzon&quot; (ARG-2)
* USS &quot;Mindanao&quot; (ARG-3)
* USS &quot;Tutuila&quot; (ARG-4)
* USS &quot;Oahu&quot; (ARG-5)
* USS &quot;Cebu&quot; (ARG-6), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Culebra Island&quot; (ARG-7)
* USS &quot;Leyte&quot; (ARG-8), renamed USS &quot;Maui&quot;
* USS &quot;Mona Island&quot; (ARG-9)
* USS &quot;Palawan&quot; (ARG-10)
* USS &quot;Samar&quot; (ARG-11)
* USS &quot;Kermit Roosevelt&quot; (ARG-16)
* USS &quot;Hooper Island&quot; (ARG-17)
&quot;Basilan&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1

* USS &quot;Basilan&quot; (ARG-12), ex-AG-68
* USS &quot;Burias&quot; (ARG-13), ex-AG-69
Other ships

* USS &quot;Dumaran&quot; (ARG-14), later ARV-1
* USS &quot;Masbate&quot; (ARG-15), later ARV-2
* USS &quot;Holland&quot; (ARG-18), ex-AS-3
* USS &quot;Beaver&quot; (ARG-19), ex-ID-2302, ex-AS-5
* USS &quot;Otus&quot; (ARG-20), ex-AS-20
==Heavy-hull repair ship (ARH)==
* USS &quot;Jason&quot; (ARH-1), later AR-8

==Landing craft repair ships (ARL)==
&quot;Achelous&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Achelous&quot; (ARL-1), ex-&quot;LST-10&quot;
* USS &quot;Amycus&quot; (ARL-2), ex-&quot;LST-489&quot;
* USS &quot;Agenor&quot; (ARL-3), ex-&quot;LST-490&quot;
* USS &quot;Adonis&quot; (ARL-4), ex-&quot;LST-83&quot;
* USS &quot;ARL-5&quot;, ex-&quot;LST-81&quot;
* USS &quot;ARL-6&quot;, ex-&quot;LST-82&quot;
* USS &quot;Atlas&quot; (ARL-7), ex-&quot;LST-231&quot;
* USS &quot;Egeria&quot; (ARL-8), ex-&quot;LST-136&quot;
* USS &quot;Endymion&quot; (ARL-9), ex-&quot;LST-513&quot;
* USS &quot;Coronis&quot; (ARL-10), ex-&quot;LST-1003&quot;
* USS &quot;Creon&quot; (ARL-11), ex-&quot;LST-1036&quot;, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Poseidon&quot; (ARL-12), ex-&quot;LST-1037&quot;
* USS &quot;Menelaus&quot; (ARL-13), ex-&quot;LST-971&quot;
* USS &quot;Minos&quot; (ARL-14), ex-&quot;LST-644&quot;
* USS &quot;Minotaur&quot; (ARL-15), ex-&quot;LST-645&quot;
* USS &quot;Myrmidon&quot; (ARL-16), ex-&quot;LST-948&quot;
* USS &quot;Numitor&quot; (ARL-17), ex-&quot;LST-954&quot;
* USS &quot;Pandemus&quot; (ARL-18), ex-&quot;LST-650&quot;
* USS &quot;Patroclus&quot; (ARL-19), ex-&quot;LST-955&quot;
* USS &quot;Pentheus&quot; (ARL-20), ex-&quot;LST-1115&quot;
* USS &quot;Proserpine&quot; (ARL-21), ex-&quot;LST-1116&quot;
* USS &quot;Romulus&quot; (ARL-22), ex-&quot;LST-961&quot;
* USS &quot;Satyr&quot; (ARL-23), ex-&quot;LST-852&quot;
* USS &quot;Sphinx&quot; (ARL-24), ex-&quot;LST-962&quot;, Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;ARL-25&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;Stentor&quot; (ARL-26), ex-&quot;LST-858&quot;
* USS &quot;Tantalus&quot; (ARL-27), ex-&quot;LST-1117&quot;
* USS &quot;Typhon&quot; (ARL-28), ex-&quot;LST-1118&quot;
* USS &quot;Amphitrite&quot; (ARL-29), ex-&quot;LST-1124&quot;
* USS &quot;Askari&quot; (ARL-30), ex-&quot;LST-1131&quot;, Operation Sandstone nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Bellerophon&quot; (ARL-31), ex-&quot;LST-1132&quot;
* USS &quot;Bellona&quot; (ARL-32), ex-&quot;LST-1136&quot;, grounded Iwo Jima 1 December 1945
* USS &quot;Chimaera&quot; (ARL-33), ex-&quot;LST-1137&quot;
* USS &quot;ARL-34&quot;, canceled
* USS &quot;Daedalus&quot; (ARL-35), ex-&quot;LST-1143&quot;
* USS &quot;Gordius&quot; (ARL-36), ex-&quot;LST-1145&quot;
* USS &quot;Indra&quot; (ARL-37), ex-&quot;LST-1147&quot;
* USS &quot;Krishna&quot; (ARL-38), ex-&quot;LST-1149&quot;
* USS &quot;Quirinus&quot; (ARL-39), ex-&quot;LST-1151&quot;
* USS &quot;Remus&quot; (ARL-40), ex-&quot;LST-453&quot;
* USS &quot;Achilles&quot; (ARL-41), ex-&quot;LST-455&quot;
* USS &quot;Aeolus&quot; (ARL-42), conversion from &quot;LST-310&quot; cancelled
* USS &quot;Cerberus&quot; (ARL-43), conversion from &quot;LST-316&quot;, cancelled
* USS &quot;Conus&quot; (ARL-44), conversion from &quot;LST-317&quot; cancelled
* USS &quot;Feronia&quot; (ARL-45), conversion from &quot;LST-332&quot; cancelled
* USS &quot;Chandra&quot; (ARL-46), conversion from &quot;LST-350&quot; cancelled
* USS &quot;Minerva&quot; (ARL-47), conversion from &quot;LST-374&quot; cancelled
==Rescue and salvage ships (ARS)==



&quot;Lapwing&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Viking&quot; (ARS-1), ex-AM-32
* USS &quot;Crusader&quot; (ARS-2), ex-AM-29
* USS &quot;Discoverer&quot; (ARS-3), ex-AM-38
* USS &quot;Redwing&quot; (ARS-4), ex-AM-48, sunk from an underwater explosion off Bizerte, North Africa 29 June 1943
* USS &quot;Warbler&quot; (ARS-11), ex-AM-53
* USS &quot;Willet&quot; (ARS-12), ex-AM-54
* USS &quot;Brant&quot; (ARS-32), ex-AM-24
&quot;Diver&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Diver&quot; (ARS-5)
* USS &quot;Escape&quot; (ARS-6)
* USS &quot;Grapple&quot; (ARS-7), Operation Dominic nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Preserver&quot; (ARS-8), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Shackle&quot; (ARS-9)
* USS &quot;Protector&quot; (ARS-14)
* USS &quot;Cable&quot; (ARS-19)
* USS &quot;Chain&quot; (ARS-20), later T-AGOR-17
* USS &quot;Curb&quot; (ARS-21)
* USS &quot;Current&quot; (ARS-22), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Deliver&quot; (ARS-23), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Grasp&quot; (ARS-24)
* USS &quot;Safeguard&quot; (ARS-25), Operation Dominic participant
* USS &quot;Seize&quot; (ARS-26)
* USS &quot;Snatch&quot; (ARS-27), later T-AGOR-18
* USS &quot;Valve&quot; (ARS-28)
* USS &quot;Vent&quot; (ARS-29)
* USS &quot;Clamp&quot; (ARS-33), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Gear&quot; (ARS-34)
Unknown class
* USS &quot;Assistance&quot; (ARS-10), not commissioned

&quot;Anchor&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Anchor&quot; (ARS-13)
* USS &quot;Extractor&quot; (ARS-15), sunk by friendly fire 24 January 1945, 6 killed
* USS &quot;Extricate&quot; (ARS-16), wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945
* USS &quot;Restorer&quot; (ARS-17)
&quot;Rescuer&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Rescuer&quot; (ARS-18), wrecked 31 December 1942 at Unimak Island in the Aleutians, 1 killed

Ex-commercial vessels

* USS &quot;Accelerate&quot; (ARS-30)
* USS &quot;Harjurand&quot; (ARS-31)
&quot;Weight&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Weight&quot; (ARS-35)
* USS &quot;Swivel&quot; (ARS-36)
&quot;Tackle&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Tackle&quot; (ARS-37), later ARST-4

&quot;Bolster&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Bolster&quot; (ARS-38), Operation Wigwam nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Conserver&quot; (ARS-39), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Hoist&quot; (ARS-40)
* USS &quot;Opportune&quot; (ARS-41)
* USS &quot;Reclaimer&quot; (ARS-42), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Recovery&quot; (ARS-43)
* USS &quot;Retriever&quot; (ARS-44), canceled 1945
* USS &quot;Skillful&quot; (ARS-45), canceled 1945
* USS &quot;Support&quot; (ARS-46), canceled 1945
* USS &quot;Toiler&quot; (ARS-47), canceled 1945
* USS &quot;Urgent&quot; (ARS-48), canceled 1945
* USS &quot;Willing&quot; (ARS-49), canceled 1945
&quot;Safeguard&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Safeguard&quot; (ARS-50) [I]
* USS &quot;Grasp&quot; (ARS-51) [A]
* USS &quot;Salvor&quot; (ARS-52) [A]
* USS &quot;Grapple&quot; (ARS-53) [I]
* ARS-54, canceled
==Salvage lifting vessels (ARSD)==
* USS &quot;Gypsy&quot; (ARS(D)-1), ex-&quot;LSM-549&quot;, nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Mender&quot; (ARS(D)-2), ex-&quot;LSM-550&quot;, nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Salvager&quot; (ARS(D)-3), ex-&quot;LSM-551&quot;, later &quot;YMLC-3&quot;
* USS &quot;Windlass&quot; (ARS(D)-4), ex-&quot;LSM-552&quot;, later &quot;YMLC-4&quot;
==Salvage craft tenders (ARST)==

* USS &quot;Laysan Island&quot; (ARST-1), ex-&quot;LST-1098&quot;
* USS &quot;Okala&quot; (ARST-2), ex-&quot;LST-1099&quot;
* USS &quot;Palmyra&quot; (ARST-3), ex-&quot;LST-1100&quot;, Operation Crossroads participant 
* USS &quot;Tackle&quot; (ARST-4), ex-ARS-37, later IX-217
==Aircraft repair ships (ARV, ARV(E), ARV(A))==

&quot;Chourre&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1
* USS &quot;Chourre&quot; (ARV-1) ex-ARG-14
* USS &quot;Webster&quot; (ARV-2) ex-ARG-15

&quot;Aventinus&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Aventinus&quot; (ARV(E)-3), ex-&quot;LST-1092&quot;
* USS &quot;Chloris&quot; (ARV(E)-4), ex-&quot;LST-1094&quot;

&quot;Fabius&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Fabius&quot; (ARV(A)-5), ex-&quot;LST-1093&quot;
* USS &quot;Megara&quot; (ARV(A)-6), ex-&quot;LST-1095&quot;

==Helicopter aircraft repair ships (ARVH)==
* USNS &quot;Corpus Christi Bay&quot; (T-ARVH-1), ex-AV-5

==Submarine tenders (AS)==



Ships which have functioned as submarine tenders without the AS designation include the four &quot;Arkansas&quot;-class monitors.

* USS &quot;Fulton&quot; (AS-1), later PG-49
* USS &quot;Bushnell&quot; (AS-2), later AG-32, AGS-5
* USS &quot;Holland&quot; (AS-3), later ARG-18
* USS &quot;Alert&quot; (AS-4)
* USS &quot;Beaver&quot; (AS-5), ex-ID-2302, later ARG-19
* USS &quot;Camden&quot; (AS-6), ex-ID-3143, later IX-42
* USS &quot;Rainbow&quot; (AS-7)
* USS &quot;Savannah&quot; (AS-8), ex-ID-3015
* USS &quot;Canopus&quot; (AS-9), ex-ID-4352-A, scuttled Manila Bay 9 April 1942
* USS &quot;Argonne&quot; (AS-10), ex-AP-4, later AG-31
&quot;Fulton&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Fulton&quot; (AS-11), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Sperry&quot; (AS-12)
* USS &quot;Bushnell&quot; (AS-15)
* USS &quot;Howard W. Gilmore&quot; (AS-16)
* USS &quot;Nereus&quot; (AS-17)
* USS &quot;Orion&quot; (AS-18)
* USS &quot;Proteus&quot; (AS-19), later IX-518
&quot;Griffin&quot;-class: MC type C3

* USS &quot;Griffin&quot; (AS-13)
* USS &quot;Pelias&quot; (AS-14)
Ex-commercial ships

* USS &quot;Otus&quot; (AS-20), later ARG-20
* USS &quot;Antaeus&quot; (AS-21), later AG-67, AH-18
* USS &quot;Euryale&quot; (AS-22): MC type C3
&quot;Aegir&quot;-class: MC type C3-S-A2

* USS &quot;Aegir&quot; (AS-23)
* USS &quot;Anthedon&quot; (AS-24)
* USS &quot;Apollo&quot; (AS-25)
* USS &quot;Clytie&quot; (AS-26)
Uncertain class

* USS &quot;Canopus&quot; (AS-27), canceled, later AD-33
* USS &quot;New England&quot; (AS-28), canceled, later AD-32
* (AS-29) and (AS-30) cancelled
&quot;Hunley&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Hunley&quot; (AS-31)
* USS &quot;Holland&quot; (AS-32)
&quot;Simon Lake&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Simon Lake&quot; (AS-33)
* USS &quot;Canopus&quot; (AS-34)
* (AS-35) cancelled
&quot;L. Y. Spear&quot;-class

* USS &quot;L. Y. Spear&quot; (AS-36)
* USS &quot;Dixon&quot; (AS-37)
* (AS-38) cancelled
&quot;Emory S. Land&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Emory S. Land&quot; (AS-39) [A]
* USS &quot;Frank Cable&quot; (AS-40) [A]
* USS &quot;McKee&quot; (AS-41) [I]
==Submarine rescue vessels (ASR)==

&quot;Lapwing&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Widgeon&quot; (ASR-1), ex-AM-22, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Falcon&quot; (ASR-2), ex-AM-28
* USS &quot;Chewink&quot; (ASR-3), ex-AM-39
* USS &quot;Mallard&quot; (ASR-4), ex-AM-44
* USS &quot;Ortolan&quot; (ASR-5), ex-AM-45
* USS &quot;Pigeon&quot; (ASR-6), ex-AM-47, sunk in air attack, Manila Bay, PI, 4 May 1942
&quot;Chanticleer&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Chanticleer&quot; (ASR-7)
* USS &quot;Coucal&quot; (ASR-8), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Florikan&quot; (ASR-9)
* USS &quot;Greenlet&quot; (ASR-10)
* USS &quot;Macaw&quot; (ASR-11), grounded 18 January 1944, sank 13 February 1944, 8 killed including 3 rescuers from Midway Island
* USS &quot;Kittiwake&quot; (ASR-13)
* USS &quot;Petrel&quot; (ASR-14)
* USS &quot;Sunbird&quot; (ASR-15)
* USS &quot;Tringa&quot; (ASR-16)
* USS &quot;Verdin&quot; (ASR-17), canceled 12 August 1945
* USS &quot;Windhover&quot; (ASR-18), canceled 12 August 1945
&quot;Penguin&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Penguin&quot; (ASR-12), ex-AT-99
* USS &quot;Bluebird&quot; (ASR-19), ex-ATF-164
* USS &quot;Skylark&quot; (ASR-20), ex-ATF-165, present during the loss of the USS &quot;Thresher&quot; (SSN-593)
&quot;Pigeon&quot;-class

:The &quot;Pigeon&quot;-class was designed to operate deep submergence rescue vehicles (DSRV).

* USS &quot;Pigeon&quot; (ASR-21)
* USS &quot;Ortolan&quot; (ASR-22)
==Cargo transport submarines (ASSA)==
==Fleet tugs (AT)==


* USS &quot;Patapsco&quot; (AT-10)
* USS &quot;Patuxent&quot; (AT-11)
* USS &quot;Wando&quot; (AT-17), later YT-123
* USS &quot;Chemung&quot; (AT-18), later YT-124
* USS &quot;Allegheny&quot; (AT-19)
* AT-40 to AT-45 – Canceled 1918
* USS &quot;Iroquois&quot; (AT-46)
* USS &quot;Osceola&quot; (AT-47)
* USS &quot;Peoria&quot; (AT-48)
* USS &quot;Piscataqua&quot; (AT-49)
* USS &quot;Potomac&quot; (AT-50)
* USS &quot;Uncas&quot; (AT-51), later YT-110
* USS &quot;Navajo&quot; (AT-52), later IX-56
* USS &quot;AT-53&quot;
* USS &quot;Conestoga&quot; (AT-54), ex-SP-1128, disappeared June 1921, 56 killed
* USS &quot;Genesee&quot; (AT-55), ex-SP-1116, scuttled 5 May 1942 at Corregidor
* USS &quot;Lykens&quot; (AT-56), ex-SP-876
* USS &quot;Sea Rover&quot; (AT-57), ex-SP-1014
* USS &quot;Undaunted&quot; (AT-58)
* USS &quot;Challenge&quot; (AT-59), ex-SP-1015, later YT-126, YTM-126
* USS &quot;Bay Spring&quot; (AT-60)
* USS &quot;Cahokia&quot; (AT-61)
* USS &quot;Tamaroa&quot; (AT-62), later YT-136
* USS &quot;Acushnet&quot; (AT-63)
* USS &quot;Tuscarora&quot; (AT-77)
* USS &quot;Carib&quot; (AT-78)
* USS &quot;Yuma&quot; (AT-79)
* USS &quot;Yaqui&quot; (AT-80)
* USS &quot;AT-119&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-120&quot;
* USS &quot;Maricopa&quot; (AT-146)
* USS &quot;Esselen&quot; (AT-147)
* USS &quot;Chetco&quot; (AT-166)
* USS &quot;Chatot&quot; (AT-167)
&quot;Sonoma&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Sonoma&quot; (AT-12)
* USS &quot;Ontario&quot; (AT-13)

&quot;Arapaho&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Arapaho&quot; (AT-14), later YT-121
* USS &quot;Mohave&quot; (AT-15), wrecked 13 February 1928, 3 killed
* USS &quot;Tillamook&quot; (AT-16), later YT-122
&quot;Bagaduce&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Sagamore&quot; (AT-20)
* USS &quot;Bagaduce&quot; (AT-21)
* USS &quot;Tadousac&quot; (AT-22)
* USS &quot;Kalmia&quot; (AT-23)
* USS &quot;Kewaydin&quot; (AT-24)
* USS &quot;Umpqua&quot; (AT-25)
* USS &quot;Wandank&quot; (AT-26)
* USS &quot;Tatnuck&quot; (AT-27)
* USS &quot;Sunnadin&quot; (AT-28)
* USS &quot;Mahopac&quot; (AT-29)
* USS &quot;Sciota&quot; (AT-30)
* USS &quot;Koka&quot; (AT-31), grounded 7 December 1937
* USS &quot;Napa&quot; (AT-32), scuttled to avoid capture 8 April 1942
* USS &quot;Pinola&quot; (AT-33)
* USS &quot;Algorma&quot; (AT-34)
* USS &quot;Carrabasset&quot; (AT-35)
* USS &quot;Contocook&quot; (AT-36)
* USS &quot;Iuka&quot; (AT-37)
* USS &quot;Keosanqua&quot; (AT-38)
* USS &quot;Montcalm&quot; (AT-39)
&quot;Cherokee&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Navajo&quot; (AT-64), sunk by torpedo 12 September 1943, 17 killed
* USS &quot;Seminole&quot; (AT-65), sunk by naval gunfire Tulagi 25 October 1942, 1 killed
* USS &quot;Cherokee&quot; (AT-66)
* USS &quot;Apache&quot; (AT-67)
* USS &quot;Arapaho&quot; (AT-68)
* USS &quot;Chippewa&quot; (AT-69)
* USS &quot;Choctaw&quot; (AT-70)
* USS &quot;Hopi&quot; (AT-71)
* USS &quot;Kiowa&quot; (AT-72)
* USS &quot;Menominee&quot; (AT-73)
* USS &quot;Pawnee&quot; (AT-74)
* USS &quot;Sioux&quot; (AT-75)
* USS &quot;Ute&quot; (AT-76)
* USS &quot;Bannock&quot; (AT-81)
* USS &quot;Carib&quot; (AT-82)
* USS &quot;Chickasaw&quot; (AT-83)
* USS &quot;Cree&quot; (AT-84)
* USS &quot;Lipan&quot; (AT-85)
* USS &quot;Mataco&quot; (AT-86)
* USS &quot;Moreno&quot; (AT-87)
* USS &quot;Narragansett&quot; (AT-88)
* USS &quot;Nauset&quot; (AT-89), sunk in air attack 9 September 1943, 18 killed or missing
* USS &quot;Pinto&quot; (AT-90)
* USS &quot;Seneca&quot; (AT-91)
* USS &quot;Tawasa&quot; (AT-92)
* USS &quot;Tekesta&quot; (AT-93)
* USS &quot;Yuma&quot; (AT-94)
* USS &quot;Zuni&quot; (AT-95)
* USS &quot;Chilula&quot; (AT-153)
&quot;Abnaki&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Abnaki&quot; (AT-96)
* USS &quot;Alsea&quot; (AT-97)
* USS &quot;Arikara&quot; (AT-98)
* USS &quot;Chetco&quot; (AT-99), later ASR-12
* USS &quot;Chowanoc&quot; (AT-100)
* USS &quot;Cocopa&quot; (AT-101)
* USS &quot;Hidatsa&quot; (AT-102)
* USS &quot;Hitchiti&quot; (AT-103)
* USS &quot;Jicarilla&quot; (AT-104)
* USS &quot;Moctobi&quot; (AT-105)
* USS &quot;Molala&quot; (AT-106)
* USS &quot;Munsee&quot; (AT-107)
* USS &quot;Pakana&quot; (AT-108)
* USS &quot;Potawatomi&quot; (AT-109)
* USS &quot;Quapaw&quot; (AT-110)
* USS &quot;Sarsi&quot; (AT-111)
* USS &quot;Seranno&quot; (AT-112)
* USS &quot;Takelma&quot; (AT-113)
* USS &quot;Tawakoni&quot; (AT-114)
* USS &quot;Tenino&quot; (AT-115)
* USS &quot;Tolowa&quot; (AT-116)
* USS &quot;Wateree&quot; (AT-117)
* USS &quot;Wenatchee&quot; (AT-118)
* USS &quot;Achomawi&quot; (AT-148)
* USS &quot;Atakapa&quot; (AT-149)
* USS &quot;Avoyel&quot; (AT-150)
* USS &quot;Chawasha&quot; (AT-151)
* USS &quot;Cahuilla&quot; (AT-152)
* USS &quot;Chimariko&quot; (AT-154)
* USS &quot;Cusabo&quot; (AT-155)
* USS &quot;Luiseno&quot; (AT-156)
* USS &quot;Nipmuc&quot; (AT-157)
* USS &quot;Mosopelea&quot; (AT-158)
* USS &quot;Paiute&quot; (AT-159)
* USS &quot;Papago&quot; (AT-160)
* USS &quot;Salinan&quot; (AT-161)
* USS &quot;Shakori&quot; (AT-162)
* USS &quot;Utina&quot; (AT-163)
* USS &quot;Yurok&quot; (AT-164)
* USS &quot;Yustaga&quot; (AT-165)
&quot;Sotoyomo&quot;-class
* USS &quot;AT-121&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-122&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-123&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-124&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-125&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-126&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-127&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-128&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-129&quot;
* USS &quot;AT-130&quot;
&quot;Lapwing&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Bobolink&quot; (AT-131), ex-AM-20
* USS &quot;Brant&quot; (AT-132), ex-AM-24, later ARS-32
* USS &quot;Cormorant&quot; (AT-133), ex-AM-40
* USS &quot;Grebe&quot; (AT-134), ex-AM-43, grounded 6 December 1942
* USS &quot;Kingfisher&quot; (AT-135), ex-AM-25
* USS &quot;Oriole&quot; (AT-136), ex-AM-7
* USS &quot;Owl&quot; (AT-137), ex-AM-2
* USS &quot;Partridge&quot; (AT-138), ex-AM-16
* USS &quot;Rail&quot; (AT-139), ex-AM-26
* USS &quot;Robin&quot; (AT-140), ex-AM-3
* USS &quot;Seagull&quot; (AT-141), ex-AM-30
* USS &quot;Tern&quot; (AT-142), ex-AM-31
* USS &quot;Turkey&quot; (AT-143), ex-AM-13
* USS &quot;Vireo&quot; (AT-144), ex-AM-52
* USS &quot;Woodcock&quot; (AT-145), ex-AM-14
* USS &quot;Lark&quot; (AT-168), ex-AM-21
* USS &quot;Whippoorwill&quot; (AT-169), ex-AM-35
==Auxiliary ocean tugs (ATA, T-ATA)==
The first ten boats of the &quot;Sotoyomo&quot;-class were originally classed as Fleet Tugs (AT), as were ATA-146, ATA-166, and ATA-167.

&quot;Sotoyomo&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Sotoyomo&quot; (ATA-121)
* USS &quot;ATA-122&quot;
* USS &quot;Iuka&quot; (ATA-123)
* USS &quot;ATA-124&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-125&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-126&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-127&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-128&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-170&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-171&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-172&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-173&quot;
* USS &quot;Wateree&quot; (ATA-174)/(1)|USNS &quot;Wateree&quot; (T-ATA-174|1))
* USS &quot;Sonoma&quot; (ATA-175)
* USS &quot;Tonkawa&quot; (ATA-176)/(1)|USNS &quot;Tonkawa&quot; (T-ATA-176|1))
* USS &quot;ATA-177&quot;
* USS &quot;Tunica&quot; (ATA-178)
* USS &quot;Allegheny&quot; (ATA-179)
* USS &quot;ATA-180&quot;, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Accokeek&quot; (ATA-181)
* USS &quot;Unadilla&quot; (ATA-182)
* USS &quot;Nottoway&quot; (ATA-183)
* USS &quot;Kalmia&quot; (ATA-184)
* USS &quot;Koka&quot; (ATA-185), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Cahokia&quot; (ATA-186)
* USS &quot;Salish&quot; (ATA-187), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Penobscot&quot; (ATA-188)
* USS &quot;Reindeer&quot; (ATA-189)
* USS &quot;Samoset&quot; (ATA-190)
* USS &quot;ATA-191&quot;
* USS &quot;Tillamook&quot; (ATA-192), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Stallion&quot; (ATA-193)
* USS &quot;Bagaduce&quot; (ATA-194)
* USS &quot;Tatnuck&quot; (ATA-195)
* USS &quot;Mahopac&quot; (ATA-196)
* USS &quot;Sunnadin&quot; (ATA-197)
* USS &quot;Keosanqua&quot; (ATA-198)
* USS &quot;Undaunted&quot; (ATA-199)
* USS &quot;ATA-200&quot;
* USS &quot;Challenge&quot; (ATA-201)
* USS &quot;Wampanoag&quot; (ATA-202)
* USS &quot;Navigator&quot; (ATA-203)
* USS &quot;Wandank&quot; (ATA-204)
* USS &quot;Sciota&quot; (ATA-205)
* USS &quot;Pinola&quot; (ATA-206)
* USS &quot;Geronimo&quot; (ATA-207)
* USS &quot;Sagamore&quot; (ATA-208)
* USS &quot;Umpqua&quot; (ATA-209)
* USS &quot;Catawba&quot; (ATA-210)
* USS &quot;Navajo&quot; (ATA-211)
* USS &quot;Algorma&quot; (ATA-212)
* USS &quot;Keywadin&quot; (ATA-213)
&quot;ATA-214&quot;-class

* USS &quot;ATA-214&quot;, ex-YN-94/AN-70
* USS &quot;ATA-215&quot;, ex-YN-95/AN-71
* USS &quot;ATA-216&quot;, ex-YN-96/AN-72
* USS &quot;ATA-217&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-218&quot;
Other classes

* USS &quot;Maricopa&quot; (ATA-146)
* USS &quot;Chetco&quot; (ATA-166)
* USS &quot;Chatot&quot; (ATA-167)
* USS &quot;ATA-219&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-220&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-221&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-222&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-223&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-224&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-225&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-226&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-227&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-228&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-229&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-230&quot;
* ATA-231 to ATA-233 – Cancelled 1945-1947
* USS &quot;ATA-234&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-235&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-236&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-237&quot;
* USS &quot;ATA-238&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-ATA-239&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-ATA-240&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-ATA-241&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-ATA-242&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-ATA-243&quot;
* USNS &quot;T-ATA-244&quot;
* USS &quot;Tuscarora&quot; (ATA-245)
==Fleet ocean tugs (ATF, T-ATF)==
All tugs of the &quot;Cherokee&quot; and &quot;Abnaki&quot; classes were reclassed from Fleet Tugs (AT) on 15 May 1944.

&quot;Cherokee&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Cherokee&quot; (ATF-66)
* USS &quot;Apache&quot; (ATF-67), Operation Castle nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Arapaho&quot; (ATF-68)
* USS &quot;Chippewa&quot; (ATF-69)
* USS &quot;Choctaw&quot; (ATF-70)
* USS &quot;Hopi&quot; (ATF-71)
* USS &quot;Kiowa&quot; (ATF-72)
* USS &quot;Menominee&quot; (ATF-73)
* USS &quot;Pawnee&quot; (ATF-74)
* USS &quot;Sioux&quot; (ATF-75), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Ute&quot; (ATF-76), Operation Dominic nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Bannock&quot; (ATF-81)
* USS &quot;Carib&quot; (ATF-82)
* USS &quot;Chickasaw&quot; (ATF-83), nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Cree&quot; (ATF-84), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Lipan&quot; (ATF-85), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Mataco&quot; (ATF-86)
* USS &quot;Moreno&quot; (ATF-87)
* USS &quot;Narragansett&quot; (ATF-88)
* USS &quot;Nauset&quot; (ATF-89)
* USS &quot;Pinto&quot; (ATF-90)
* USS &quot;Seneca&quot; (ATF-91)
* USS &quot;Tawasa&quot; (ATF-92), Operation Wigwam nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Tekesta&quot; (ATF-93)
* USS &quot;Yuma&quot; (ATF-94), Operation Ivy nuclear test
* USS &quot;Zuni&quot; (ATF-95)
* USS &quot;Chilula&quot; (AT-153)
&quot;Abnaki&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Abnaki&quot; (ATF-96)
* USS &quot;Alsea&quot; (ATF-97)
* USS &quot;Arikara&quot; (ATF-98), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Chowanoc&quot; (ATF-100), Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Cocopa&quot; (ATF-101), Operation Castle participant
* USS &quot;Hidatsa&quot; (ATF-102)
* USS &quot;Hitchiti&quot; (ATF-103), Operation Dominic participant
* USS &quot;Jicarilla&quot; (ATF-104)
* USS &quot;Moctobi&quot; (ATF-105), Project SHAD chemical/biological test participant
* USS &quot;Molala&quot; (ATF-106), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Munsee&quot; (ATF-107), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Pakana&quot; (ATF-108)
* USS &quot;Potawatomi&quot; (ATF-109)
* USS &quot;Quapaw&quot; (ATF-110)
* USS &quot;Sarsi&quot; (ATF-111), sunk by mine between Hungnam and Wonsan, Korea, 27 August 1952, 4 killed
* USS &quot;Seranno&quot; (ATF-112)
* USS &quot;Takelma&quot; (ATF-113), Operation Dominic participant
* USS &quot;Tawakoni&quot; (ATF-114) nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Tenino&quot; (ATF-115)
* USS &quot;Tolowa&quot; (ATF-116)
* USS &quot;Wateree&quot; (ATF-117), wrecked by Typhoon Louise Okinawa October 1945, 8 killed
* USS &quot;Wenatchee&quot; (ATF-118), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Achomawi&quot; (ATF-148), Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;Atakapa&quot; (ATF-149)
* USS &quot;Avoyel&quot; (ATF-150)
* USS &quot;Chawasha&quot; (ATF-151)
* USS &quot;Cahuilla&quot; (ATF-152)
* USS &quot;Chimariko&quot; (ATF-154)
* USS &quot;Cusabo&quot; (ATF-155)
* USS &quot;Luiseno&quot; (ATF-156)
* USS &quot;Nipmuc&quot; (ATF-157)
* USS &quot;Mosopelea&quot; (ATF-158)
* USS &quot;Paiute&quot; (ATF-159)
* USS &quot;Papago&quot; (ATF-160)
* USS &quot;Salinan&quot; (ATF-161)
* USS &quot;Shakori&quot; (ATF-162)
* USS &quot;Utina&quot; (ATF-163)
* USS &quot;Yurok&quot; (ATF-164), later ASR-19
* USS &quot;Yustaga&quot; (ATF-165), later ASR-20

&quot;Powhatan&quot;-class

* USNS &quot;Powhatan&quot; (T-ATF-166)
* USNS &quot;Narragansett&quot; (T-ATF-167)
* USNS &quot;Catawba&quot; (T-ATF-168) [A]
* USNS &quot;Navajo&quot; (T-ATF-169) [I]
* USNS &quot;Mohawk&quot; (T-ATF-170) [I]
* USNS &quot;Sioux&quot; (T-ATF-171) [I]
* USNS &quot;Apache&quot; (T-ATF-172) [I]
==Fleet tugs, old (ATO)==
The Fleet Tug Old classification was created on 15 May 1944, several Fleet Tugs received this classification at this time without a change of hull number.
* USS &quot;Allegheny&quot; (ATO-19)
* USS &quot;Undaunted&quot; (ATO-58)
* USS &quot;Acushnet&quot; (ATO-63)
* USS &quot;Esselin&quot; (ATO-147)
&quot;Sonoma&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Sonoma&quot; (ATO-12), sunk by kamikaze San Pedro Bay, Leyte Gulf, Philippines, 24 October 1944
* USS &quot;Ontario&quot; (ATO-13)

&quot;Bagaduce&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Sagamore&quot; (AT-20)
* USS &quot;Bagaduce&quot; (ATO-21)
* USS &quot;Kalmia&quot; (ATO-23)
* USS &quot;Kewaydin&quot; (ATO-24)
* USS &quot;Umpqua&quot; (ATO-25)
* USS &quot;Wandank&quot; (ATO-26)
* USS &quot;Tatnuck&quot; (ATO-27)
* USS &quot;Sunnadin&quot; (ATO-28)
* USS &quot;Mahopac&quot; (ATO-29)
* USS &quot;Sciota&quot; (ATO-30)
* USS &quot;Pinola&quot; (ATO-33)
* USS &quot;Algorma&quot; (ATO-34)
* USS &quot;Iuka&quot; (ATO-37)
* USS &quot;Keosanqua&quot; (ATO-38)
* USS &quot;Montcalm&quot; (ATO-39)
&quot;Lapwing&quot;-class

* USS &quot;Bobolink&quot; (ATO-131)
* USS &quot;Cormorant&quot; (ATO-133)
* USS &quot;Kingfisher&quot; (ATO-135)
* USS &quot;Oriole&quot; (ATO-136)
* USS &quot;Owl&quot; (ATO-137)
* USS &quot;Partridge&quot; (ATO-138), sunk by torpedo off Normandy, France, 11 June 1944, 5 killed
* USS &quot;Rail&quot; (ATO-139)
* USS &quot;Robin&quot; (ATO-140)
* USS &quot;Seagull&quot; (ATO-141)
* USS &quot;Tern&quot; (ATO-142)
* USS &quot;Turkey&quot; (ATO-143)
* USS &quot;Vireo&quot; (ATO-144)
* USS &quot;Woodcock&quot; (ATO-145)
* USS &quot;Lark&quot; (ATO-168)
* USS &quot;Whippoorwill&quot; (ATO-169)
==Rescue tugs (ATR)==
&quot;ATR-1&quot; class

* USS &quot;ATR-1&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-2&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-3&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-4&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-5&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-6&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-7&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-8&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-9&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-10&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-11&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-12&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-13&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-14&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-15&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-16&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-17&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-18&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-19&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-20&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-21&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-22&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-23&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-24&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-25&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-26&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-27&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-28&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-29&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-30&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-31&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-32&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-33&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-34&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-35&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-36&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-37&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-38&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-39&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-40&quot;, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;ATR-41&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-42&quot;
&quot;Sotoyomo&quot;-class

* USS &quot;ATR-43&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-44&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-45&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-46&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-47&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-51&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-52&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-53&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-54&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-55&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-56&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-57&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-58&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-59&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-60&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-61&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-62&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-63&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-64&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-65&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-66&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-67&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-68&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-69&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-70&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-71&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-72&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-73&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-74&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-75&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-76&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-77&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-78&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-79&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-80&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-81&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-82&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-83&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-84&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-85&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-86&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-87&quot;, Operation Crossroads participant
* USS &quot;ATR-88&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-89&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-90&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-91&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-92&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-93&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-94&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-95&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-96&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-97&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-98&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-99&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-100&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-101&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-102&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-103&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-104&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-105&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-106&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-107&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-108&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-109&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-110&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-111&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-112&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-113&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-114&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-115&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-116&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-117&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-118&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-119&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-120&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-121&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-122&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-123&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-124&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-125&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-126&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-127&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-128&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-129&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-130&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-131&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-132&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-133&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-134&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-135&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-136&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-137&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-138&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-139&quot;
* USS &quot;ATR-140&quot;
==Salvage and rescue ships (ATS)==
&quot;Edenton&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Edenton&quot; (ATS-1), later USCGC &quot;Alex Haley&quot; (WMEC-39).
* USS &quot;Beaufort&quot; (ATS-2)
* USS &quot;Brunswick&quot; (ATS-3)

ATS-4 and ATS-5 skipped

&quot;Navajo&quot;-class
* USNS &quot;Navajo&quot; (T-ATS-6) [P]
* USNS &quot;Cherokee Nation&quot; (T-ATS-7) [P]
* USNS &quot;Saginaw Ojibwe Anishinabek&quot; (T-ATS-8) [P]
* USNS &quot;Lenni Lenape&quot; (T-ATS-7) [P]
* USNS &quot;Muscogee Creek Nation&quot; (T-ATS-10) [P]
* USNS &quot;Billy Frank Jr.&quot; (T-ATS-11) [P]
* USNS &quot;Solomon Atkinson&quot; (T-ATS-12) [P]
* USNS &quot;James D. Fairbanks&quot; (T-ATS-13) [P]
* USNS &quot;Narragansett&quot; (T-ATS-14) [P]
* (T-ATS-15) [P]

==Seaplane tenders (AV)==



Ships which have functioned as seaplane tenders without the AV designation include the USS Mississippi (BB-23) in 1914, the USS Ajax (AG-15) in 1924-1925, and the USS &quot;Christiana&quot; (IX-80 / YAG-32) in WW2.

&quot;Wright&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Wright&quot; (AV-1), ex-AZ-1, later AG-79

&quot;Jason&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Jason&quot; (AV-2), ex-AC-12

&quot;Langley&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Langley&quot; (AV-3), ex-AC-3, CV-1, scuttled Java Sea 27 February 1942 after air attack, 16 killed outright, possibly hundreds killed after rescue ship sunk

&quot;Curtiss&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Curtiss&quot; (AV-4), nuclear tests participant
* USS &quot;Albemarle&quot; (AV-5), nuclear tests participant, later T-ARVH-1 as &quot;Corpus Christi Bay&quot;

&quot;Patoka&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Patoka&quot; (AV-6), ex-AO–9, later AG–125

&quot;Currituck&quot; class
* USS &quot;Currituck&quot; (AV-7)
* USS &quot;Norton Sound&quot; (AV-11), later AVM-1
* USS &quot;Pine Island&quot; (AV-12)
* USS &quot;Salisbury Sound&quot; (AV-13)

&quot;Tangier&quot;-class: MC type C3
* USS &quot;Tangier&quot; (AV-8)
* USS &quot;Hobe Sound&quot; (AV-20), canceled while under construction 1944

&quot;Pocomoke&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Pocomoke&quot; (AV-9)

&quot;Chandeleur&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Chandeleur&quot; (AV-10)

&quot;Kenneth Whiting&quot;-class: MC type C3 
* USS &quot;Kenneth Whiting&quot; (AV-14), Operation Crossroads participant 
* USS &quot;Hamlin&quot; (AV-15)
* USS &quot;St George&quot; (AV-16)
* USS &quot;Cumberland Sound&quot; (AV-17), Operation Crossroads participant 
* USS &quot;Townsend&quot; (AV-18), cancelled while under construction 1945

unknown class
* USS &quot;Calibogue&quot; (AV-19), canceled while under construction 1944
* (AV-22), conversion from unassigned ship canceled
* (AV-23), conversion from unassigned ship canceled

&quot;Ashland&quot;-class
* USS Ashland (AV-21), conversion from LSD-1 canceled 1959

==Advance aviation base ships (AVB, T-AVB)==
* USS &quot;Alameda County&quot; (AVB-1), ex-&quot;LST-32&quot;
* USS &quot;Tallahatchie County&quot; (AVB-2), ex-&quot;LST-1154&quot;
&quot;Wright&quot;-class: MA type C5-S-78

* [R]
* USNS &quot;Curtiss&quot; (T-AVB-4) [R]
==Seaplane catapult, light (AVC)==
* AVC-1

==Destroyer seaplane tenders (AVD)==

&quot;Clemson&quot; class
:These ships were formerly Destroyers (DD), some of which had been converted to Small seaplane tenders (AVP) and then reclassified as AVD. Seven would later be converted to High-speed transports (APD).
* , former AVP-14
* , former AVP-15, later APD-27
* , former AVP-16, later APD-33
* , former AVP-17, later APD-31
* , former AVP-18, later APD-32
* , former AVP-19
* , former AVP-20
* , former DD-251, later APD-34
* , former DD-255, later APD-35
* , former DD-267
* , former DD-270
* , former DD-260
* USS &quot;Greene&quot; (AVD-13), former DD-266, later APD-36
* , former DD-237

==Auxiliary aircraft escort vessels (AVG)==

The Auxiliary aircraft escort vessels (AVG) were redesignated Auxiliary aircraft carriers (ACV) on 20 August 1942 and then Escort aircraft carriers (CVE) on 15 July 1943.

==Guided missile ships (AVM)==
* USS &quot;Norton Sound&quot; (AVM-1), ex-AV-11, nuclear tests participant

==Small seaplane tenders (AVP)==

&quot;Lapwing&quot;-class
* USS &quot;Lapwing&quot; (AVP-1), former AM-1
* USS &quot;Heron&quot; (AVP-2), former AM-10
* USS &quot;Thrush&quot; (AVP-3), former AM-18
* USS &quot;Avocet&quot; (AVP-4), former AM-19
* USS &quot;Teal&quot; (AVP-5), former AM-23
* USS &quot;Pelican&quot; (AVP-6), former AM-27
* USS &quot;Swan&quot; (AVP-7), former AM-34
* USS &quot;Gannet&quot; (AVP-8), former AM-41, torpedoed 7 June 1942, 16 killed
* USS &quot;Sandpiper&quot; (AVP-9), former AM-51
&quot;Clemson&quot;-class
:The &quot;Clemson&quot;-class of Small seaplane tenders (AVP) were reclassified as Destroyer seaplane tenders (AVD) in 1940; they were originally Destroyers (DD).
* USS &quot;Childs&quot; (AVP-14), former DD-241, later AVD-1
* USS &quot;Williamson&quot; (AVP-15), former DD-244, later AVD-2
* USS &quot;George E. Badger&quot; (AVP-16), former DD-196, CG-16 (USCG), later AVD-3
* USS &quot;Clemson&quot; (AVP-17), former DD-186, later AVD-4
* USS &quot;Goldsborough&quot; (AVP-18), former DD-188, later AVD-5
* USS &quot;Hulbert&quot; (AVP-19), former DD-342, later AVD-6
* USS &quot;William B. Preston&quot; (AVP-20), former DD-344, later AVD-7

&quot;Barnegat&quot;-class
:The &quot;Barnegat&quot; class ships were the first purpose-built AVPs.
* USS &quot;Barnegat&quot; (AVP-10)
* USS &quot;Biscayne&quot; (AVP-11), later AGC-18
* USS &quot;Casco&quot; (AVP-12)
* USS &quot;Mackinac&quot; (AVP-13)
* USS &quot;Hunboldt&quot; (AVP-21), briefly AG-121
* USS &quot;Matagorda&quot; (AVP-22), briefly AG-122
* USS &quot;Abescon&quot; (AVP-23)
* USS &quot;Chincoteague&quot; (AVP-24)
* USS &quot;Coos Bay&quot; (AVP-25)
* USS &quot;Half Moon&quot; (AVP-26)
* USS &quot;Mobjack&quot; (AVP-27), later AGP-7
* USS &quot;Oyster Bay&quot; (AVP-28), briefly AGP-6
* USS &quot;Rockaway&quot; (AVP-29), briefly AG-123
* USS &quot;San Pablo&quot; (AVP-30), later AGS-30
* USS &quot;Unimak&quot; (AVP-31)
* USS &quot;Yakutat&quot; (AVP-32)
* USS &quot;Barataria&quot; (AVP-33)
* USS &quot;Bering Strait&quot; (AVP-34)
* USS &quot;Castle Rock&quot; (AVP-35)
* USS &quot;Cook Inlet&quot; (AVP-36)
* USS &quot;Corson&quot; (AVP-37)
* USS &quot;Duxbury Bay&quot; (AVP-38)
* USS &quot;Gardiners Bay&quot; (AVP-39), Operation Sandstone participant
* USS &quot;Floyds Bay&quot; (AVP-40)
* USS &quot;Greenwich Bay&quot; (AVP-41)
* USS &quot;Hatteras&quot; (AVP-42), canceled
* USS &quot;Hempstead&quot; (AVP-43), canceled
* USS &quot;Kamishak&quot; (AVP-44), canceled
* USS &quot;Magothy&quot; (AVP-45), canceled
* USS &quot;Matanzas&quot; (AVP-46), canceled
* USS &quot;Metomkin&quot; (AVP-47), canceled
* USS &quot;Onslow&quot; (AVP-48)
* USS &quot;Orca&quot; (AVP-49), Operation Crossroads participant 
* USS &quot;Rehoboth&quot; (AVP-50), later AGS-50
* USS &quot;San Carlos&quot; (AVP-51), later T-AGOR-1
* USS &quot;Shelikof&quot; (AVP-52)
* USS &quot;Suisin&quot; (AVP-53)
* USS &quot;Timbalier&quot; (AVP-54)
* USS &quot;Valcour&quot; (AVP-55), later AGF-1
* USS &quot;Wachapreague&quot; (AVP-56), later AGP-8
* USS &quot;Willoughby&quot; (AVP-57), later AGP-9

==Aviation stores issue ships (AVS)==

* USS &quot;Supply&quot; (AVS-1), ex-IX-147
* USS &quot;Fortune&quot; (AVS-2), ex-IX-146

&quot;Grumium&quot;-class: MC type EC2-S-C1
* USS &quot;Grumium&quot; (AVS-3), ex-AK-112, ex-IX-174
* USS &quot;Allioth&quot; (AVS-4), ex-AK-109, ex-IX-204

&quot;Gwinnett&quot;-class: MC type C1-M-AV1
* USS &quot;Gwinnett&quot; (AVS-5), ex-AK-185, ex-AG-92
* USS &quot;Nicollet&quot; (AVS-6), ex-AK-199, ex-AG-93
* USS &quot;Pontotoc&quot; (AVS-7), ex-AK-206, ex-AG-94

Other
* USS &quot;Jupiter&quot; (AVS-8), ex-AK-43

==Aircraft transports (AVT)==
All of these aircraft carriers received this classification while in reserve in 1959, 1960, and 1961, and none ever operated as Aircraft Transports after receiving it.

* USS &quot;Cowpens&quot; (AVT-1), ex-CVL-25
* USS &quot;Monterey&quot; (AVT-2), ex-CVL-26
* USS &quot;Cabot&quot; (AVT-3), ex-CVL-28, to Spain as &quot;Dédalo&quot; 1967
* USS &quot;Bataan&quot; (AVT-4), ex-CVL-29
* USS &quot;San Jacinto&quot; (AVT-5), ex-CVL-30


* USS &quot;Saipan&quot; (AVT-6), ex-CVL-48, later CC-3, then AGMR-2 as &quot;Arlington&quot;
* USS &quot;Wright&quot; (AVT-7), ex-CVL-49, later CC-2


* USS &quot;Franklin&quot; (AVT-8), ex-CV-13
* USS &quot;Bunker Hill&quot; (AVT-9), ex-CV-17
* USS &quot;Leyte&quot; (AVT-10), ex-CV-32
* USS &quot;Philippine Sea&quot; (AVT-11), ex-CV-47
* USS &quot;Tarawa&quot; (AVT-12), ex-CV-40
==Auxiliary aircraft landing training ships (AVT)==

* USS &quot;Lexington&quot; (AVT-16), ex CVT-16
* USS &quot;Forrestal&quot; (AVT-59), ex CVA-59
==Distilling ships (AW)==

&quot;Stag&quot;-class: MC type Z-ET1-S-C3

* USS &quot;Stag&quot; (AW-1), ex-IX-128
* USS &quot;Wildcat&quot; (AW-2), ex-IX-130, Operation Crossroads nuclear test participant
&quot;Pasig&quot;-class: MC type T2-SE-A2

* USS &quot;Pasig&quot; (AW-3), ex-AO–91, Operation Sandstone nuclear test participant
* USS &quot;Abatan&quot; (AW-4), ex-AO–92
==Lighter-than-air aircraft tender (AZ)==
* USS &quot;Wright&quot; (AZ-1), later AV-1
* USS &quot;Patoka&quot; (AO-9) operated as a lighter-than-air aircraft tender from 1924 to 1933, but never received the AZ classification

==Miscellaneous classifications (IX)==
==Yard and district craft (Y)==
==Pre-1920 craft==
===Screw tugs===

===World War I (ID) series===
Civilian cargo ships, tankers, transports, etc., were registered during World War I for potential use and given &quot;ID&quot; identification numbers in the &quot;ID/SP&quot; numbering series.
==See also==
* Auxiliary cruiser (which is, despite its name, a type of warship (cruiser), not an auxiliary)
* Glossary of watercraft types in service of the United States
* List of current ships of the United States Navy
* List of United States Navy ships
* - abbreviated list
* - detailed list
* List of United States Naval Air Stations, including auxiliary airfields
* Military Auxiliary Radio System, Navy-Marine Corp branch operated 1962-2015
* Military Sealift Command, current operator of most US Navy auxiliaries
* Strategic sealift ships
* United States Coast Guard Auxiliary (an auxiliary organization of support personnel, not a type of ship)

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Footnotes ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 

== External links ==
Museum ships
* USNS &quot;Carthage&quot; (T-AG-185) / SS &quot;American Victory&quot;, American Victory Ship &amp; Museum, Tampa, FL
* USS &quot;Cahuilla&quot; (ATF-152), San Pedro, Buenos Aires Province, Argentina
* USS &quot;Potomac&quot; (AG-25) - Association for the Preservation of the Presidential Yacht Potomac, Oakland, CA
* USS &quot;Pueblo&quot; (AGER-2), Pyongyang, North Korea
* USS &quot;Wampanoag&quot; (ATA-202) - ATA-202 Foundation, Tacoma, WA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1474233" start="10" end="74" title="List of auxiliaries of the United States Navy" label="list of [[Auxiliary ship|auxiliaries]] of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="162" end="180" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601889" start="285" end="326" title="List of United States Navy hospital ships" label="List of United States Navy hospital ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890838" start="331" end="364" title="List of United States Navy oilers" label="List of United States Navy oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708390" start="516" end="542" title="hull classification symbol" label="hull classification symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623495" start="709" end="732" title="List of yard and district craft of the United States Navy" label="Yard and district craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326941" start="1466" end="1499" title="United States Maritime Commission" label="United States Maritime Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="1618" end="1655" title="United States Maritime Administration" label="United States Maritime Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2022" end="2033" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2055" end="2112" title="Section patrol craft#Identification numbers (ID)" label="Section patrol (SP) and identification number (ID) system"/>
<link wikidata="Q115766178" start="2404" end="2431" title="List of Emergency Fleet Corporation ship designs" label="Emergency Fleet Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2486" end="2521" title="Hog Islander#Notable Hog Islanders" label="even fewer became naval auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2553" end="2565" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322779" start="2885" end="2914" title="USS Dobbin (AD-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dobbin&amp;quot; (AD-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875497" start="2919" end="2949" title="USS Whitney (AD-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whitney&amp;quot; (AD-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871685" start="2967" end="2996" title="USS Medusa (AR-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Medusa&amp;quot; (AR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002108" start="3023" end="3053" title="USS Holland (AS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Holland&amp;quot; (AS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284912" start="3464" end="3487" title="Dixie-class destroyer tender" label="&amp;quot;Dixie&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875164" start="3518" end="3536" title="USS Vulcan (AR-5)" label="&amp;quot;Vulcan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642311" start="3578" end="3602" title="Fulton-class submarine tender" label="&amp;quot;Fulton&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547391" start="3637" end="3656" title="USS Curtiss (AV-4)" label="&amp;quot;Curtiss&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195180" start="3713" end="3740" title="Currituck class seaplane tender" label="&amp;quot;Currituck&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3968" end="3989" title="Net laying ship#Changing requirements" label="changing requirements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4087" end="4116" title="List of United States Navy amphibious warfare ships#Vehicle landing ship (LSV)" label="Landing ships, vehicle (LSV)s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4202" end="4260" title="United States Maritime Commission#World War II" label="Maritime Commission (MarCom, later MarAd) standard designs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4346" end="4371" title="Type B ship#Barracks Barge" label="58 Type B barracks barges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4383" end="4399" title="Type C1 ship#Ships in class" label="83 Type C1 ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4469" end="4485" title="Type C2 ship#Ships in class" label="59 Type C2 ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4529" end="4545" title="Type C3 ship#Ships in type" label="63 Type C3 ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4581" end="4597" title="Type C4 ship#List of Type C4 ships" label="42 Type C4 ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4619" end="4645" title="Liberty ship#Ships in class" label="107 Type EC2 Liberty ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4699" end="4723" title="Liberty ship#Ships in class" label="2 Type ET1 Liberty ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4736" end="4751" title="Type R ship#Ships in class" label="26 Type R ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4762" end="4790" title="List of United States Navy LSTs#By class" label="88 Type S3 ships (most LSTs)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4869" end="4882" title="T1 tanker#US classes" label="76 T1 tankers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4894" end="4906" title="T2 tanker#T2-SE-A2 and -A3" label="4 T2 tankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098321" start="4928" end="4943" title="Type V ship" label="79 Type V ships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4954" end="4979" title="Victory ship#Ships in class" label="34 Type VC2 Victory ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q15919349" start="4987" end="4992" title="Boulder Victory-class cargo ships" label="29 AK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601881" start="5002" end="5008" title="List of United States Navy Landing Ship Mediums" label="4 LSMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5055" end="5063" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5309" end="5324" title="Type C5 ship#Ships in class" label="8 Type C5 ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860864" start="5347" end="5362" title="Type C6 ship" label="7 Type C6 ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860863" start="5374" end="5389" title="Type C7 ship" label="7 Type C7 ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q112316303" start="5520" end="5536" title="Type S4 ship (disambiguation)" label="17 Type S4 ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227935" start="5585" end="5605" title="T3 tanker" label="19 T3 tankers / CVEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q333386" start="5971" end="5995" title="Military Sealift Command" label="Military Sealift Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273486" start="6250" end="6282" title="USS Kearsarge (BB-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kearsarge&amp;quot; (AB-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869996" start="6314" end="6345" title="USS Hannibal (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hannibal&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870639" start="6360" end="6389" title="USS Justin (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Justin&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871224" start="6392" end="6423" title="USS Leonidas (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leonidas&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655041" start="6426" end="6458" title="USS Marcellus (1879)" label="USS &amp;quot;Marcellus&amp;quot; (1879)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871744" start="6461" end="6492" title="USS Merrimac (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Merrimac&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699358" start="6495" end="6524" title="USS Quincy (1918)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quincy&amp;quot; (1918)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873883" start="6527" end="6556" title="USS Saturn (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saturn&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874268" start="6571" end="6602" title="USS Southery (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Southery&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878094" start="6605" end="6636" title="USS Sterling (1898)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sterling&amp;quot; (1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434891" start="6639" end="6668" title="USS Vestal (AC-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vestal&amp;quot; (AC-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873120" start="6683" end="6713" title="USS Ontario (AC-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ontario&amp;quot; (AC-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q860057" start="6728" end="6758" title="USS Jupiter (AC-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jupiter&amp;quot; (AC-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694882" start="6802" end="6832" title="USS Cyclops (AC-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cyclops&amp;quot; (AC-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875165" start="6864" end="6893" title="USS Vulcan (AC-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vulcan&amp;quot; (AC-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871564" start="6896" end="6923" title="USS Mars (AC-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (AC-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870083" start="6926" end="6955" title="USS Hector (AC-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hector&amp;quot; (AC-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872194" start="6958" end="6988" title="USS Neptune (AC-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Neptune&amp;quot; (AC-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977309" start="6991" end="7021" title="USS Proteus (AC-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Proteus&amp;quot; (AC-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872198" start="7024" end="7054" title="USS Nereus (AC-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nereus&amp;quot; (AC-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872483" start="7057" end="7086" title="USS Orion (AC-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Orion&amp;quot; (AC-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870515" start="7089" end="7118" title="USS Jason (AC-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jason&amp;quot; (AC-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866965" start="7133" end="7165" title="USS Abarenda (AC-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abarenda&amp;quot; (AC-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867110" start="7181" end="7209" title="USS Ajax (AC-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (AC-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867903" start="7225" end="7255" title="USS Brutus (AC-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brutus&amp;quot; (AC-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867980" start="7258" end="7288" title="USS Caesar (AC-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (AC-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872201" start="7291" end="7319" title="USS Nero (AC-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nero&amp;quot; (AC-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092921" start="7438" end="7468" title="Gopher State-class crane ship" label="&amp;quot;Gopher State&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7763" end="7802" title="#Auxiliary aircraft escort vessels (AVG)" label="Auxiliary aircraft escort vessels (AVG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868884" start="7932" end="7960" title="USS Dixie (AD-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dixie&amp;quot; (AD-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871693" start="7963" end="7994" title="USS Melville (AD-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Melville&amp;quot; (AD-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322779" start="8023" end="8052" title="USS Dobbin (AD-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dobbin&amp;quot; (AD-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875497" start="8055" end="8085" title="USS Whitney (AD-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whitney&amp;quot; (AD-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122311" start="8105" end="8135" title="USS Prairie (AD-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prairie&amp;quot; (AD-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872646" start="8138" end="8168" title="USS Panther (AD-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Panther&amp;quot; (AD-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871224" start="8171" end="8202" title="USS Leonidas (AD-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leonidas&amp;quot; (AD-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867918" start="8205" end="8235" title="USS Buffalo (AD-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Buffalo&amp;quot; (AD-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867734" start="8238" end="8271" title="USS Black Hawk (AD-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Black Hawk&amp;quot; (AD-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824318" start="8274" end="8308" title="USS Bridgeport (AD-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bridgeport&amp;quot; (AD-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736096" start="8330" end="8354" title="Altair-class destroyer tender" label="&amp;quot;Altair&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468394" start="8358" end="8388" title="USS Altair (AD-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Altair&amp;quot; (AD-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868825" start="8391" end="8423" title="USS Denebola (AD-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Denebola&amp;quot; (AD-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680695" start="8426" end="8455" title="USS Rigel (AD-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rigel&amp;quot; (AD-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284912" start="8476" end="8499" title="Dixie-class destroyer tender" label="&amp;quot;Dixie&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868886" start="8503" end="8532" title="USS Dixie (AD-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dixie&amp;quot; (AD-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696665" start="8535" end="8566" title="USS Prairie (AD-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prairie&amp;quot; (AD-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872872" start="8569" end="8601" title="USS Piedmont (AD-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Piedmont&amp;quot; (AD-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698317" start="8604" end="8634" title="USS Sierra (AD-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sierra&amp;quot; (AD-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875722" start="8637" end="8669" title="USS Yosemite (AD-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yosemite&amp;quot; (AD-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868123" start="8698" end="8729" title="USS Cascade (AD-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cascade&amp;quot; (AD-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680686" start="8770" end="8799" title="USS Hamul (AD-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hamul&amp;quot; (AD-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871554" start="8812" end="8842" title="USS Markab (AD-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Markab&amp;quot; (AD-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870836" start="8908" end="8940" title="USS Klondike (AD-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Klondike&amp;quot; (AD-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867372" start="8956" end="8987" title="USS Arcadia (AD-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arcadia&amp;quot; (AD-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869267" start="8990" end="9024" title="USS Everglades (AD-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Everglades&amp;quot; (AD-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869515" start="9027" end="9059" title="USS Frontier (AD-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Frontier&amp;quot; (AD-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494152" start="9060" end="9088" title="Shenandoah-class destroyer tender" label="&amp;quot;Shenandoah&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874102" start="9105" end="9139" title="USS Shenandoah (AD-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shenandoah&amp;quot; (AD-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875709" start="9142" end="9177" title="USS Yellowstone (AD-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yellowstone&amp;quot; (AD-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869805" start="9180" end="9216" title="USS Grand Canyon (AD-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grand Canyon&amp;quot; (AD-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870441" start="9232" end="9267" title="USS Isle Royale (AD-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Isle Royale&amp;quot; (AD-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878416" start="9270" end="9305" title="USS Great Lakes (AD-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Great Lakes&amp;quot; (AD-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874752" start="9318" end="9351" title="USS Tidewater (AD-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tidewater&amp;quot; (AD-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872224" start="9354" end="9389" title="USS New England (AD-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;New England&amp;quot; (AD-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494152" start="9392" end="9423" title="USS Canopus (AD-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Canopus&amp;quot; (AD-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848101" start="9436" end="9469" title="USS Arrowhead (AD-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arrowhead&amp;quot; (AD-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547386" start="9482" end="9518" title="USS Bryce Canyon (AD-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bryce Canyon&amp;quot; (AD-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867175" start="9545" end="9574" title="USS Alcor (AD-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcor&amp;quot; (AD-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411500" start="9586" end="9618" title="Samuel Gompers-class destroyer tender" label="&amp;quot;Samuel Gompers&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11675266" start="9622" end="9660" title="USS Samuel Gompers (AD-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Samuel Gompers&amp;quot; (AD-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873150" start="9663" end="9698" title="USS Puget Sound (AD-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Puget Sound&amp;quot; (AD-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051973" start="9699" end="9728" title="Yellowstone-class destroyer tender" label="&amp;quot;Yellowstone&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875710" start="9732" end="9767" title="USS Yellowstone (AD-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yellowstone&amp;quot; (AD-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866989" start="9770" end="9800" title="USS Acadia (AD-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Acadia&amp;quot; (AD-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868056" start="9803" end="9835" title="USS Cape Cod (AD-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cape Cod&amp;quot; (AD-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874103" start="9838" end="9872" title="USS Shenandoah (AD-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shenandoah&amp;quot; (AD-44)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10013" end="10055" title="#Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE)" label="Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873171" start="10060" end="10087" title="USS Pyro (AE-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pyro&amp;quot; (AE-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872305" start="10090" end="10118" title="USS Nitro (AE-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nitro&amp;quot; (AE-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875415" start="10121" end="10167" title="USS West Elcasco (ID-3661)" label="&amp;quot;Major General Henry Gibbins&amp;quot; (AE-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871167" start="10262" end="10291" title="USS Lassen (AE-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lassen&amp;quot; (AE-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871983" start="10294" end="10328" title="USS Mount Baker (AE-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mount Baker&amp;quot; (AE-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873263" start="10331" end="10361" title="USS Rainier (AE-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rainier&amp;quot; (AE-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874077" start="10364" end="10393" title="USS Shasta (AE-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shasta&amp;quot; (AE-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871618" start="10396" end="10428" title="USS Mauna Loa (AE-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mauna Loa&amp;quot; (AE-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871630" start="10431" end="10460" title="USS Mazama (AE-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mazama&amp;quot; (AE-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668620" start="10492" end="10522" title="USS Sangay (AE-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sangay&amp;quot; (AE-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470362" start="10573" end="10607" title="USS Mount Hood (AE-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mount Hood&amp;quot; (AE-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875651" start="10672" end="10704" title="USS Wrangell (AE-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wrangell&amp;quot; (AE-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867115" start="10707" end="10737" title="USS Akutan (AE-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Akutan&amp;quot; (AE-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869378" start="10740" end="10773" title="USS Firedrake (AE-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Firedrake&amp;quot; (AE-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875081" start="10776" end="10808" title="USS Vesuvius (AE-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vesuvius&amp;quot; (AE-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871986" start="10811" end="10847" title="USS Mount Katmai (AE-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mount Katmai&amp;quot; (AE-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869831" start="10850" end="10886" title="USS Great Sitkin (AE-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Great Sitkin&amp;quot; (AE-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668465" start="10889" end="10922" title="USS Paricutin (AE-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Paricutin&amp;quot; (AE-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852763" start="10925" end="10961" title="USS Diamond Head (AE-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Diamond Head&amp;quot; (AE-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869430" start="11007" end="11040" title="USS Fomalhaut (AE-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fomalhaut&amp;quot; (AE-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646266" start="11051" end="11078" title="Suribachi-class ammunition ship" label="&amp;quot;Suribachi&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265744" start="11170" end="11192" title="underway replenishment" label="underway replenishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874490" start="11197" end="11230" title="USS Suribachi (AE-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Suribachi&amp;quot; (AE-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871616" start="11233" end="11266" title="USS Mauna Kea (AE-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mauna Kea&amp;quot; (AE-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041416" start="11268" end="11291" title="Nitro-class ammunition ship" label="&amp;quot;Nitro&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872304" start="11295" end="11324" title="USS Nitro (AE-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nitro&amp;quot; (AE-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873174" start="11327" end="11355" title="USS Pyro (AE-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pyro&amp;quot; (AE-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869962" start="11358" end="11391" title="USS Haleakala (AE-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Haleakala&amp;quot; (AE-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875133" start="11441" end="11470" title="USS Virgo (AE-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Virgo&amp;quot; (AE-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868210" start="11484" end="11513" title="USS Chara (AE-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chara&amp;quot; (AE-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783431" start="11526" end="11551" title="Kilauea-class ammunition ship" label="&amp;quot;Kilauea&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866588" start="11555" end="11586" title="USS Kilauea (AE-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kilauea&amp;quot; (AE-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867952" start="11589" end="11618" title="USS Butte (AE-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Butte&amp;quot; (AE-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873832" start="11621" end="11658" title="USS Santa Barbara (AE-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Santa Barbara&amp;quot; (AE-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871985" start="11661" end="11695" title="USS Mount Hood (AE-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mount Hood&amp;quot; (AE-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869408" start="11698" end="11727" title="USS Flint (AE-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Flint&amp;quot; (AE-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874078" start="11730" end="11760" title="USS Shasta (AE-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shasta&amp;quot; (AE-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866651" start="11763" end="11798" title="USS Mount Baker (AE-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mount Baker&amp;quot; (AE-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866591" start="11801" end="11830" title="USS Kiska (AE-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kiska&amp;quot; (AE-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741110" start="11981" end="12013" title="USS Artisan (ABSD-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Artisan&amp;quot; (ABSD-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770322" start="12016" end="12038" title="USS ABSD-2" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60771517" start="12041" end="12063" title="USS ABSD-3" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772516" start="12066" end="12088" title="USS ABSD-4" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772572" start="12091" end="12113" title="USS ABSD-5" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772045" start="12116" end="12138" title="USS ABSD-6" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871338" start="12141" end="12163" title="Los Alamos (AFDB-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-7&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12166" end="12188" title="USS ABSD-8" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12191" end="12213" title="USS ABSD-9" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12216" end="12239" title="USS ABSD-10" label="USS &amp;quot;ABSD-10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741110" start="12290" end="12322" title="USS Artisan (AFDB-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Artisan&amp;quot; (AFDB-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770322" start="12325" end="12347" title="USS AFDB-2" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDB-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60771517" start="12350" end="12372" title="USS AFDB-3" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDB-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772516" start="12375" end="12397" title="USS AFDB-4" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDB-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772572" start="12400" end="12422" title="USS AFDB-5" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDB-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60772045" start="12425" end="12447" title="USS AFDB-6" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDB-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12450" end="12484" title="USS Machinist (AFDB-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Machinist&amp;quot; (AFDB-8)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12487" end="12509" title="USS AFDB-9" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDB-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642600" start="12560" end="12593" title="USS Endeavor (AFDL-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Endeavor&amp;quot; (AFDL-1)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12596" end="12618" title="USS AFDL-2" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12621" end="12643" title="USS AFDL-3" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12646" end="12668" title="USS AFDL-4" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12671" end="12693" title="USS AFDL-5" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12696" end="12728" title="USS Dynamic (AFDL-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dynamic&amp;quot; (AFDL-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866974" start="12731" end="12763" title="USS Ability (AFDL-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ability&amp;quot; (AFDL-7)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12766" end="12788" title="USS AFDL-8" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12791" end="12813" title="USS AFDL-9" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12816" end="12839" title="USS AFDL-10" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12842" end="12865" title="USS AFDL-11" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-11&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12868" end="12891" title="USS AFDL-12" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12894" end="12917" title="USS AFDL-13" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12920" end="12943" title="USS AFDL-14" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-14&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12946" end="12969" title="USS AFDL-15" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12972" end="12995" title="USS AFDL-16" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-16&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12998" end="13021" title="USS AFDL-17" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-17&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13024" end="13047" title="USS AFDL-18" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13050" end="13073" title="USS AFDL-19" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-19&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13076" end="13099" title="USS AFDL-20" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13102" end="13125" title="USS AFDL-21" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-21&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13128" end="13151" title="USS AFDL-22" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-22&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867035" start="13154" end="13185" title="USS Adept (AFDL-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Adept&amp;quot; (AFDL-23)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13188" end="13211" title="USS AFDL-24" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-24&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13214" end="13249" title="USS Undaunted (AFDL-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Undaunted&amp;quot; (AFDL-25)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13252" end="13275" title="USS AFDL-26" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-26&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13278" end="13301" title="USS AFDL-27" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-27&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13304" end="13327" title="USS AFDL-28" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-28&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13330" end="13353" title="USS AFDL-29" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-29&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13356" end="13379" title="USS AFDL-30" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-30&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13382" end="13405" title="USS AFDL-31" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-31&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13408" end="13431" title="USS AFDL-32" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-32&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13434" end="13457" title="USS AFDL-33" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13460" end="13483" title="USS AFDL-34" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-34&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13486" end="13509" title="USS AFDL-35" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-35&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13512" end="13535" title="USS AFDL-36" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-36&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13538" end="13561" title="USS AFDL-37" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-37&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13564" end="13587" title="USS AFDL-38" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-38&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13590" end="13613" title="USS AFDL-39" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-39&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13616" end="13639" title="USS AFDL-40" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-40&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13642" end="13665" title="USS AFDL-41" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-41&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13668" end="13691" title="USS AFDL-42" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-42&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13694" end="13717" title="USS AFDL-43" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-43&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13720" end="13743" title="USS AFDL-44" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-44&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13746" end="13769" title="USS AFDL-45" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-45&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13772" end="13795" title="USS AFDL-46" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDL-46&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13798" end="13832" title="USS Reliance (AFDL-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Reliance&amp;quot; (AFDL-47)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13835" end="13870" title="USS Diligence (AFDL-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Diligence&amp;quot; (AFDL-48)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13969" end="13991" title="USS AFDM-1" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769971" start="13994" end="14016" title="USS AFDM-2" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111164483" start="14019" end="14041" title="USS AFDM-3" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14044" end="14066" title="USS AFDM-4" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110833598" start="14069" end="14105" title="USS Resourceful (AFDM-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Resourceful&amp;quot; (AFDM-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111028981" start="14108" end="14142" title="USS Competent (AFDM-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Competent&amp;quot; (AFDM-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111019403" start="14145" end="14177" title="USS Sustain (AFDM-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sustain&amp;quot; (AFDM-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873452" start="14180" end="14213" title="USS Richland (AFDM-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Richland&amp;quot; (AFDM-8)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14216" end="14238" title="USS AFDM-9" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110858780" start="14241" end="14275" title="USS Resolute (AFDM-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Resolute&amp;quot; (AFDM-10)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14282" end="14305" title="USS AFDM-11" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-11&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14308" end="14331" title="USS AFDM-12" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14334" end="14357" title="USS AFDM-13" label="USS &amp;quot;AFDM-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110863824" start="14360" end="14395" title="USS Steadfast (AFDM-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Steadfast&amp;quot; (AFDM-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793223" start="14433" end="14454" title="USS ARD-1" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14457" end="14478" title="USS ARD-2" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14481" end="14502" title="USS ARD-3" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14505" end="14526" title="USS ARD-4" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48996561" start="14529" end="14562" title="USS Waterford (ARD-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Waterford&amp;quot; (ARD-5)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14565" end="14586" title="USS ARD-6" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14589" end="14624" title="USS West Milton (ARD-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;West Milton&amp;quot; (ARD-7)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14627" end="14648" title="USS ARD-8" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866953" start="14651" end="14672" title="USS ARD-9" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866951" start="14675" end="14697" title="USS ARD-10" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14700" end="14722" title="USS ARD-11" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-11&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14725" end="14747" title="USS ARD-12" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14750" end="14772" title="USS ARD-13" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14775" end="14797" title="USS ARD-14" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-14&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14800" end="14822" title="USS ARD-15" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14825" end="14847" title="USS ARD-16" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-16&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866952" start="14850" end="14872" title="USS ARD-17" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-17&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869167" start="14875" end="14897" title="USS ARD-18" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872376" start="14900" end="14922" title="USS ARD-19" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-19&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875483" start="14925" end="14961" title="USS White Sands (ARD-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;White Sands&amp;quot; (ARD-20)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14980" end="15002" title="USS ARD-21" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-21&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15005" end="15037" title="USS Windsor (ARD-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot; (ARD-22)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15040" end="15062" title="USS ARD-23" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-23&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15065" end="15087" title="USS ARD-24" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-24&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15090" end="15112" title="USS ARD-25" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-25&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867136" start="15115" end="15137" title="USS ARD-26" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-26&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15140" end="15162" title="USS ARD-27" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-27&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15165" end="15187" title="USS ARD-28" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-28&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867379" start="15190" end="15219" title="USS Arco (ARD-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arco&amp;quot; (ARD-29)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15222" end="15257" title="USS San Onofre (ARD-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Onofre&amp;quot; (ARD-30)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15260" end="15282" title="USS ARD-31" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-31&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15285" end="15307" title="USS ARD-32" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-32&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15310" end="15332" title="USS ARD-33" label="USS &amp;quot;ARD-33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872376" start="15379" end="15413" title="USS Oak Ridge (ARDM-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oak Ridge&amp;quot; (ARDM-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867136" start="15416" end="15451" title="USS Alamogordo (ARDM-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alamogordo&amp;quot; (ARDM-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869167" start="15454" end="15488" title="USS Endurance (ARDM-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Endurance&amp;quot; (ARDM-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874109" start="15491" end="15524" title="Shippingport (ARDM-4)" label="&amp;quot;Shippingport&amp;quot; (ARDM-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867381" start="15531" end="15556" title="Arco (ARDM-5)" label="&amp;quot;Arco&amp;quot; (ARDM-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867855" start="15686" end="15715" title="USS Bridge (AF-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bridge&amp;quot; (AF-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868174" start="15718" end="15747" title="USS Celtic (AF-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Celtic&amp;quot; (AF-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868667" start="15750" end="15779" title="USS Culgoa (AF-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Culgoa&amp;quot; (AF-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869730" start="15782" end="15812" title="USS Glacier (AF-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Glacier&amp;quot; (AF-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873003" start="15815" end="15844" title="USS Pompey (AF-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pompey&amp;quot; (AF-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103347" start="15847" end="15882" title="USS Rappahannock (AF-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rappahannock&amp;quot; (AF-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867382" start="15897" end="15926" title="USS Arctic (AF-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arctic&amp;quot; (AF-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867791" start="15941" end="15969" title="USS Boras (AF-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Boras&amp;quot; (AF-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875734" start="15972" end="16000" title="USS Yukon (AF-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yukon&amp;quot; (AF-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867180" start="16003" end="16036" title="USS Aldebaran (AF-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aldebaran&amp;quot; (AF-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872987" start="16039" end="16070" title="USS Polaris (AF-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Polaris&amp;quot; (AF-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871877" start="16073" end="16102" title="USS Mizar (AF-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mizar&amp;quot; (AF-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874619" start="16105" end="16136" title="USS Tarazed (AF-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tarazed&amp;quot; (AF-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874986" start="16139" end="16169" title="USS Uranus (AF-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Uranus&amp;quot; (AF-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874577" start="16172" end="16205" title="USS Talamanca (AF-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Talamanca&amp;quot; (AF-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872688" start="16208" end="16240" title="USS Pastores (AF-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pastores&amp;quot; (AF-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222767" start="16255" end="16286" title="SS Antigua" label="USS &amp;quot;Antigua&amp;quot; (AF-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867986" start="16289" end="16322" title="USS Calamares (AF-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Calamares&amp;quot; (AF-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873481" start="16337" end="16367" title="USS Roamer (AF-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Roamer&amp;quot; (AF-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873013" start="16370" end="16401" title="USS Pontiac (AF-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pontiac&amp;quot; (AF-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871722" start="16404" end="16433" title="USS Merak (AF-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Merak&amp;quot; (AF-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867408" start="16436" end="16465" title="USS Ariel (AF-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ariel&amp;quot; (AF-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868700" start="16468" end="16498" title="USS Cygnus (AF-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cygnus&amp;quot; (AF-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868816" start="16501" end="16534" title="USS Delphinus (AF-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Delphinus&amp;quot; (AF-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874636" start="16537" end="16567" title="USS Taurus (AF-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Taurus&amp;quot; (AF-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872396" start="16570" end="16600" title="USS Octans (AF-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Octans&amp;quot; (AF-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222874" start="16603" end="16633" title="USS Pictor (AF-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pictor&amp;quot; (AF-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873885" start="16636" end="16666" title="USS Saturn (AF-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saturn&amp;quot; (AF-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700295" start="16722" end="16752" title="USS Hyades (AF-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hyades&amp;quot; (AF-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869794" start="16755" end="16787" title="USS Graffias (AF-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Graffias&amp;quot; (AF-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098262" start="16788" end="16811" title="Type R ship" label="&amp;quot;Adria&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867061" start="16833" end="16862" title="USS Adria (AF-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Adria&amp;quot; (AF-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867392" start="16865" end="16897" title="USS Arequipa (AF-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arequipa&amp;quot; (AF-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868565" start="16927" end="16958" title="USS Corduba (AF-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Corduba&amp;quot; (AF-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870684" start="16961" end="16990" title="USS Karin (AF-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Karin&amp;quot; (AF-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870764" start="17023" end="17054" title="USS Kerstin (AF-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kerstin&amp;quot; (AF-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871168" start="17057" end="17087" title="USS Latona (AF-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Latona&amp;quot; (AF-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871289" start="17090" end="17119" title="USS Lioba (AF-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lioba&amp;quot; (AF-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871459" start="17122" end="17153" title="USS Malabar (AF-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Malabar&amp;quot; (AF-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871724" start="17156" end="17186" title="USS Merapi (AF-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Merapi&amp;quot; (AF-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872621" start="17189" end="17221" title="USS Palisana (AF-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palisana&amp;quot; (AF-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867475" start="17224" end="17257" title="USS Athanasia (AF-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Athanasia&amp;quot; (AF-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867780" start="17260" end="17290" title="USS Bondia (AF-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bondia&amp;quot; (AF-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869780" start="17293" end="17325" title="USS Gordonia (AF-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gordonia&amp;quot; (AF-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871178" start="17328" end="17361" title="USS Laurentia (AF-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Laurentia&amp;quot; (AF-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871369" start="17364" end="17395" title="USS Lucidor (AF-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lucidor&amp;quot; (AF-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872397" start="17398" end="17429" title="USS Octavia (AF-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Octavia&amp;quot; (AF-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874997" start="17432" end="17465" title="USS Valentine (AF-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Valentine&amp;quot; (AF-47)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098262" start="17466" end="17491" title="Type R ship" label="&amp;quot;Alstede&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867248" start="17524" end="17555" title="USS Alstede (AF-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alstede&amp;quot; (AF-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875757" start="17558" end="17588" title="USS Zelima (AF-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zelima&amp;quot; (AF-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866505" start="17591" end="17629" title="USNS Blue Jacket (T-AF-51)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Blue Jacket&amp;quot; (T-AF-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867386" start="17632" end="17706" title="USS Arcturus (AF-52)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Golden Eagle&amp;quot; (T-AF-52) / USS &amp;quot;Arcturus&amp;quot; (AF-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872871" start="17709" end="17739" title="USS Pictor (AF-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pictor&amp;quot; (AF-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867254" start="17742" end="17772" title="USS Aludra (AF-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aludra&amp;quot; (AF-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874175" start="17775" end="17805" title="USS Sirius (AF-60)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sirius&amp;quot; (AF-60)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873116" start="17808" end="17839" title="USS Procyon (AF-61)" label="USS &amp;quot;Procyon&amp;quot; (AF-61)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867659" start="17842" end="17875" title="USS Bellatrix (AF-62)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bellatrix&amp;quot; (AF-62)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866499" start="17910" end="17947" title="USNS Bald Eagle (T-AF-50)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bald Eagle&amp;quot; (T-AF-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866555" start="18002" end="18043" title="USNS Grommet Reefer (T-AF-53)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Grommet Reefer&amp;quot; (T-AF-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868826" start="18140" end="18172" title="USS Denebola (AF-56)" label="USS &amp;quot;Denebola&amp;quot; (AF-56)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873353" start="18175" end="18206" title="USS Regulus (AF-57)" label="USS &amp;quot;Regulus&amp;quot; (AF-57)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866498" start="18209" end="18244" title="USNS Asterion (T-AF-63)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Asterion&amp;quot; (T-AF-63)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700504" start="18247" end="18281" title="USNS Perseus (T-AF-64)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Perseus&amp;quot; (T-AF-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873463" start="18327" end="18356" title="USS Rigel (AF-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rigel&amp;quot; (AF-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875039" start="18359" end="18387" title="USS Vega (AF-59)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot; (AF-59)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18485" end="18527" title="#Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE)" label="Advanced auxiliary dry cargo ships (T-AKE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773075" start="18530" end="18552" title="Mars-class combat stores ship" label="&amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871565" start="18556" end="18584" title="USS Mars (AFS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mars&amp;quot; (AFS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874547" start="18587" end="18619" title="USS Sylvania (AFS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sylvania&amp;quot; (AFS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872272" start="18622" end="18659" title="USS Niagara Falls (AFS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Niagara Falls&amp;quot; (AFS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875481" start="18662" end="18698" title="USS White Plains (AFS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;White Plains&amp;quot; (AFS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866531" start="18701" end="18732" title="USS Concord (AFS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Concord&amp;quot; (AFS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873792" start="18735" end="18768" title="USS San Diego (AFS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Diego&amp;quot; (AFS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705825" start="18771" end="18803" title="USS San Jose (AFS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Jose&amp;quot; (AFS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19843192" start="18804" end="18828" title="Sirius-class combat stores ship" label="&amp;quot;Sirius&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866731" start="18832" end="18865" title="USNS Sirius (T-AFS-8)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sirius&amp;quot; (T-AFS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866737" start="18868" end="18900" title="USNS Spica (T-AFS-9)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Spica&amp;quot; (T-AFS-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276543" start="18903" end="18937" title="USNS Saturn (T-AFS-10)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Saturn&amp;quot; (T-AFS-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882680" start="19051" end="19124" title="List of unclassified miscellaneous vessels of the United States Navy" label="List of unclassified miscellaneous vessels of the United States Navy (IX)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869996" start="19149" end="19180" title="USS Hannibal (AG-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hannibal&amp;quot; (AG-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871199" start="19196" end="19226" title="USS Lebanon (AG-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lebanon&amp;quot; (AG-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872089" start="19263" end="19293" title="USS Nanshan (AG-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nanshan&amp;quot; (AG-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873883" start="19305" end="19334" title="USS Saturn (AG-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saturn&amp;quot; (AG-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869609" start="19346" end="19382" title="USS General Alava (AG-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;General Alava&amp;quot; (AG-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868974" start="19408" end="19438" title="USS Dubuque (AG-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dubuque&amp;quot; (AG-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872616" start="19460" end="19490" title="USS Paducah (AG-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Paducah&amp;quot; (AG-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871442" start="19513" end="19543" title="USS Mahanna (AG-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mahanna&amp;quot; (AG-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869830" start="19558" end="19595" title="USS Great Northern (AG-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Great Northern&amp;quot; (AG-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867319" start="19609" end="19640" title="USS Antares (AG-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antares&amp;quot; (AG-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873115" start="19656" end="19687" title="USS Procyon (AG-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Procyon&amp;quot; (AG-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869761" start="19703" end="19736" title="USS Gold Star (AG-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gold Star&amp;quot; (AG-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959701" start="19749" end="19782" title="USS Pensacola (AG-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pensacola&amp;quot; (AG-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866965" start="19794" end="19826" title="USS Abarenda (AG-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abarenda&amp;quot; (AG-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867110" start="19839" end="19867" title="USS Ajax (AG-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (AG-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754624" start="19897" end="19925" title="USS Utah (AG-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Utah&amp;quot; (AG-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276562" start="19998" end="20029" title="USS Wyoming (AG-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wyoming&amp;quot; (AG-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874408" start="20057" end="20089" title="USS Stoddert (AG-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stoddert&amp;quot; (AG-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501902" start="20127" end="20156" title="USS Boggs (AG-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Boggs&amp;quot; (AG-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501977" start="20190" end="20219" title="USS Kilty (AG-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kilty&amp;quot; (AG-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469902" start="20258" end="20291" title="USS Lamberton (AG-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lamberton&amp;quot; (AG-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460264" start="20325" end="20356" title="USS Radford (AG-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Radford&amp;quot; (AG-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547447" start="20395" end="20426" title="USS Sequoia (AG-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sequoia&amp;quot; (AG-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874014" start="20449" end="20479" title="USS Semmes (AG-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Semmes&amp;quot; (AG-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547436" start="20517" end="20548" title="USS Potomac (AG-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Potomac&amp;quot; (AG-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866050" start="20571" end="20603" title="USS Cuyahoga (AG-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cuyahoga&amp;quot; (AG-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873500" start="20660" end="20700" title="USS Robert L. Barnes (AG-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Robert L. Barnes&amp;quot; (AG-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301159" start="20742" end="20772" title="USS Manley (AG-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manley&amp;quot; (AG-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867635" start="20805" end="20833" title="USS Bear (AG-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bear&amp;quot; (AG-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867807" start="20860" end="20892" title="USS Bowditch (AG-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bowditch&amp;quot; (AG-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867401" start="20922" end="20953" title="USS Argonne (AG-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Argonne&amp;quot; (AG-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874455" start="20982" end="21012" title="USS Sumner (AG-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sumner&amp;quot; (AG-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870701" start="21050" end="21079" title="USS Kaula (AG-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kaula&amp;quot; (AG-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757145" start="21081" end="21087" title="SeaBee" label="SeaBee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867175" start="21101" end="21130" title="USS Alcor (AG-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcor&amp;quot; (AG-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868016" start="21153" end="21184" title="USS Calypso (AG-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Calypso&amp;quot; (AG-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871469" start="21226" end="21259" title="USS Manasquan (AG-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manasquan&amp;quot; (AG-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867410" start="21288" end="21319" title="USS Manomet (AG-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manomet&amp;quot; (AG-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869600" start="21348" end="21382" title="USS Mantinicus (AG-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mantinicus&amp;quot; (AG-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871712" start="21405" end="21437" title="USS Menemsha (AG-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Menemsha&amp;quot; (AG-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871919" start="21469" end="21500" title="USS Monomoy (AG-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Monomoy&amp;quot; (AG-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871790" start="21532" end="21562" title="USS Midway (AG-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Midway&amp;quot; (AG-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868020" start="21577" end="21608" title="USS Camanga (AG-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Camanga&amp;quot; (AG-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871456" start="21635" end="21665" title="USS Majaba (AG-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Majaba&amp;quot; (AG-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871461" start="21694" end="21725" title="USS Malanao (AG-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Malanao&amp;quot; (AG-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874575" start="21740" end="21771" title="USS Taganak (AG-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Taganak&amp;quot; (AG-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874899" start="21798" end="21829" title="USS Tuluran (AG-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tuluran&amp;quot; (AG-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871479" start="21856" end="21889" title="USS Manhasset (AG-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manhasset&amp;quot; (AG-47)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547425" start="21931" end="21963" title="USS Muskeget (AG-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Muskeget&amp;quot; (AG-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867290" start="22057" end="22088" title="USS Anacapa (AG-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Anacapa&amp;quot; (AG-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550883" start="22090" end="22096" title="Q-ship" label="Q-ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699460" start="22113" end="22143" title="USS Kopara (AG-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kopara&amp;quot; (AG-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867704" start="22156" end="22187" title="USS Besboro (AG-66)" label="USS &amp;quot;Besboro&amp;quot; (AG-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867318" start="22202" end="22233" title="USS Antaeus (AG-67)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antaeus&amp;quot; (AG-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867605" start="22259" end="22290" title="USS Basilan (AG-68)" label="USS &amp;quot;Basilan&amp;quot; (AG-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867939" start="22307" end="22337" title="USS Burias (AG-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Burias&amp;quot; (AG-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875747" start="22354" end="22384" title="USS Zaniah (AG-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zaniah&amp;quot; (AG-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867545" start="22438" end="22467" title="USS Baham (AG-71)" label="USS &amp;quot;Baham&amp;quot; (AG-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872664" start="22521" end="22558" title="USS Parris Island (AG-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Parris Island&amp;quot; (AG-72)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867662" start="22573" end="22607" title="USS Belle Isle (AG-73)" label="USS &amp;quot;Belle Isle&amp;quot; (AG-73)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868415" start="22649" end="22688" title="USS Coasters Harbor (AG-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coasters Harbor&amp;quot; (AG-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="22715" end="22735" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868693" start="22777" end="22817" title="USS Cuttyhunk Island (AG-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cuttyhunk Island&amp;quot; (AG-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867522" start="22845" end="22881" title="USS Avery Island (AG-76)" label="USS &amp;quot;Avery Island&amp;quot; (AG-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870377" start="22943" end="22980" title="USS Indian Island (AG-77)" label="USS &amp;quot;Indian Island&amp;quot; (AG-77)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870732" start="23008" end="23043" title="USS Kent Island (AG-78)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kent Island&amp;quot; (AG-78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875653" start="23071" end="23128" title="USS Wright (AG-79)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wright&amp;quot; / &amp;quot;San Clemente&amp;quot; (AG-79)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551351" start="23156" end="23187" title="USS Du Pont (AG-80)" label="USS &amp;quot;Du Pont&amp;quot; (AG-80)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552067" start="23214" end="23253" title="USS J. Fred Talbott (AG-81)" label="USS &amp;quot;J. Fred Talbott&amp;quot; (AG-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552029" start="23280" end="23311" title="USS Schenck (AG-82)" label="USS &amp;quot;Schenck&amp;quot; (AG-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551547" start="23338" end="23370" title="USS Kennison (AG-83)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kennison&amp;quot; (AG-83)"/>
<link wikidata="Q339469" start="23397" end="23429" title="USS Hatfield (AG-84)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hatfield&amp;quot; (AG-84)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869470" start="23455" end="23482" title="USS Fox (AG-85)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fox&amp;quot; (AG-85)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867928" start="23509" end="23539" title="USS Bulmer (AG-86)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bulmer&amp;quot; (AG-86)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871408" start="23566" end="23598" title="USS MacLeish (AG-87)" label="USS &amp;quot;MacLeish&amp;quot; (AG-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46138" start="23625" end="23662" title="USS Burton Island (AG-88)" label="USS &amp;quot;Burton Island&amp;quot; (AG-88)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866071" start="23678" end="23708" title="USS Edisto (AG-89)" label="USS &amp;quot;Edisto&amp;quot; (AG-89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46159" start="23724" end="23752" title="USS Atka (AG-90)" label="USS &amp;quot;Atka&amp;quot; (AG-90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977721" start="23768" end="23800" title="USS Dahlgren (AG-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dahlgren&amp;quot; (AG-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869928" start="23838" end="23870" title="USS Gwinnett (AG-92)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gwinnett&amp;quot; (AG-92)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872281" start="23897" end="23929" title="USS Nicollet (AG-93)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nicollet&amp;quot; (AG-93)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873017" start="23956" end="23988" title="USS Pontotoc (AG-94)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pontotoc&amp;quot; (AG-94)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871292" start="24015" end="24049" title="USS Litchfield (AG-95)" label="USS &amp;quot;Litchfield&amp;quot; (AG-95)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867886" start="24063" end="24093" title="USS Broome (AG-96)" label="USS &amp;quot;Broome&amp;quot; (AG-96)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668814" start="24107" end="24138" title="USS Simpson (AG-97)" label="USS &amp;quot;Simpson&amp;quot; (AG-97)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460236" start="24164" end="24194" title="USS Ramsay (AG-98)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ramsay&amp;quot; (AG-98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873071" start="24245" end="24275" title="USS Preble (AG-99)" label="USS &amp;quot;Preble&amp;quot; (AG-99)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874138" start="24309" end="24340" title="USS Sicard (AG-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sicard&amp;quot; (AG-100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873141" start="24374" end="24405" title="USS Pruitt (AG-101)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pruitt&amp;quot; (AG-101)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502087" start="24439" end="24471" title="USS Babbitt (AG-102)" label="USS &amp;quot;Babbitt&amp;quot; (AG-102)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551446" start="24510" end="24541" title="USS Upshur (AG-103)" label="USS &amp;quot;Upshur&amp;quot; (AG-103)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552305" start="24575" end="24606" title="USS Elliot (AG-104)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elliot&amp;quot; (AG-104)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669836" start="24639" end="24669" title="USS Hogan (AG-105)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hogan&amp;quot; (AG-105)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669894" start="24703" end="24734" title="USS Howard (AG-106)" label="USS &amp;quot;Howard&amp;quot; (AG-106)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669494" start="24768" end="24802" title="USS Stansbury (AG-107)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stansbury&amp;quot; (AG-107)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868204" start="24838" end="24871" title="USS Chandler (AG-108)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chandler&amp;quot; (AG-108)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875746" start="24904" end="24933" title="USS Zane (AG-109)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zane&amp;quot; (AG-109)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874856" start="24967" end="24998" title="USS Trever (AG-110)" label="USS &amp;quot;Trever&amp;quot; (AG-110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551977" start="25020" end="25053" title="USS Hamilton (AG-111)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hamilton&amp;quot; (AG-111)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551383" start="25099" end="25136" title="USS Breckinridge (AG-112)" label="USS &amp;quot;Breckinridge&amp;quot; (AG-112)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551530" start="25163" end="25194" title="USS Barney (AG-113)" label="USS &amp;quot;Barney&amp;quot; (AG-113)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551465" start="25221" end="25252" title="USS Biddle (AG-114)" label="USS &amp;quot;Biddle&amp;quot; (AG-114)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551513" start="25266" end="25296" title="USS Ellis (AG-115)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ellis&amp;quot; (AG-115)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552283" start="25323" end="25352" title="USS Cole (AG-116)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cole&amp;quot; (AG-116)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875469" start="25379" end="25411" title="USS Whipple (AG-117)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whipple&amp;quot; (AG-117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237473" start="25438" end="25472" title="USS McCormick (AG-118)" label="USS &amp;quot;McCormick&amp;quot; (AG-118)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870545" start="25486" end="25523" title="USS John D. Ford (AG-119)" label="USS &amp;quot;John D. Ford&amp;quot; (AG-119)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872734" start="25550" end="25585" title="USS Paul Jones (AG-120)" label="USS &amp;quot;Paul Jones&amp;quot; (AG-120)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870285" start="25599" end="25632" title="USS Humboldt (AG-121)" label="USS &amp;quot;Humboldt&amp;quot; (AG-121)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871595" start="25681" end="25715" title="USS Matagorda (AG-122)" label="USS &amp;quot;Matagorda&amp;quot; (AG-122)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873517" start="25764" end="25797" title="USS Rockaway (AG-123)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rockaway&amp;quot; (AG-123)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871614" start="25846" end="25877" title="USS Maumee (AG-124)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maumee&amp;quot; (AG-124)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604565" start="25908" end="25939" title="USS Patoka (AG-125)" label="USS &amp;quot;Patoka&amp;quot; (AG-125)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052251" start="25978" end="26011" title="USS McDougal (AG-126)" label="USS &amp;quot;McDougal&amp;quot; (AG-126)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052288" start="26058" end="26090" title="USS Winslow (AG-127)" label="USS &amp;quot;Winslow&amp;quot; (AG-127)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544634" start="26146" end="26182" title="USS Mississippi (AG-128)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mississippi&amp;quot; (AG-128)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875491" start="26210" end="26244" title="USS Whitewood (AG-129)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whitewood&amp;quot; (AG-129)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868021" start="26284" end="26315" title="USS Camano (AG-130)" label="USS &amp;quot;Camano&amp;quot; (AG-130)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868783" start="26350" end="26379" title="USS Deal (AG-131)" label="USS &amp;quot;Deal&amp;quot; (AG-131)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869091" start="26410" end="26439" title="USS Elba (AG-132)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elba&amp;quot; (AG-132)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869211" start="26470" end="26500" title="USS Errol (AG-133)" label="USS &amp;quot;Errol&amp;quot; (AG-133)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869226" start="26531" end="26562" title="USS Estero (AG-134)" label="USS &amp;quot;Estero&amp;quot; (AG-134)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870526" start="26593" end="26623" title="USS Jekyl (AG-135)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jekyl&amp;quot; (AG-135)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871765" start="26654" end="26687" title="USS Metomkin (AG-136)" label="USS &amp;quot;Metomkin&amp;quot; (AG-136)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873560" start="26718" end="26748" title="USS Roque (AG-137)" label="USS &amp;quot;Roque&amp;quot; (AG-137)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873603" start="26779" end="26808" title="USS Ryer (AG-138)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ryer&amp;quot; (AG-138)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874074" start="26839" end="26870" title="USS Sharps (AG-139)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sharps&amp;quot; (AG-139)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875462" start="26903" end="26935" title="USS Whidbey (AG-141)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whidbey&amp;quot; (AG-141)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872122" start="27022" end="27056" title="USS Nashawena (AG-142)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nashawena&amp;quot; (AG-142)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871553" start="27109" end="27138" title="USS Mark (AG-143)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mark&amp;quot; (AG-143)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870161" start="27170" end="27201" title="USS Hewell (AG-145)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hewell&amp;quot; (AG-145)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869102" start="27233" end="27266" title="USS Electron (AG-146)" label="USS &amp;quot;Electron&amp;quot; (AG-146)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873129" start="27338" end="27369" title="USS Proton (AG-147)" label="USS &amp;quot;Proton&amp;quot; (AG-147)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868443" start="27441" end="27475" title="USS Colington (AG-148)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colington&amp;quot; (AG-148)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871193" start="27536" end="27574" title="USS League Island (AG-149)" label="USS &amp;quot;League Island&amp;quot; (AG-149)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868328" start="27635" end="27666" title="USS Chimon (AG-150)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chimon&amp;quot; (AG-150)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873442" start="27727" end="27768" title="USS Richard E. Kraus (AG-151)" label="USS &amp;quot;Richard E. Kraus&amp;quot; (AG-151)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228675" start="27825" end="27859" title="USS Timmerman (AG-152)" label="USS &amp;quot;Timmerman&amp;quot; (AG-152)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868494" start="27931" end="27972" title="USS Compass Island (E-AG-153)" label="USS &amp;quot;Compass Island&amp;quot; (E-AG-153)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002095" start="28017" end="28061" title="USS Observation Island (EAG-154)" label="USS &amp;quot;Observation Island&amp;quot; (EAG-154)"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="28074" end="28089" title="Polaris missile" label="Polaris missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473449" start="28189" end="28214" title="PGM-19 Jupiter" label="Jupiter ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870798" start="28321" end="28357" title="USS King County (AG-157)" label="USS &amp;quot;King County&amp;quot; (AG-157)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690183" start="28359" end="28377" title="Regulus II missile" label="Regulus II missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869758" start="28414" end="28445" title="USS Glover (AG-158)" label="USS &amp;quot;Glover&amp;quot; (AG-158)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872556" start="28448" end="28479" title="USS Oxford (AG-159)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oxford&amp;quot; (AG-159)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="28481" end="28487" title="SIGINT" label="SIGINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866690" start="28509" end="28550" title="USNS Range Tracker (T-AG-160)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Range Tracker&amp;quot; (T-AG-160)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866688" start="28597" end="28640" title="USNS Range Recoverer (T-AG-161)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Range Recoverer&amp;quot; (T-AG-161)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866619" start="28712" end="28758" title="USNS Mission Capistrano (T-AG-162)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mission Capistrano&amp;quot; (T-AG-162)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869758" start="28791" end="28822" title="USS Glover (AG-163)" label="USS &amp;quot;Glover&amp;quot; (AG-163)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866589" start="28826" end="28863" title="USNS Kingsport (T-AG-164)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Kingsport&amp;quot; (T-AG-164)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681593" start="28909" end="28944" title="USS Georgetown (AG-165)" label="USS &amp;quot;Georgetown&amp;quot; (AG-165)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702807" start="28974" end="29008" title="USS Jamestown (AG-166)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jamestown&amp;quot; (AG-166)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867671" start="29038" end="29070" title="USS Belmont (AG-167)" label="USS &amp;quot;Belmont&amp;quot; (AG-167)"/>
<link wikidata="Q599906" start="29100" end="29132" title="USS Liberty (AG-168)" label="USS &amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (AG-168)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676458" start="29162" end="29209" title="USNS Pvt. Jose F. Valdez (T-AG-169)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pvt. Jose F. Valdez&amp;quot; (T-AG-169)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866600" start="29236" end="29285" title="USNS LT. James E. Robinson (T-AG-170)" label="USNS &amp;quot;LT. James E. Robinson&amp;quot; (T-AG-170)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866720" start="29338" end="29387" title="USNS Sgt. Joseph E. Muller (T-AG-171)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Joseph E. Muller&amp;quot; (T-AG-171)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866666" start="29403" end="29438" title="USNS Phoenix (T-AG-172)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Phoenix&amp;quot; (T-AG-172)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866686" start="29453" end="29486" title="USNS Provo (T-AG-173)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Provo&amp;quot; (T-AG-173)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866522" start="29501" end="29537" title="USNS Cheyenne (T-AG-174)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cheyenne&amp;quot; (T-AG-174)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866715" start="29552" end="29600" title="USNS Sgt. Curtis F. Shoup (T-AG-175)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Curtis F. Shoup&amp;quot; (T-AG-175)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872810" start="29616" end="29650" title="USS Peregrine (AG-176)" label="USS &amp;quot;Peregrine&amp;quot; (AG-176)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866725" start="29705" end="29743" title="USNS Shearwater (T-AG-177)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Shearwater&amp;quot; (T-AG-177)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866544" start="29782" end="29815" title="USNS Flyer (T-AG-178)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Flyer&amp;quot; (T-AG-178)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755312" start="29817" end="29822" title="SOSUS" label="SOSUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126591" start="29837" end="29874" title="USNS Havenford (T-AG-179)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Havenford&amp;quot; (T-AG-179)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866494" start="29899" end="29934" title="USNS Antioch (T-AG-180)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Antioch&amp;quot; (T-AG-180)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866486" start="29959" end="29994" title="USNS Adelphi (T-AG-181)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Adelphi&amp;quot; (T-AG-181)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866606" start="30019" end="30051" title="USNS Lynn (T-AG-182)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lynn&amp;quot; (T-AG-182)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706323" start="30076" end="30114" title="USNS Clarksburg (T-AG-183)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Clarksburg&amp;quot; (T-AG-183)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866524" start="30139" end="30174" title="USNS Clemson (T-AG-184)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Clemson&amp;quot; (T-AG-184)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393152" start="30199" end="30235" title="USNS Carthage (T-AG-185)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Carthage&amp;quot; (T-AG-185)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393255" start="30273" end="30309" title="USNS Bessemer (T-AG-186)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bessemer&amp;quot; (T-AG-186)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706321" start="30334" end="30369" title="USNS Milford (T-AG-187)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Milford&amp;quot; (T-AG-187)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866701" start="30394" end="30429" title="USNS Rollins (T-AG-189)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Rollins&amp;quot; (T-AG-189)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489338" start="30454" end="30488" title="USS Spokane (T-AG-191)" label="USS &amp;quot;Spokane&amp;quot; (T-AG-191)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866702" start="30519" end="30554" title="USNS S P Lee (T-AG-192)" label="USNS &amp;quot;S P Lee&amp;quot; (T-AG-192)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564035" start="30596" end="30639" title="USNS Glomar Explorer (T-AG-193)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Glomar Explorer&amp;quot; (T-AG-193)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702852" start="30662" end="30698" title="USNS Vanguard (T-AG-194)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Vanguard&amp;quot; (T-AG-194)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866565" start="30759" end="30792" title="USNS Hayes (T-AG-195)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Hayes&amp;quot; (T-AG-195)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870302" start="30838" end="30872" title="USS Hunting (E-AG-398)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hunting&amp;quot; (E-AG-398)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867124" start="30919" end="30952" title="USS Alacrity (AG-520)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alacrity&amp;quot; (AG-520)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867462" start="30975" end="31009" title="USS Assurance (AG-521)" label="USS &amp;quot;Assurance&amp;quot; (AG-521)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83575112" start="31032" end="31084" title="USNS Vice Adm. K. R. Wheeler" label="USNS &amp;quot;Vice Adm. K. R. Wheeler&amp;quot; (T-AG-5001)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46138" start="31166" end="31203" title="USS Burton Island (AGB-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Burton Island&amp;quot; (AGB-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866071" start="31232" end="31262" title="USS Edisto (AGB-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Edisto&amp;quot; (AGB-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46159" start="31291" end="31319" title="USS Atka (AGB-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Atka&amp;quot; (AGB-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869734" start="31348" end="31379" title="USS Glacier (AGB-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Glacier&amp;quot; (AGB-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q46225" start="31396" end="31433" title="USS Staten Island (AGB-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Staten Island&amp;quot; (AGB-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875483" start="31538" end="31577" title="USS White Sands (ARD-20)" label="USNS &amp;quot;White Sands&amp;quot; (T-AGDS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866668" start="31591" end="31629" title="USNS Point Loma (T-AGDS-2)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Point Loma&amp;quot; (T-AGDS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872932" start="31678" end="31712" title="USS Plainview (AGEH-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Plainview&amp;quot; (AGEH-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="31755" end="31775" title="Signals intelligence" label="Signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642231" start="31796" end="31820" title="Banner-class environmental research ship" label="&amp;quot;Banner&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731598" start="31823" end="31854" title="USS Banner (AGER-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Banner&amp;quot; (AGER-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q712703" start="31868" end="31899" title="USS Pueblo (AGER-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pueblo&amp;quot; (AGER-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876889" start="32015" end="32050" title="USS Palm Beach (AGER-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palm Beach&amp;quot; (AGER-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874994" start="32090" end="32121" title="USS Valcour (AGF-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Valcour&amp;quot; (AGF-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437967" start="32135" end="32167" title="USS La Salle (AGF-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;La Salle&amp;quot; (AGF-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469069" start="32180" end="32213" title="USS Coronado (AGF-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coronado&amp;quot; (AGF-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866690" start="32278" end="32318" title="USNS Range Tracker (T-AGM-1)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Range Tracker&amp;quot; (T-AGM-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425035" start="32320" end="32337" title="Operation Dominic" label="Operation Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866688" start="32365" end="32407" title="USNS Range Recoverer (T-AGM-2)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Range Recoverer&amp;quot; (T-AGM-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866560" start="32423" end="32458" title="USNS Longview (T-AGM-3)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Longview&amp;quot; (T-AGM-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705845" start="32461" end="32497" title="USNS Richfield (T-AGM-4)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Richfield&amp;quot; (T-AGM-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866536" start="32500" end="32536" title="USNS Sunnyvale (T-AGM-5)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sunnyvale&amp;quot; (T-AGM-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866760" start="32539" end="32575" title="USNS Watertown (T-AGM-6)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Watertown&amp;quot; (T-AGM-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866576" start="32578" end="32615" title="USNS Huntsville (T-AGM-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Huntsville&amp;quot; (T-AGM-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866764" start="32618" end="32653" title="USNS Wheeling (T-AGM-8)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Wheeling&amp;quot; (T-AGM-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869648" start="32656" end="32703" title="USNS General H. H. Arnold (T-AGM-9)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General H. H. Arnold&amp;quot; (T-AGM-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468048" start="32717" end="32771" title="USNS General Hoyt S. Vandenberg (T-AGM-10)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Hoyt S. Vandenberg&amp;quot; (T-AGM-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866752" start="32785" end="32823" title="USNS Twin Falls (T-AGM-11)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Twin Falls&amp;quot; (T-AGM-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865760" start="32842" end="32886" title="USNS American Mariner (T-AGM-12)" label="USNS &amp;quot;American Mariner&amp;quot; (T-AGM-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866742" start="32889" end="32927" title="USNS Sword Knot (T-AGM-13)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sword Knot&amp;quot; (T-AGM-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866700" start="32930" end="32967" title="USNS Rose Knot (T-AGM-14)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Rose Knot&amp;quot; (T-AGM-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866526" start="32970" end="33012" title="USNS Coastal Sentry (T-AGM-15)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Coastal Sentry&amp;quot; (T-AGM-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866525" start="33015" end="33059" title="USNS Coastal Crusader (T-AGM-16)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Coastal Crusader&amp;quot; (T-AGM-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866747" start="33087" end="33127" title="USNS Timber Hitch (T-AGM-17)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Timber Hitch&amp;quot; (T-AGM-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866706" start="33130" end="33170" title="USNS Sampan Hitch (T-AGM-18)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sampan Hitch&amp;quot; (T-AGM-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702852" start="33173" end="33209" title="USNS Vanguard (T-AGM-19)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Vanguard&amp;quot; (T-AGM-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866621" start="33212" end="33248" title="USNS Redstone" label="USNS &amp;quot;Redstone&amp;quot; (T-AGM-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866635" start="33251" end="33286" title="USNS Mercury (T-AGM-21)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mercury&amp;quot; (T-AGM-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002123" start="33289" end="33331" title="USNS Range Sentinel (T-AGM-22)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Range Sentinel&amp;quot; (T-AGM-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002095" start="33334" end="33380" title="USNS Observation Island (T-AGM-23)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Observation Island&amp;quot; (T-AGM-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866580" start="33406" end="33444" title="USNS Invincible (T-AGM-24)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Invincible&amp;quot; (T-AGM-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866575" start="33465" end="33511" title="USNS Howard O. Lorenzen (T-AGM-25)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Howard O. Lorenzen&amp;quot; (T-AGM-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869720" start="33563" end="33597" title="USS Annapolis (AGMR-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Annapolis&amp;quot; (AGMR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303926" start="33612" end="33646" title="USS Arlington (AGMR-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot; (AGMR-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873791" start="33740" end="33788" title="USNS Josiah Willard Gibbs (T-AGOR-1)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Josiah Willard Gibbs&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705850" start="33870" end="33914" title="USNS Robert D. Conrad (T-AGOR-3)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Robert D. Conrad&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653894" start="33917" end="33961" title="USNS James M. Gilliss (T-AGOR-4)" label="USNS &amp;quot;James M. Gilliss&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631142" start="33964" end="34008" title="USNS Charles H. Davis (T-AGOR-5)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Charles H. Davis&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866708" start="34011" end="34044" title="USNS Sands (T-AGOR-6)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sands&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866603" start="34047" end="34080" title="USNS Lynch (T-AGOR-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lynch&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705853" start="34083" end="34129" title="USNS Thomas G. Thompson (T-AGOR-9)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Thomas G. Thompson&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866745" start="34132" end="34178" title="USNS Thomas Washington (T-AGOR-10)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Thomas Washington&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866539" start="34181" end="34221" title="USNS De Steiguer (T-AGOR-12)" label="USNS &amp;quot;De Steiguer&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866500" start="34224" end="34261" title="USNS Bartlett (T-AGOR-13)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bartlett&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563512" start="34310" end="34345" title="USNS Eltanin (T-AGOR-8)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Eltanin&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q583779" start="34361" end="34395" title="USNS Mizar (T-AGOR-11)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mizar&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928408" start="34439" end="34476" title="USNS Melville (T-AGOR-14)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Melville&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278048" start="34479" end="34513" title="USNS Knorr (T-AGOR-15)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Knorr&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866565" start="34541" end="34575" title="USNS Hayes (T-AGOR-16)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Hayes&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868191" start="34619" end="34653" title="USNS Chain (T-AGOR-17)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Chain&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874221" start="34671" end="34706" title="USNS Snatch (T-AGOR-18)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Snatch&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866561" start="34748" end="34781" title="USNS Gyre (T-AGOR-21)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gyre&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125375480" start="34784" end="34823" title="USNS Moana Wave (T-AGOR-22)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Moana Wave&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278073" start="34864" end="34911" title="USNS Thomas G. Thompson (T-AGOR-23)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Thomas G. Thompson&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928409" start="34918" end="34960" title="USNS Roger Revelle (T-AGOR-24)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Roger Revelle&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278030" start="34967" end="35004" title="USNS Atlantis (T-AGOR-25)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Atlantis&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196661" start="35041" end="35080" title="USNS Kilo Moana (T-AGOR-26)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Kilo Moana&amp;quot; (T-AGOR-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292425" start="35170" end="35190" title="Underwater acoustics" label="Underwater acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679501" start="35212" end="35238" title="Stalwart-class ocean surveillance ship" label="&amp;quot;Stalwart&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866738" start="35242" end="35278" title="USNS Stalwart (T-AGOS-1)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Stalwart&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866532" start="35281" end="35318" title="USNS Contender (T-AGOS-2)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Contender&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866756" start="35321" end="35359" title="USNS Vindicator (T-AGOS-3)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Vindicator&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866751" start="35362" end="35397" title="USNS Triumph (T-AGOS-4)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Triumph&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955183" start="35400" end="35437" title="USNS Assurance (T-AGOS-5)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Assurance&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866664" start="35440" end="35478" title="USNS Persistent (T-AGOS-6)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Persistent&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866577" start="35481" end="35520" title="USNS Indomitable (T-AGOS-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Indomitable&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866677" start="35523" end="35558" title="Prevail (IX-537)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Prevail&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866496" start="35575" end="35612" title="USNS Assertive (T-AGOS-9)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Assertive&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866580" start="35615" end="35654" title="USNS Invincible (T-AGOS-10)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Invincible&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955189" start="35673" end="35711" title="USNS Audacious (T-AGOS-11)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Audacious&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866507" start="35714" end="35747" title="USNS Bold (T-AGOS-12)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bold&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866487" start="35750" end="35790" title="USNS Adventurous (T-AGOS-13)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Adventurous&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866767" start="35793" end="35828" title="USNS Worthy (T-AGOS-14)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Worthy&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866749" start="35862" end="35896" title="USNS Titan (T-AGOS-15)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Titan&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866515" start="35899" end="35935" title="USNS Capable (T-AGOS-16)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Capable&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631126" start="35938" end="35976" title="USNS Tenacious (T-AGOS-17)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Tenacious&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866694" start="35979" end="36018" title="USNS Relentless (T-AGOS-18)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Relentless&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866755" start="36051" end="36090" title="USNS Victorious (T-AGOS-19)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Victorious&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866485" start="36097" end="36130" title="USNS Able (T-AGOS-20)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Able&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866541" start="36137" end="36175" title="USNS Effective (T-AGOS-21)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Effective&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866598" start="36182" end="36216" title="USNS Loyal (T-AGOS-22)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Loyal&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491599" start="36252" end="36291" title="USNS Impeccable (T-AGOS-23)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Impeccable&amp;quot; (T-AGOS-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872269" start="36337" end="36368" title="USS Niagara (AGP-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Niagara&amp;quot; (AGP-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q864870" start="36406" end="36412" title="Tulagi" label="Tulagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870192" start="36442" end="36470" title="USS Hilo (AGP-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hilo&amp;quot; (AGP-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870506" start="36483" end="36516" title="USS Jamestown (AGP-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jamestown&amp;quot; (AGP-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873043" start="36529" end="36561" title="USS Portunus (AGP-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Portunus&amp;quot; (AGP-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875032" start="36588" end="36618" title="USS Varuna (AGP-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Varuna&amp;quot; (AGP-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872558" start="36644" end="36678" title="USS Oyster Bay (AGP-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oyster Bay&amp;quot; (AGP-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871884" start="36706" end="36737" title="USS Mobjack (AGP-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mobjack&amp;quot; (AGP-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875185" start="36789" end="36825" title="USS Wachapreague (AGP-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wachapreague&amp;quot; (AGP-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875575" start="36839" end="36873" title="USS Willoughby (AGP-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Willoughby&amp;quot; (AGP-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386354" start="36887" end="36919" title="USS Orestes (AGP-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Orestes&amp;quot; (AGP-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715119" start="36946" end="36978" title="USS Silenus (AGP-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Silenus&amp;quot; (AGP-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867012" start="37005" end="37038" title="USS Acontius (AGP-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Acontius&amp;quot; (AGP-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622510" start="37041" end="37072" title="USS Cyrene (AGP-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cyrene&amp;quot; (AGP-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867182" start="37075" end="37106" title="USS Alecto (AGP-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alecto&amp;quot; (AGP-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868009" start="37133" end="37166" title="USS Callisto (AGP-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Callisto&amp;quot; (AGP-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642596" start="37193" end="37226" title="USS Antigone (AGP-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antigone&amp;quot; (AGP-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023089" start="37253" end="37285" title="USS Brontes (AGP-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brontes&amp;quot; (AGP-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023092" start="37313" end="37344" title="USS Chiron (AGP-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chiron&amp;quot; (AGP-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642603" start="37372" end="37403" title="USS Pontus (AGP-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pontus&amp;quot; (AGP-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386893" start="37430" end="37470" title="USS Garrett County (AGP-786)" label="USS &amp;quot;Garrett County&amp;quot; (AGP-786)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386924" start="37485" end="37525" title="USS Harnett County (AGP-821)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harnett County&amp;quot; (AGP-821)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870301" start="37540" end="37582" title="USS Hunterdon County (AGP-838)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hunterdon County&amp;quot; (AGP-838)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869797" start="37597" end="37637" title="USS Graham County (AGP-1176)" label="USS &amp;quot;Graham County&amp;quot; (AGP-1176)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975328" start="37680" end="37706" title="Guardian-class radar picket ship" label="&amp;quot;Guardian&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37793" end="37797" title="List of yard and district craft of the United States Navy#Radar Picket Ships (YAGR)" label="YAGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869896" start="37841" end="37873" title="USS Guardian (AGR-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Guardian&amp;quot; (AGR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871330" start="37876" end="37907" title="USS Lookout (AGR-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lookout&amp;quot; (AGR-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874207" start="37910" end="37944" title="USS Skywatcher (AGR-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Skywatcher&amp;quot; (AGR-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873982" start="37947" end="37979" title="USS Searcher (AGR-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Searcher&amp;quot; (AGR-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873908" start="37982" end="38013" title="USS Scanner (AGR-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Scanner&amp;quot; (AGR-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871307" start="38016" end="38047" title="USS Locator (AGR-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Locator&amp;quot; (AGR-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681910" start="38050" end="38080" title="USS Picket (AGR-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Picket&amp;quot; (AGR-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870401" start="38083" end="38118" title="USS Interceptor (AGR-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Interceptor&amp;quot; (AGR-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870409" start="38121" end="38157" title="USS Investigator (AGR-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Investigator&amp;quot; (AGR-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872544" start="38160" end="38192" title="USS Outpost (AGR-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Outpost&amp;quot; (AGR-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873124" start="38195" end="38229" title="USS Protector (AGR-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Protector&amp;quot; (AGR-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875097" start="38232" end="38262" title="USS Vigil (AGR-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vigil&amp;quot; (AGR-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870403" start="38265" end="38301" title="USS Interdictor (AGR-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Interdictor&amp;quot; (AGR-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870402" start="38304" end="38340" title="USS Interpreter (AGR-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Interpreter&amp;quot; (AGR-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874833" start="38343" end="38400" title="USS Tracer" label="USS &amp;quot;Interrupter&amp;quot; / &amp;quot;Tracer&amp;quot; (AGR-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875331" start="38403" end="38436" title="USS Watchman (AGR-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Watchman&amp;quot; (AGR-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872695" start="38467" end="38501" title="USS Pathfinder (AGS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pathfinder&amp;quot; (AGS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870331" start="38504" end="38540" title="USS Hydrographer (AGS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hydrographer&amp;quot; (AGS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872388" start="38543" end="38580" title="USS Oceanographer (AGS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oceanographer&amp;quot; (AGS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867807" start="38604" end="38636" title="USS Bowditch (AGS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bowditch&amp;quot; (AGS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="38648" end="38668" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874455" start="38697" end="38727" title="USS Sumner (AGS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sumner&amp;quot; (AGS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38740" end="38773" title="USS Derickson (AGS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Derickson&amp;quot; (AGS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38776" end="38811" title="USS Littlehales (AGS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Littlehales&amp;quot; (AGS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868991" start="38814" end="38844" title="USS Dutton (AGS-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dutton&amp;quot; (AGS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38908" end="38945" title="USS Amistead Rust (AGS-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Amistead Rust&amp;quot; (AGS-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744060" start="38948" end="38983" title="USS John Blish (AGS-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;John Blish&amp;quot; (AGS-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868263" start="39031" end="39065" title="USS Chauvenet (AGS-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chauvenet&amp;quot; (AGS-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870013" start="39080" end="39113" title="USS Harkness (AGS-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harkness&amp;quot; (AGS-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870496" start="39143" end="39184" title="USS James M. Gilliss (AGS-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;James M. Gilliss&amp;quot; (AGS-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874160" start="39248" end="39286" title="USS Simon Newcomb (AGS-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Simon Newcomb&amp;quot; (AGS-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874611" start="39364" end="39395" title="USS Tanner (AGS-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tanner&amp;quot; (AGS-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871622" start="39409" end="39439" title="USS Maury (AGS-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maury&amp;quot; (AGS-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681240" start="39476" end="39508" title="USS Pursuit (AGS-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pursuit&amp;quot; (AGS-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873399" start="39522" end="39556" title="USS Requisite (AGS-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Requisite&amp;quot; (AGS-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874093" start="39570" end="39604" title="USS Sheldrake (AGS-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sheldrake&amp;quot; (AGS-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873093" start="39617" end="39649" title="USS Prevail (AGS-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prevail&amp;quot; (AGS-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866509" start="39710" end="39746" title="USNS Bowditch (T-AGS-21)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bowditch&amp;quot; (T-AGS-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866540" start="39749" end="39783" title="USNS Dutton (T-AGS-22)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Dutton&amp;quot; (T-AGS-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866615" start="39786" end="39823" title="USNS Michelson (T-AGS-23)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Michelson&amp;quot; (T-AGS-23)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39841" end="39873" title="USS Seranno (AGS-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seranno&amp;quot; (AGS-24)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39876" end="39910" title="USNS Kellar (T-AGS-25)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Kellar&amp;quot; (T-AGS-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514110" start="39911" end="39939" title="Silas Bent-class survey ship" label="&amp;quot;Silas Bent&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866728" start="39943" end="39981" title="USNS Silas Bent (T-AGS-26)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Silas Bent&amp;quot; (T-AGS-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407231" start="39983" end="39995" title="Project SHAD" label="Project SHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642347" start="40035" end="40067" title="USNS Kane (T-AGS-27)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Kane&amp;quot; (T-AGS-27)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40070" end="40104" title="USNS Wilkes (T-AGS-33)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Wilkes&amp;quot; (T-AGS-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866768" start="40107" end="40140" title="USNS Wyman (T-AGS-34)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Wyman&amp;quot; (T-AGS-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874830" start="40158" end="40189" title="USS Towhee (AGS-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Towhee&amp;quot; (AGS-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460756" start="40204" end="40241" title="USNS Chauvenet (T-AGS-29)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Chauvenet&amp;quot; (T-AGS-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873800" start="40244" end="40278" title="USS San Pablo (AGS-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Pablo&amp;quot; (AGS-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866702" start="40292" end="40329" title="USNS S. P. Lee (T-AGS-31)" label="USNS &amp;quot;S. P. Lee&amp;quot; (T-AGS-31)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40358" end="40394" title="USNS Harkness (T-AGS-32)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Harkness&amp;quot; (T-AGS-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866716" start="40397" end="40448" title="USNS Sgt. George D. Keathley (T-AGS-35)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. George D. Keathley&amp;quot; (T-AGS-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866525" start="40465" end="40506" title="USS Coastal Crusader (AGS-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coastal Crusader&amp;quot; (AGS-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866752" start="40530" end="40568" title="USNS Twin Falls (T-AGS-37)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Twin Falls&amp;quot; (T-AGS-37)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40584" end="40622" title="USNS H. H. Hess (T-AGS-38)" label="USNS &amp;quot;H. H. Hess&amp;quot; (T-AGS-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512671" start="40625" end="40658" title="USNS Maury (T-AGS-39)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Maury&amp;quot; (T-AGS-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671804" start="40661" end="40695" title="USNS Tanner (T-AGS-40)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Tanner&amp;quot; (T-AGS-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866759" start="40698" end="40732" title="USNS Waters (T-AGS-45)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Waters&amp;quot; (T-AGS-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873357" start="40739" end="40772" title="USS Rehoboth (AGS-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rehoboth&amp;quot; (AGS-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866585" start="40786" end="40828" title="USNS John McDonnell (T-AGS-51)" label="USNS &amp;quot;John McDonnell&amp;quot; (T-AGS-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954836" start="40831" end="40870" title="USNS Littlehales (T-AGS-52)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Littlehales&amp;quot; (T-AGS-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792946" start="40871" end="40899" title="Pathfinder-class survey ship" label="&amp;quot;Pathfinder&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866659" start="40903" end="40941" title="USNS Pathfinder (T-AGS-60)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pathfinder&amp;quot; (T-AGS-60)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866740" start="40948" end="40982" title="USNS Sumner (T-AGS-61)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sumner&amp;quot; (T-AGS-61)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866510" start="40989" end="41025" title="USNS Bowditch (T-AGS-62)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bowditch&amp;quot; (T-AGS-62)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866573" start="41032" end="41066" title="USNS Henson (T-AGS-63)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Henson&amp;quot; (T-AGS-63)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866513" start="41073" end="41116" title="USNS Bruce C. Heezen (T-AGS-64)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bruce C. Heezen&amp;quot; (T-AGS-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866607" start="41123" end="41161" title="USNS Mary Sears (T-AGS-65)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mary Sears&amp;quot; (T-AGS-65)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866611" start="41168" end="41207" title="USNS Marie Tharp" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marie Tharp&amp;quot; (T-AGS-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792946" start="41247" end="41289" title="USNS Robert Ballard (T-AGS-67)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Robert Ballard&amp;quot; (T-AGS-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868991" start="41329" end="41360" title="USS Dutton (AGSC-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dutton&amp;quot; (AGSC-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744060" start="41373" end="41409" title="USS John Blish (AGSC-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;John Blish&amp;quot; (AGSC-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870013" start="41423" end="41457" title="USS Harkness (AGSC-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harkness&amp;quot; (AGSC-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870496" start="41486" end="41528" title="USS James M. Gilliss (AGSC-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;James M. Gilliss&amp;quot; (AGSC-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874160" start="41557" end="41596" title="USS Simon Newcomb (AGSC-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Simon Newcomb&amp;quot; (AGSC-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168940" start="41610" end="41647" title="USS Littlehales (AGSC-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Littlehales&amp;quot; (AGSC-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742365" start="41717" end="41747" title="Black Powder-class support vessel" label="&amp;quot;Black Powder&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078835" start="41809" end="41835" title="USS Cod (SS-224)" label="&amp;quot;Cod&amp;quot; (AGSS-224)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142271" start="41878" end="41907" title="USS Rasher (SS-269)" label="&amp;quot;Rasher&amp;quot; (AGSS-269)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638840" start="41946" end="41975" title="USS Bowfin (SS-287)" label="&amp;quot;Bowfin&amp;quot; (AGSS-287)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544207" start="42018" end="42045" title="USS Ling (SS-297)" label="&amp;quot;Ling&amp;quot; (AGSS-297)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544085" start="42088" end="42119" title="USS Lionfish (SS-298)" label="&amp;quot;Lionfish&amp;quot; (AGSS-298)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544153" start="42162" end="42193" title="USS Roncador (SS-301)" label="&amp;quot;Roncador&amp;quot; (AGSS-301)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544024" start="42223" end="42251" title="USS Charr (SS-328)" label="&amp;quot;Charr&amp;quot; (AGSS-328)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544178" start="42281" end="42308" title="USS Carp (SS-338)" label="&amp;quot;Carp&amp;quot; (AGSS-338)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544021" start="42338" end="42368" title="USS Chopper (SS-342)" label="&amp;quot;Chopper&amp;quot; (AGSS-342)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548504" start="42398" end="42430" title="USS Pampanito (SS-383)" label="&amp;quot;Pampanito&amp;quot; (AGSS-383)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874823" start="42473" end="42501" title="USS Torsk (SS-423)" label="&amp;quot;Torsk&amp;quot; (AGSS-423)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873595" start="42544" end="42573" title="USS Runner (SS-476)" label="&amp;quot;Runner&amp;quot; (AGSS-476)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873400" start="42603" end="42632" title="USS Requin (SS-481)" label="&amp;quot;Requin&amp;quot; (AGSS-481)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="42807" end="42827" title="Signals intelligence" label="Signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198602" start="42849" end="42873" title="Oxford-class research ship" label="&amp;quot;Oxford&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872556" start="42896" end="42927" title="USS Oxford (AGTR-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oxford&amp;quot; (AGTR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681593" start="42941" end="42976" title="USS Georgetown (AGTR-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Georgetown&amp;quot; (AGTR-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702807" start="42990" end="43024" title="USS Jamestown (AGTR-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jamestown&amp;quot; (AGTR-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867671" start="43083" end="43115" title="USS Belmont (AGTR-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Belmont&amp;quot; (AGTR-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q599906" start="43129" end="43161" title="USS Liberty (AGTR-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (AGTR-5)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43236" end="43239" title="Marine insurance#CTL - US Navy usage" label="CTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870262" start="43311" end="43341" title="USS Houston (AK-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Houston&amp;quot; (AK-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845032" start="43344" end="43374" title="USS Kittery (AK-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kittery&amp;quot; (AK-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872259" start="43377" end="43412" title="USS Newport News (AK-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Newport News&amp;quot; (AK-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867614" start="43415" end="43442" title="USS Bath (AK-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bath&amp;quot; (AK-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q139134" start="43445" end="43476" title="USS Gulfport (AK-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gulfport&amp;quot; (AK-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867638" start="43491" end="43522" title="USS Beaufort (AK-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Beaufort&amp;quot; (AK-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959701" start="43537" end="43569" title="USS Pensacola (AK-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pensacola&amp;quot; (AK-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867466" start="43585" end="43615" title="USS Astoria (AK-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot; (AK-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871322" start="43630" end="43663" title="USS Long Beach (AK-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Long Beach&amp;quot; (AK-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699358" start="43678" end="43708" title="USS Quincy (AK-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quincy&amp;quot; (AK-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873500" start="43711" end="43751" title="USS Robert L. Barnes (AO-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Robert L. Barnes&amp;quot; (AK-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869761" start="43786" end="43818" title="USS Gold Star" label="USS &amp;quot;Arcturus&amp;quot; (AK-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869761" start="43821" end="43854" title="USS Gold Star" label="USS &amp;quot;Gold Star&amp;quot; (AK-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680020" start="43870" end="43901" title="USS Capella (AK-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Capella&amp;quot; (AK-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873354" start="43904" end="43935" title="USS Regulus (AK-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Regulus&amp;quot; (AK-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874177" start="43938" end="43968" title="USS Sirius (AK-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sirius&amp;quot; (AK-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874297" start="43971" end="44000" title="USS Spica (AK-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Spica&amp;quot; (AK-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875041" start="44003" end="44031" title="USS Vega (AK-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot; (AK-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867385" start="44034" end="44066" title="USS Arcturus (AKA-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arcturus&amp;quot; (AK-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679488" start="44082" end="44113" title="USS Procyon (AKA-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Procyon&amp;quot; (AK-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867658" start="44129" end="44162" title="USS Bellatrix (AKA-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bellatrix&amp;quot; (AK-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869099" start="44178" end="44209" title="USS Electra (AKA-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Electra&amp;quot; (AK-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869430" start="44225" end="44258" title="USS Fomalhaut (AK-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fomalhaut&amp;quot; (AK-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867173" start="44281" end="44312" title="USS Alchiba (AKA-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alchiba&amp;quot; (AK-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867178" start="44328" end="44359" title="USS Alcyone (AKA-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcyone&amp;quot; (AK-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867203" start="44375" end="44406" title="USS Algorab (AKA-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Algorab&amp;quot; (AK-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867206" start="44422" end="44452" title="USS Alhena (AKA-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alhena&amp;quot; (AK-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867235" start="44468" end="44499" title="USS Almaack (AKA-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Almaack&amp;quot; (AK-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002097" start="44516" end="44550" title="USS Betelgeuse (AKA-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Betelgeuse&amp;quot; (AK-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868819" start="44567" end="44596" title="USS Delta (AR-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Delta&amp;quot; (AK-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680686" start="44611" end="44640" title="USS Hamul (AD-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hamul&amp;quot; (AK-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871554" start="44656" end="44686" title="USS Markab" label="USS &amp;quot;Markab&amp;quot; (AK-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875415" start="44730" end="44762" title="USS West Elcasco (ID-3661)" label="&amp;quot;West Elcasco&amp;quot; (AK-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865774" start="44807" end="44820" title="USAT Meigs" label="Meigs (AK-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468064" start="44853" end="44880" title="USAT Liberty" label="&amp;quot;Liberty&amp;quot; (AK-35)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44967" end="45000" title="USS Mendocino (AK-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mendocino&amp;quot; (AK-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870135" start="45003" end="45035" title="USS Hercules (AK-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hercules&amp;quot; (AK-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871729" start="45038" end="45069" title="USS Mercury (AK-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mercury&amp;quot; (AK-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870635" start="45072" end="45103" title="USS Jupiter (AK-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jupiter&amp;quot; (AK-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867430" start="45119" end="45152" title="USS Aroostook (CM-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aroostook&amp;quot; (AK-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874416" start="45176" end="45209" title="USS Stratford (AP-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stratford&amp;quot; (AK-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872943" start="45212" end="45244" title="USS Pleiades (AK-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pleiades&amp;quot; (AK-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867356" start="45247" end="45277" title="USS Aquila (AK-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aquila&amp;quot; (AK-47)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872763" start="45280" end="45311" title="USS Pegasus (AK-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pegasus&amp;quot; (AK-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873885" start="45314" end="45344" title="USS Saturn (AK-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saturn&amp;quot; (AK-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867410" start="45360" end="45389" title="USS Aries (AK-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aries&amp;quot; (AK-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869600" start="45402" end="45435" title="USS Gemini (AP-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Matinicus&amp;quot; (AK-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871262" start="45461" end="45490" title="USS Libra (AKA-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Libra&amp;quot; (AK-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872994" start="45507" end="45537" title="USS Pollux (AKS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pollux&amp;quot; (AK-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874788" start="45553" end="45583" title="USS Titania (AKA-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Titana&amp;quot; (AK-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872380" start="45600" end="45630" title="USS Oberon (AKA-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oberon&amp;quot; (AK-56)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45647" end="45687" title="SS Thomas Jefferson" label="USS &amp;quot;Thomas Jefferson&amp;quot; (AK-57)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699460" start="45690" end="45720" title="USS Kopara (AK-62)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kopara&amp;quot; (AK-62)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867465" start="45736" end="45768" title="USS Asterion (AK-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Asterion&amp;quot; (AK-63)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867304" start="45771" end="45804" title="USS Andromeda" label="USS &amp;quot;Andromeda&amp;quot; (AK-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867354" start="45821" end="45853" title="USS Aquarius (AKA-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aquarius&amp;quot; (AK-65)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868177" start="45870" end="45903" title="USS Centaurus (AKA-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Centaurus&amp;quot; (AK-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868181" start="45920" end="45951" title="USS Cepheus (AKA-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cepheus&amp;quot; (AK-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679479" start="45968" end="45998" title="USS Thuban (AKA-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Thuban&amp;quot; (AK-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875133" start="46015" end="46044" title="USS Virgo (AKA-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Virgo&amp;quot; (AK-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868629" start="46068" end="46098" title="USS Crater (AK-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Crater&amp;quot; (AK-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867034" start="46101" end="46131" title="USS Adhara" label="USS &amp;quot;Adhara&amp;quot; (AK-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867256" start="46134" end="46164" title="USS Aludra (AK-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aludra&amp;quot; (AK-72)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11667782" start="46167" end="46197" title="USS Arided" label="USS &amp;quot;Arided&amp;quot; (AK-73)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868082" start="46200" end="46230" title="USS Carina (AK-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Carina&amp;quot; (AK-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868137" start="46233" end="46267" title="USS Cassiopeia (AK-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cassiopeia&amp;quot; (AK-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868172" start="46270" end="46300" title="USS Celeno (AK-76)" label="USS &amp;quot;Celeno&amp;quot; (AK-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868185" start="46303" end="46332" title="USS Cetus (AK-77)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cetus&amp;quot; (AK-77)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868806" start="46335" end="46365" title="USS Deimos (AK-78)" label="USS &amp;quot;Deimos&amp;quot; (AK-78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868951" start="46368" end="46397" title="USS Draco (AK-79)" label="USS &amp;quot;Draco&amp;quot; (AK-79)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869162" start="46400" end="46433" title="USS Enceladus (AK-80)" label="USS &amp;quot;Enceladus&amp;quot; (AK-80)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870327" start="46457" end="46486" title="USS Hydra (AK-82)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hydra&amp;quot; (AK-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866704" start="46573" end="46607" title="USNS Sagitta (T-AK-87)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sagitta&amp;quot; (T-AK-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866753" start="46631" end="46659" title="USNS Vela (T-AK-89)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vela&amp;quot; (AK-89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867167" start="46662" end="46693" title="USS Albireo" label="USS &amp;quot;Albireo&amp;quot; (AK-90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868562" start="46696" end="46730" title="USS Cor Caroli (AK-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cor Caroli&amp;quot; (AK-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699514" start="46733" end="46765" title="USS Eridanus (AK-92)" label="USS &amp;quot;Eridanus&amp;quot; (AK-92)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869232" start="46768" end="46798" title="USS Etamin (AK-93)" label="USS &amp;quot;Etamin&amp;quot; (AK-93)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871846" start="46801" end="46832" title="USS Mintaka (AK-94)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mintaka&amp;quot; (AK-94)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872022" start="46835" end="46865" title="USS Murzim (AK-95)" label="USS &amp;quot;Murzim&amp;quot; (AK-95)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874388" start="46868" end="46899" title="USS Sterope (AK-96)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sterope&amp;quot; (AK-96)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874042" start="46902" end="46933" title="USS Serpens (AK-97)" label="USS &amp;quot;Serpens&amp;quot; (AK-97)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867507" start="46988" end="47018" title="USS Auriga" label="USS &amp;quot;Auriga&amp;quot; (AK-98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867788" start="47021" end="47051" title="USS Bootes (AK-99)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bootes&amp;quot; (AK-99)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871397" start="47054" end="47083" title="USS Lynx (AK-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lynx&amp;quot; (AK-100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867465" start="47086" end="47119" title="USS Asterion (AK-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Asterion&amp;quot; (AK-100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550883" start="47143" end="47149" title="Q-ship" label="Q-ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871400" start="47178" end="47207" title="USS Lyra (AK-101)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lyra&amp;quot; (AK-101)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867478" start="47210" end="47239" title="USS Atik" label="USS &amp;quot;Atik&amp;quot; (AK-101)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874858" start="47329" end="47364" title="USS Triangulum (AK-102)" label="USS &amp;quot;Triangulum&amp;quot; (AK-102)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873947" start="47367" end="47400" title="USS Sculptor (AK-103)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sculptor&amp;quot; (AK-103)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699574" start="47403" end="47436" title="USS Ganymede (AK-104)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ganymede&amp;quot; (AK-104)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872104" start="47439" end="47468" title="USS Naos (AK-105)" label="USS &amp;quot;Naos&amp;quot; (AK-105)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867979" start="47471" end="47502" title="USS Caelum (AK-106)" label="USS &amp;quot;Caelum&amp;quot; (AK-106)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870336" start="47505" end="47538" title="USS Hyperion (AK-107)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hyperion&amp;quot; (AK-107)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873570" start="47541" end="47573" title="USS Rotanin (AK-108)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rotanin&amp;quot; (AK-108)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867230" start="47576" end="47608" title="USS Allioth" label="USS &amp;quot;Allioth&amp;quot; (AK-109)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867212" start="47632" end="47662" title="USS Alkes" label="USS &amp;quot;Alkes&amp;quot; (AK-110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869718" start="47665" end="47697" title="USS Giansar (AK-111)" label="USS &amp;quot;Giansar&amp;quot; (AK-111)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674269" start="47700" end="47732" title="USS Grumium (AK-112)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grumium&amp;quot; (AK-112)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873599" start="47756" end="47790" title="USS Rutilicus (AK-113)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rutilicus&amp;quot; (AK-113)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867211" start="47793" end="47824" title="USS Alkaid" label="USS &amp;quot;Alkaid&amp;quot; (AK-114)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868664" start="47827" end="47856" title="USS Crux (AK-115)" label="USS &amp;quot;Crux&amp;quot; (AK-115)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867181" start="47859" end="47893" title="USS Alderamin" label="USS &amp;quot;Alderamin&amp;quot; (AK-116)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875750" start="47896" end="47927" title="USS Zaurak (AK-117)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zaurak&amp;quot; (AK-117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874080" start="47930" end="47961" title="USS Shaula (AK-118)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shaula&amp;quot; (AK-118)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699707" start="47964" end="47994" title="USS Matar (AK-119)" label="USS &amp;quot;Matar&amp;quot; (AK-119)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875747" start="47997" end="48028" title="USS Zaniah (AK-120)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zaniah&amp;quot; (AK-120)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873707" start="48044" end="48074" title="USS Sabik (AK-121)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sabik&amp;quot; (AK-121)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867545" start="48077" end="48107" title="USS Baham" label="USS &amp;quot;Baham&amp;quot; (AK-122)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871716" start="48123" end="48154" title="USS Menkar (AK-123)" label="USS &amp;quot;Menkar&amp;quot; (AK-123)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867533" start="48157" end="48189" title="USS Azimech" label="USS &amp;quot;Azimech&amp;quot; (AK-124)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871231" start="48192" end="48223" title="USS Lesuth (AK-125)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lesuth&amp;quot; (AK-125)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871687" start="48226" end="48257" title="USS Megrez (AK-126)" label="USS &amp;quot;Megrez&amp;quot; (AK-126)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867237" start="48260" end="48292" title="USS Alnitah" label="USS &amp;quot;Alnitah&amp;quot; (AK-127)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871223" start="48295" end="48326" title="USS Leonis (AK-128)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leonis&amp;quot; (AK-128)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872851" start="48329" end="48360" title="USS Phobos (AK-129)" label="USS &amp;quot;Phobos&amp;quot; (AK-129)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867418" start="48363" end="48393" title="USS Arkab" label="USS &amp;quot;Arkab&amp;quot; (AK-130)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871691" start="48396" end="48428" title="USS Melucta (AK-131)" label="USS &amp;quot;Melucta&amp;quot; (AK-131)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873121" start="48431" end="48462" title="USS Propus (AK-132)" label="USS &amp;quot;Propus&amp;quot; (AK-132)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874000" start="48465" end="48497" title="USS Seginus (AK-133)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seginus&amp;quot; (AK-133)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874553" start="48500" end="48530" title="USS Syrma (AK-134)" label="USS &amp;quot;Syrma&amp;quot; (AK-134)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875062" start="48533" end="48563" title="USS Venus (AK-135)" label="USS &amp;quot;Venus&amp;quot; (AK-135)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867359" start="48566" end="48594" title="USS Ara" label="USS &amp;quot;Ara&amp;quot; (AK-136)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867441" start="48597" end="48629" title="USS Ascella" label="USS &amp;quot;Ascella&amp;quot; (AK-137)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868269" start="48632" end="48663" title="USS Cheleb (AK-138)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cheleb&amp;quot; (AK-138)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872738" start="48666" end="48695" title="USS Pavo (AK-139)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pavo&amp;quot; (AK-139)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874184" start="48698" end="48729" title="USS Situla (AK-140)" label="USS &amp;quot;Situla&amp;quot; (AK-140)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867137" start="48732" end="48764" title="USS Alamosa" label="USS &amp;quot;Alamosa&amp;quot; (AK-156)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867174" start="48767" end="48798" title="USS Alcona" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcona&amp;quot; (AK-157)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867259" start="48801" end="48832" title="USS Amador" label="USS &amp;quot;Amador&amp;quot; (AK-158)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867334" start="48835" end="48866" title="USS Antrim (AK-159)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antrim&amp;quot; (AK-159)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867512" start="48869" end="48901" title="USS Autauga" label="USS &amp;quot;Autauga&amp;quot; (AK-160)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867648" start="48904" end="48939" title="USS Beaverhead" label="USS &amp;quot;Beaverhead&amp;quot; (AK-161)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867672" start="48942" end="48975" title="USS Beltrami" label="USS &amp;quot;Beltrami&amp;quot; (AK-162)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867748" start="48978" end="49009" title="USS Blount" label="USS &amp;quot;Blount&amp;quot; (AK-163)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867848" start="49012" end="49044" title="USS Brevard (AK-164)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brevard&amp;quot; (AK-164)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867926" start="49047" end="49079" title="USS Bullock (AK-165)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bullock&amp;quot; (AK-165)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867967" start="49082" end="49113" title="USS Cabell (AK-166)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cabell&amp;quot; (AK-166)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867995" start="49116" end="49150" title="USS Caledonia (AK-167)" label="USS &amp;quot;Caledonia&amp;quot; (AK-167)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868236" start="49153" end="49188" title="USS Charlevoix (AK-168)" label="USS &amp;quot;Charlevoix&amp;quot; (AK-168)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868252" start="49191" end="49223" title="USS Chatham (AK-169)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chatham&amp;quot; (AK-169)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868310" start="49226" end="49257" title="USS Chicot (AK-170)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chicot&amp;quot; (AK-170)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868377" start="49260" end="49294" title="USS Claiborne (AK-171)" label="USS &amp;quot;Claiborne&amp;quot; (AK-171)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868386" start="49297" end="49329" title="USS Clarion (AK-172)" label="USS &amp;quot;Clarion&amp;quot; (AK-172)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868426" start="49332" end="49366" title="USS Codington (AK-173)" label="USS &amp;quot;Codington&amp;quot; (AK-173)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868455" start="49369" end="49402" title="USCGC Kukui (WAK-186)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colquitt&amp;quot; (AK-174)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868627" start="49405" end="49439" title="USS Craighead (AK-175)" label="USS &amp;quot;Craighead&amp;quot; (AK-175)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49442" end="49476" title="USS Doddridge (AK-176)" label="USS &amp;quot;Doddridge&amp;quot; (AK-176)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49501" end="49531" title="USS Duval (AK-177)" label="USS &amp;quot;Duval&amp;quot; (AK-177)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869300" start="49556" end="49590" title="USS Fairfield (AK-178)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fairfield&amp;quot; (AK-178)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869325" start="49593" end="49627" title="USS Faribault (AK-179)" label="USS &amp;quot;Faribault&amp;quot; (AK-179)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869352" start="49630" end="49663" title="USS Fentress (AK-180)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fentress&amp;quot; (AK-180)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869389" start="49666" end="49698" title="USS Flagler (AK-181)" label="USS &amp;quot;Flagler&amp;quot; (AK-181)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869543" start="49701" end="49733" title="USS Gadsden (AK-182)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gadsden&amp;quot; (AK-182)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869733" start="49736" end="49768" title="USS Glacier (AK-183)" label="USS &amp;quot;Glacier&amp;quot; (AK-183)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869799" start="49771" end="49804" title="USS Grainger (AK-184)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grainger&amp;quot; (AK-184)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869928" start="49807" end="49840" title="USS Gwinnett (AVS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gwinnett&amp;quot; (AK-185)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869947" start="49863" end="49897" title="USS Habersham (AK-186)" label="USS &amp;quot;Habersham&amp;quot; (AK-186)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870113" start="49900" end="49933" title="USS Hennepin (AK-187)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hennepin&amp;quot; (AK-187)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870137" start="49936" end="49969" title="USS Herkimer (AK-188)" label="USS &amp;quot;Herkimer&amp;quot; (AK-188)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870177" start="49972" end="50004" title="USS Hidalgo (AK-189)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hidalgo&amp;quot; (AK-189)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870727" start="50007" end="50039" title="USS Kenosha (AK-190)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kenosha&amp;quot; (AK-190)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871200" start="50042" end="50074" title="USS Lebanon (AK-191)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lebanon&amp;quot; (AK-191)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871210" start="50077" end="50108" title="USS Lehigh (AK-192)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lehigh&amp;quot; (AK-192)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871133" start="50111" end="50145" title="USS Lancaster (AK-193)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lancaster&amp;quot; (AK-193)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705877" start="50148" end="50180" title="USS Marengo (AK-194)" label="USS &amp;quot;Marengo&amp;quot; (AK-194)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871786" start="50183" end="50215" title="USS Midland (AK-195)" label="USS &amp;quot;Midland&amp;quot; (AK-195)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871833" start="50218" end="50251" title="USS Minidoka (AK-196)" label="USS &amp;quot;Minidoka&amp;quot; (AK-196)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872024" start="50254" end="50288" title="USS Muscatine (AK-197)" label="USS &amp;quot;Muscatine&amp;quot; (AK-197)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872032" start="50291" end="50325" title="USS Muskingum (AK-198)" label="USS &amp;quot;Muskingum&amp;quot; (AK-198)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872281" start="50328" end="50361" title="USS Nicollet (AVS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nicollet&amp;quot; (AK-199)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872773" start="50384" end="50416" title="USS Pembina (AK-200)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pembina&amp;quot; (AK-200)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872774" start="50419" end="50452" title="USS Pemiscot (AK-201)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pemiscot&amp;quot; (AK-201)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872894" start="50455" end="50488" title="USS Pinellas (AK-202)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinellas&amp;quot; (AK-202)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872913" start="50491" end="50525" title="USS Pipestone (AK-203)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pipestone&amp;quot; (AK-203)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872924" start="50528" end="50559" title="USS Pitkin (AK-204)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pitkin&amp;quot; (AK-204)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872980" start="50562" end="50595" title="USS Poinsett (AK-205)" label="USS &amp;quot;Poinsett&amp;quot; (AK-205)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873017" start="50598" end="50631" title="USS Pontotoc (AVS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pontotoc&amp;quot; (AK-206)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873451" start="50654" end="50687" title="USS Richland (AK-207)" label="USS &amp;quot;Richland&amp;quot; (AK-207)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873520" start="50690" end="50723" title="USS Rockdale (AK-208)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rockdale&amp;quot; (AK-208)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873916" start="50726" end="50759" title="USS Schuyler (AK-209)" label="USS &amp;quot;Schuyler&amp;quot; (AK-209)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873939" start="50762" end="50794" title="USS Screven (AK-210)" label="USS &amp;quot;Screven&amp;quot; (AK-210)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873988" start="50797" end="50831" title="USS Sebastian (AK-211)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sebastian&amp;quot; (AK-211)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866526" start="50834" end="50867" title="USNS Coastal Sentry (T-AGM-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Somerset&amp;quot; (AK-212)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874507" start="50870" end="50901" title="USS Sussex (AK-213)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sussex&amp;quot; (AK-213)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874624" start="50904" end="50936" title="USS Tarrant (AK-214)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tarrant&amp;quot; (AK-214)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874783" start="50939" end="50970" title="USS Tipton (AK-215)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tipton&amp;quot; (AK-215)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50973" end="51006" title="USS Traverse (AK-216)" label="USS &amp;quot;Traverse&amp;quot; (AK-216)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51026" end="51057" title="USS Tulare (AK-217)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tulare&amp;quot; (AK-217)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866717" start="51077" end="51111" title="USNS Sgt. George Peterson (T-AK-248)" label="USS &amp;quot;Washtenaw&amp;quot; (AK-218)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51114" end="51150" title="USS Westchester (AK-219)" label="USS &amp;quot;Westchester&amp;quot; (AK-219)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866525" start="51170" end="51202" title="USNS Coastal Crusader (T-AGM-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wexford&amp;quot; (AK-220)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870711" start="51229" end="51261" title="USS Kenmore (AK-221)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kenmore&amp;quot; (AK-221)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364141" start="51275" end="51310" title="USS Livingston (AP-163)" label="USS &amp;quot;Livingston&amp;quot; (AK-222)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868776" start="51324" end="51358" title="USS De Grasse (AK-223)" label="USS &amp;quot;De Grasse&amp;quot; (AK-223)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873102" start="51372" end="51411" title="USS Prince Georges (AK-224)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prince Georges&amp;quot; (AK-224)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867214" start="51425" end="51457" title="USS Allegan" label="USS &amp;quot;Allegan&amp;quot; (AK-225)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867350" start="51460" end="51494" title="USS Appanoose" label="USS &amp;quot;Appanoose&amp;quot; (AK-226)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867804" start="51497" end="51537" title="USS Boulder Victory (AK-227)" label="USS &amp;quot;Boulder Victory&amp;quot; (AK-227)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873135" start="51540" end="51578" title="USS Provo Victory (AK-228)" label="USS &amp;quot;Provo Victory&amp;quot; (AK-228)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871166" start="51581" end="51623" title="USS Las Vegas Victory (AK-229)" label="USS &amp;quot;Las Vegas Victory&amp;quot; (AK-229)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871478" start="51626" end="51668" title="USS Manderson Victory (AK-230)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manderson Victory&amp;quot; (AK-230)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705892" start="51671" end="51711" title="USS Bedford Victory (AK-231)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bedford Victory&amp;quot; (AK-231)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871624" start="51714" end="51755" title="USS Mayfield Victory (AK-232)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mayfield Victory&amp;quot; (AK-232)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872250" start="51758" end="51800" title="USS Newcastle Victory (AK-233)" label="USS &amp;quot;Newcastle Victory&amp;quot; (AK-233)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867916" start="51803" end="51843" title="USS Bucyrus Victory (AK-234)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bucyrus Victory&amp;quot; (AK-234)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394275" start="51846" end="51886" title="USS Red Oak Victory (AK-235)" label="USS &amp;quot;Red Oak Victory&amp;quot; (AK-235)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871120" start="51889" end="51930" title="USS Lakewood Victory (AK-236)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lakewood Victory&amp;quot; (AK-236)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705895" start="51933" end="51979" title="USNS Greenville Victory (T-AK-237)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Greenville Victory&amp;quot; (T-AK-237)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866560" start="51982" end="52023" title="USNS Haiti Victory (T-AK-238)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Haiti Victory&amp;quot; (T-AK-238)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866589" start="52026" end="52071" title="USNS Kingsport Victory (T-AK-239)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Kingsport Victory&amp;quot; (T-AK-239)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866683" start="52090" end="52139" title="USNS Private John R. Towle (T-AK-240)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private John R. Towle&amp;quot; (T-AK-240)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866678" start="52142" end="52195" title="USNS Private Francis X. McGraw (T-AK-241)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Francis X. McGraw&amp;quot; (T-AK-241)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866712" start="52198" end="52244" title="USNS Sgt. Andrew Miller (T-AK-242)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Andrew Miller&amp;quot; (T-AK-242)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866713" start="52247" end="52296" title="USNS Sgt. Archer T. Gammon (T-AK-243)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Archer T. Gammon&amp;quot; (T-AK-243)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705899" start="52299" end="52347" title="USNS Sgt. Morris E. Crain (T-AK-244)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Morris E. Crain&amp;quot; (T-AK-244)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705900" start="52350" end="52399" title="USNS Captain Arlo L. Olson (T-AK-245)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Captain Arlo L. Olson&amp;quot; (T-AK-245)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52402" end="52458" title="USNS Col. William J. O&amp;#x27;Brien (T-AK-246)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Col. William J. O&amp;#x27;Brien&amp;quot; (T-AK-246)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866682" start="52461" end="52512" title="USNS Private John F. Thorson (T-AK-247)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private John F. Thorson&amp;quot; (T-AK-247)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866717" start="52515" end="52563" title="USNS Sgt. George Peterson (T-AK-248)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. George Peterson&amp;quot; (T-AK-248)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866726" start="52566" end="52606" title="USNS Short Splice (T-AK-249)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Short Splice&amp;quot; (T-AK-249)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866679" start="52609" end="52662" title="USNS Private Frank J. Petrarca (T-AK-250)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Frank J. Petrarca&amp;quot; (T-AK-250)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425035" start="52664" end="52681" title="Operation Dominic" label="Operation Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866597" start="52709" end="52759" title="USNS Lt. George W. G. Boyce (T-AK-251)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lt. George W. G. Boyce&amp;quot; (T-AK-251)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866602" start="52762" end="52806" title="USNS Lt. Robert Craig (T-AK-252)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lt. Robert Craig&amp;quot; (T-AK-252)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705845" start="52809" end="52856" title="USNS Private Joe E. Mann (T-AK-253)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Joe E. Mann&amp;quot; (T-AK-253)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866723" start="52859" end="52905" title="USNS Sgt. Truman Kimbro (T-AK-254)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Truman Kimbro&amp;quot; (T-AK-254)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866685" start="52908" end="52963" title="USNS Private Leonard C. Brostrom (T-AK-255)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Leonard C. Brostrom&amp;quot; (T-AK-255)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866536" start="52966" end="53008" title="USNS Dalton Victory (T-AK-256)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Dalton Victory&amp;quot; (T-AK-256)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867249" start="53011" end="53042" title="USS Altair (AK-257)" label="USS &amp;quot;Altair&amp;quot; (AK-257)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867320" start="53045" end="53077" title="USS Antares (AK-258)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antares&amp;quot; (AK-258)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867177" start="53080" end="53110" title="USS Alcor (AK-259)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcor&amp;quot; (AK-259)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867707" start="53113" end="53148" title="USS Betelgeuse (AK-260)" label="USS &amp;quot;Betelgeuse&amp;quot; (AK-260)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53151" end="53183" title="USS Alchiba (AK-261)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alchiba&amp;quot; (AK-261)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53186" end="53218" title="USS Algorab (AK-262)" label="USS &amp;quot;Algorab&amp;quot; (AK-262)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53221" end="53254" title="USS Aquarius (AK-263)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aquarius&amp;quot; (AK-263)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53257" end="53291" title="USS Centaurus (AK-264)" label="USS &amp;quot;Centaurus&amp;quot; (AK-264)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53294" end="53326" title="USS Cepheus (AK-265)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cepheus&amp;quot; (AK-265)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53329" end="53361" title="USS Serpens (AK-266)" label="USS &amp;quot;Serpens&amp;quot; (AK-266)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023084" start="53364" end="53406" title="USNS Marine Fiddler (T-AK-267)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Fiddler&amp;quot; (T-AK-267)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866529" start="53409" end="53442" title="USNS Comet (T-AK-269)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Comet&amp;quot; (T-AK-269)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563512" start="53445" end="53480" title="USNS Eltanin (T-AK-270)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Eltanin&amp;quot; (T-AK-270)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53483" end="53517" title="USNS Mirfak (T-AK-271)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mirfak&amp;quot; (T-AK-271)"/>
<link wikidata="Q583779" start="53520" end="53553" title="USNS Mizar (T-AK-272)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mizar&amp;quot; (T-AK-272)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866743" start="53573" end="53607" title="USNS Taurus (T-AK-273)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Taurus&amp;quot; (T-AK-273)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866600" start="53636" end="53685" title="USNS Lt. James E. Robinson (T-AK-274)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lt. James E. Robinson&amp;quot; (T-AK-274)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933959" start="53701" end="53751" title="USNS Pvt. Joseph F. Merrell (T-AK-275)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pvt. Joseph F. Merrell&amp;quot; (T-AK-275)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866719" start="53754" end="53804" title="USNS Sgt. Jack J. Pendleton (T-AK-276)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Jack J. Pendleton&amp;quot; (T-AK-276)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252460" start="53840" end="53887" title="USNS Schuyler Otis Bland (T-AK-277)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Schuyler Otis Bland&amp;quot; (T-AK-277)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110625360" start="53890" end="53925" title="USNS Norwalk (T-AK-279)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Norwalk&amp;quot; (T-AK-279)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652769" start="53928" end="53962" title="USNS Furman (T-AK-280)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Furman&amp;quot; (T-AK-280)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652765" start="53965" end="54001" title="USNS Victoria (T-AK-281)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Victoria&amp;quot; (T-AK-281)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652767" start="54004" end="54042" title="USNS Marshfield (T-AK-282)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marshfield&amp;quot; (T-AK-282)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875657" start="54045" end="54080" title="USNS Wyandot (T-AK-283)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Wyandot&amp;quot; (T-AK-283)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54096" end="54138" title="USNS Northern Light (T-AK-284)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Northern Light&amp;quot; (T-AK-284)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54141" end="54183" title="USNS Southern Cross (T-AK-285)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Southern Cross&amp;quot; (T-AK-285)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54186" end="54218" title="USNS Vega (T-AK-286)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot; (T-AK-286)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393140" start="54221" end="54254" title="USNS Algol (T-AK-287)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Algol&amp;quot; (T-AK-287)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393239" start="54274" end="54311" title="USNS Bellatrix (T-AK-288)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bellatrix&amp;quot; (T-AK-288)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393474" start="54331" end="54367" title="USNS Denebola (T-AK-289)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Denebola&amp;quot; (T-AK-289)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866669" start="54387" end="54421" title="USNS Pollux (T-AK-290)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pollux&amp;quot; (T-AK-290)"/>
<link wikidata="Q434007" start="54441" end="54475" title="USNS Altair (T-AK-291)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Altair&amp;quot; (T-AK-291)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394278" start="54495" end="54530" title="USNS Regulus (T-AK-292)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Regulus&amp;quot; (T-AK-292)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393328" start="54550" end="54585" title="USNS Capella (T-AK-293)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Capella&amp;quot; (T-AK-293)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393168" start="54605" end="54640" title="USNS Antares (T-AK-294)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Antares&amp;quot; (T-AK-294)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54660" end="54697" title="USNS Cleveland (T-AK-851)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cleveland&amp;quot; (T-AK-851)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54700" end="54744" title="USNS Austral Rainbow (T-AK-1005)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Austral Rainbow&amp;quot; (T-AK-1005)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54747" end="54785" title="USNS Cape Nome (T-AK-1014)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Nome&amp;quot; (T-AK-1014)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866605" start="54788" end="54829" title="USNS Marine Adder (T-AP-193)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Adder&amp;quot; (T-AK-2005)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54845" end="54891" title="USNS Pioneer Commander (T-AK-2016)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pioneer Commander&amp;quot; (T-AK-2016)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54894" end="54941" title="USNS Pioneer Contractor (T-AK-2018)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pioneer Contractor&amp;quot; (T-AK-2018)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54944" end="54989" title="USNS Pioneer Crusader (T-AK-2019)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pioneer Crusader&amp;quot; (T-AK-2019)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54992" end="55026" title="USNS Buyer (T-AK-2033)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Buyer&amp;quot; (T-AK-2033)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55029" end="55070" title="USNS Gulf Shipper (T-AK-2035)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gulf Shipper&amp;quot; (T-AK-2035)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55073" end="55113" title="USNS Gulf Trader (T-AK-2036)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gulf Trader&amp;quot; (T-AK-2036)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55119" end="55160" title="USNS Green Valley (T-AK-2049)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Green Valley&amp;quot; (T-AK-2049)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55163" end="55202" title="USNS Green Wave (T-AK-2050)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Green Wave&amp;quot; (T-AK-2050)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165206" start="55205" end="55252" title="USNS American Cormorant (T-AK-2062)" label="USNS &amp;quot;American Cormorant&amp;quot; (T-AK-2062)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110889417" start="55255" end="55297" title="USNS Green Harbour (T-AK-2064)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Green Harbour&amp;quot; (T-AK-2064)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110961277" start="55300" end="55350" title="MV Cpl. Louis J. Hauge Jr." label="MV &amp;quot;Cpl. Louis J. Hauge Jr.&amp;quot; (T-AK-3000)"/>
<link wikidata="Q52327121" start="55377" end="55425" title="USNS 2nd Lt. John P. Bobo" label="USNS &amp;quot;2nd Lt John P. Bobo&amp;quot; (T-AK-3008)"/>
<link wikidata="Q52321816" start="55456" end="55508" title="USNS 1st Lt. Harry L. Martin" label="USNS &amp;quot;1st Lt. Harry L. Martin&amp;quot; (T-AK-3015)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468178" start="55511" end="55557" title="USNS LCPL Roy M. Wheat" label="USNS &amp;quot;LCPL Roy M. Wheat&amp;quot; (T-AK-3016)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866559" start="55560" end="55612" title="USNS GySgt. Fred W. Stockham (T-AK-3017)" label="USNS &amp;quot;GySgt. Fred W. Stockham&amp;quot; (T-AK-3017)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55674" end="55718" title="USNS Cape Adventurer (T-AK-5005)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Adventurer&amp;quot; (T-AK-5005)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55721" end="55759" title="USNS Cape Aide (T-AK-5006)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Aide&amp;quot; (T-AK-5006)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55762" end="55806" title="USNS Cape Ambassador (T-AK-5007)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Ambassador&amp;quot; (T-AK-5007)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55809" end="55844" title="USNS Banner (T-AK-5008)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Banner&amp;quot; (T-AK-5008)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55847" end="55884" title="USNS Cape Ann (T-AK-5009)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Ann&amp;quot; (T-AK-5009)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55891" end="55932" title="USNS Cape Avinoff (T-AK-5013)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Avinoff&amp;quot; (T-AK-5013)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55939" end="55973" title="USNS Agent (T-AK-5015)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Agent&amp;quot; (T-AK-5015)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55976" end="56009" title="USNS Lake (T-AK-5016)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lake&amp;quot; (T-AK-5016)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56012" end="56046" title="USNS Pride (T-AK-5017)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pride&amp;quot; (T-AK-5017)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56049" end="56082" title="USNS Scan (T-AK-5018)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Scan&amp;quot; (T-AK-5018)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56085" end="56123" title="USNS Cape John (T-AK-5022)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape John&amp;quot; (T-AK-5022)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56126" end="56165" title="USNS Del Viento (T-AK-5026)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Del Viento&amp;quot; (T-AK-5026)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56174" end="56216" title="USNS Cape Chalmers (T-AK-5036)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Chalmers&amp;quot; (T-AK-5036)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56223" end="56262" title="USNS Cape Canso (T-AK-5037)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Canso&amp;quot; (T-AK-5037)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56265" end="56306" title="USNS Cape Charles (T-AK-5038)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Charles&amp;quot; (T-AK-5038)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56309" end="56348" title="USNS Cape Clear (T-AK-5039)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Clear&amp;quot; (T-AK-5039)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56351" end="56394" title="USNS Cape Canaveral (T-AK-5040)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Canaveral&amp;quot; (T-AK-5040)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56397" end="56434" title="USNS Cape Cod (T-AK-5041)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Cod&amp;quot; (T-AK-5041)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56437" end="56479" title="USNS Cape Carthage (T-AK-5042)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Carthage&amp;quot; (T-AK-5042)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56482" end="56523" title="USNS Cape Catoche (T-AK-5043)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Catoche&amp;quot; (T-AK-5043)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56526" end="56566" title="USNS Gulf Banker (T-AK-5044)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gulf Banker&amp;quot; (T-AK-5044)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56569" end="56609" title="USNS Gulf Farmer (T-AK-5045)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gulf Farmer&amp;quot; (T-AK-5045)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56612" end="56654" title="USNS Gulf Merchant (T-AK-5046)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gulf Merchant&amp;quot; (T-AK-5046)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56657" end="56695" title="USNS Del Monte (T-AK-5049)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Del Monte&amp;quot; (T-AK-5049)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56702" end="56740" title="USNS Del Valle (T-AK-5050)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Del Valle&amp;quot; (T-AK-5050)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56743" end="56782" title="USNS Cape Bover (T-AK-5057)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Bover&amp;quot; (T-AK-5057)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56804" end="56845" title="USNS Cape Catawba (T-AK-5074)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cape Catawba&amp;quot; (T-AK-5074)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56854" end="56902" title="USNS LTC Calvin P. Titus (T-AK-5089)" label="USNS &amp;quot;LTC Calvin P. Titus&amp;quot; (T-AK-5089)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56905" end="56952" title="USNS SP5 Eric G. Gibson (T-AK-5091)" label="USNS &amp;quot;SP5 Eric G. Gibson&amp;quot; (T-AK-5091)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56967" end="57006" title="MT SLNC Corsica (T-AK-5423)" label="MT &amp;quot;SLNC Corsica&amp;quot; (T-AK-5423)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57013" end="57052" title="USNS Jeb Stuart (T-AK-9204)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Jeb Stuart&amp;quot; (T-AK-9204)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720175" start="57055" end="57098" title="MV Virginian (T-AK 9205)" label="MV &amp;quot;Strong Virginian&amp;quot; (T-AK-9205)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719325" start="57101" end="57145" title="MV Buffalo Soldier (T-AK-9301)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Buffalo Soldier&amp;quot; (T-AK-9301)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57148" end="57192" title="USNS American Merlin (T-AK-9302)" label="USNS &amp;quot;American Merlin&amp;quot; (T-AK-9302)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57195" end="57240" title="USNS American Kestrel (T-AK-9651)" label="USNS &amp;quot;American Kestrel&amp;quot; (T-AK-9651)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57243" end="57282" title="USNS Noble Star (T-AK-9653)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Noble Star&amp;quot; (T-AK-9653)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57285" end="57325" title="USNS Green Ridge (T-AK-9655)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Green Ridge&amp;quot; (T-AK-9655)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57328" end="57366" title="USNS Advantage (T-AK-9682)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Advantage&amp;quot; (T-AK-9682)"/>
<link wikidata="Q431622" start="57503" end="57528" title="Landing Ship Dock" label="Landing Ships Dock (LSD)s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866668" start="57589" end="57628" title="USNS Point Barrow (T-AKD-1)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Point Barrow&amp;quot; (T-AKD-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425035" start="57630" end="57647" title="Operation Dominic" label="Operation Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265744" start="57917" end="57939" title="underway replenishment" label="underway replenishment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57982" end="58003" title="#Ammunition Ships (AE)" label="Ammunition Ships (AE)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58008" end="58040" title="#Combat Stores Ships (AFS, T-AFS)" label="Combat Stores Ships (AFS, T-AFS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496120" start="58085" end="58118" title="Lewis and Clark-class dry cargo ship" label="&amp;quot;Lewis and Clark&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468199" start="58122" end="58164" title="USNS Lewis and Clark (T-AKE-1)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lewis and Clark&amp;quot; (T-AKE-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127379" start="58171" end="58207" title="USNS Sacagawea (T-AKE-2)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sacagawea&amp;quot; (T-AKE-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228120" start="58214" end="58253" title="USNS Alan Shepard" label="USNS &amp;quot;Alan Shepard&amp;quot; (T-AKE-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866695" start="58260" end="58302" title="USNS Richard E. Byrd (T-AKE-4)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Richard E. Byrd&amp;quot; (T-AKE-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866699" start="58309" end="58351" title="USNS Robert E. Peary (T-AKE-5)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Robert E. Peary&amp;quot; (T-AKE-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866491" start="58358" end="58399" title="USNS Amelia Earhart" label="USNS &amp;quot;Amelia Earhart&amp;quot; (T-AKE-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866517" start="58406" end="58446" title="USNS Carl Brashear (T-AKE-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Carl Brashear&amp;quot; (T-AKE-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950261" start="58453" end="58493" title="USNS Wally Schirra (T-AKE-8)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Wally Schirra&amp;quot; (T-AKE-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866609" start="58500" end="58540" title="USNS Matthew Perry (T-AKE-9)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Matthew Perry&amp;quot; (T-AKE-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866518" start="58547" end="58587" title="USNS Charles Drew (T-AKE-10)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Charles Drew&amp;quot; (T-AKE-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866758" start="58594" end="58641" title="USNS Washington Chambers (T-AKE-11)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Washington Chambers&amp;quot; (T-AKE-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866765" start="58648" end="58690" title="USNS William McLean (T-AKE-12)" label="USNS &amp;quot;William McLean&amp;quot; (T-AKE-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866614" start="58697" end="58737" title="USNS Medgar Evers (T-AKE-13)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Medgar Evers&amp;quot; (T-AKE-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707758" start="58744" end="58784" title="USNS Cesar Chavez (T-AKE-14)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cesar Chavez&amp;quot; (T-AKE-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868021" start="58820" end="58850" title="USS Camano (AKL-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Camano&amp;quot; (AKL-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868783" start="58864" end="58892" title="USS Deal (AKL-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Deal&amp;quot; (AKL-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869091" start="58906" end="58934" title="USS Elba (AKL-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elba&amp;quot; (AKL-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869211" start="58948" end="58977" title="USS Errol (AKL-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Errol&amp;quot; (AKL-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869226" start="58991" end="59021" title="USS Estero (AKL-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Estero&amp;quot; (AKL-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870526" start="59035" end="59064" title="USS Jekyl (AKL-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jekyl&amp;quot; (AKL-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871765" start="59078" end="59110" title="USS Metomkin (AKL-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Metomkin&amp;quot; (AKL-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873560" start="59124" end="59153" title="USS Roque (AKL-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Roque&amp;quot; (AKL-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873603" start="59167" end="59195" title="USS Ryer (AKL-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ryer&amp;quot; (AKL-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874074" start="59209" end="59240" title="USS Sharps (AKL-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sharps&amp;quot; (AKL-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058582" start="59254" end="59284" title="USS Torry (AKL-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Torry&amp;quot; (AKL-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871553" start="59298" end="59327" title="USS Mark (AKL-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mark&amp;quot; (AKL-12)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59341" end="59376" title="USNS Tingles (T-AKL-13)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Tingles&amp;quot; (T-AKL-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870161" start="59379" end="59410" title="USS Hewell (AKL-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hewell&amp;quot; (AKL-14)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59424" end="59446" title="USS AKL-15" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59449" end="59471" title="USS AKL-16" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-16&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866655" start="59474" end="59511" title="USNS New Bedford (AKL-17)" label="USNS &amp;quot;New Bedford&amp;quot; (AKL-17)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59528" end="59550" title="USS AKL-18" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59553" end="59575" title="USS AKL-19" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-19&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59578" end="59603" title="USNS T-AKL-20" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-AKL-20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59606" end="59628" title="USS AKL-21" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-21&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59631" end="59653" title="USS AKL-22" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-22&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59656" end="59678" title="USS AKL-23" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-23&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59681" end="59703" title="USS AKL-24" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-24&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731598" start="59706" end="59737" title="USS Banner (AKL-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Banner&amp;quot; (AKL-25)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59754" end="59776" title="USS AKL-26" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-26&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59779" end="59804" title="USNS T-AKL-27" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-AKL-27&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976614" start="59807" end="59837" title="USS Brule (AKL-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brule&amp;quot; (AKL-28)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59840" end="59862" title="USS AKL-29" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-29&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q56284232" start="59865" end="59899" title="NOAAS George B. Kelez (R 441)" label="USNS &amp;quot;AKL-30&amp;quot; (T-AKL-30)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59902" end="59924" title="USS AKL-31" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-31&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59927" end="59949" title="USS AKL-32" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-32&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59952" end="59974" title="USS AKL-33" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59977" end="59999" title="USS AKL-34" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-34&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60002" end="60024" title="USS AKL-35" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-35&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60027" end="60049" title="USS AKL-36" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-36&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60052" end="60084" title="USS Alcyone (AKL-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcyone&amp;quot; (AKL-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848122" start="60087" end="60118" title="USS Alhena (AKL-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alhena&amp;quot; (AKL-38)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60121" end="60153" title="USS Almaack (AKL-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Almaack&amp;quot; (AKL-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868806" start="60156" end="60187" title="USS Deimos (AKL-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Deimos&amp;quot; (AKL-40)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60190" end="60212" title="USS AKL-41" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-41&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60215" end="60246" title="USS Renate (AKL-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Renate&amp;quot; (AKL-42)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60249" end="60271" title="USS AKL-43" label="USS &amp;quot;AKL-43&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q712703" start="60274" end="60305" title="USS Pueblo (AKL-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pueblo&amp;quot; (AKL-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876889" start="60326" end="60361" title="USS Palm Beach (AKL-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palm Beach&amp;quot; (AKL-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866227" start="60378" end="60413" title="USNS Redbud (T-AKL-398)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Redbud&amp;quot; (T-AKL-398)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870385" start="60498" end="60527" title="USS Indus (AKN-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Indus&amp;quot; (AKN-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873740" start="60530" end="60565" title="USS Sagittarius (AKN-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sagittarius&amp;quot; (AKN-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874919" start="60568" end="60599" title="USS Tuscana (AKN-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tuscana&amp;quot; (AKN-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875751" start="60602" end="60631" title="USS Zebra (AKN-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zebra&amp;quot; (AKN-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870740" start="60659" end="60689" title="USS Keokuk (AKN-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Keokuk&amp;quot; (AKN-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871935" start="60720" end="60751" title="USS Galilea (AKN-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Galilea&amp;quot; (AKN-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866529" start="60821" end="60853" title="USNS Comet (T-AKR-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Comet&amp;quot; (T-AKR-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866709" start="60866" end="60899" title="USNS Meteor (T-AKR-9)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Meteor&amp;quot; (T-AKR-9)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60932" end="60939" title="Type C7 ship#States Steamship Lines C7-S-95 Series" label="C7-S-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q379195" start="60991" end="61014" title="Algol-class vehicle cargo ship" label="&amp;quot;Algol&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393140" start="61018" end="61052" title="USNS Algol (T-AKR-287)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Algol&amp;quot; (T-AKR-287)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393239" start="61072" end="61110" title="USNS Bellatrix (T-AKR-288)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bellatrix&amp;quot; (T-AKR-288)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393474" start="61130" end="61167" title="USNS Denebola (T-AKR-289)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Denebola&amp;quot; (T-AKR-289)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866669" start="61187" end="61222" title="USNS Pollux (T-AKR-290)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pollux&amp;quot; (T-AKR-290)"/>
<link wikidata="Q434007" start="61242" end="61277" title="USNS Altair (T-AKR-291)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Altair&amp;quot; (T-AKR-291)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394278" start="61297" end="61333" title="USNS Regulus (T-AKR-292)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Regulus&amp;quot; (T-AKR-292)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393328" start="61353" end="61389" title="USNS Capella (T-AKR-293)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Capella&amp;quot; (T-AKR-293)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393168" start="61409" end="61445" title="USNS Antares (T-AKR-294)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Antares&amp;quot; (T-AKR-294)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61463" end="61489" title="Large, Medium-Speed Roll-on/Roll-off#Shughart Class" label="&amp;quot;Shughart&amp;quot;-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866729" start="61493" end="61530" title="USNS Shughart (T-AKR-295)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Shughart&amp;quot; (T-AKR-295)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866769" start="61537" end="61570" title="USNS Yano (T-AKR-297)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Yano&amp;quot; (T-AKR-297)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866559" start="61577" end="61614" title="USNS Soderman (T-AKR-299)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Soderman&amp;quot; (T-AKR-299)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61670" end="61694" title="Large, Medium-Speed Roll-on/Roll-off#Gordon Class" label="&amp;quot;Gordon&amp;quot;-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866551" start="61698" end="61733" title="USNS Gordon (T-AKR-296)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gordon&amp;quot; (T-AKR-296)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707192" start="61740" end="61778" title="USNS Gilliland (T-AKR-298)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Gilliland&amp;quot; (T-AKR-298)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094119" start="61783" end="61809" title="Bob Hope-class vehicle cargo ship" label="&amp;quot;Bob Hope&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866506" start="61813" end="61850" title="USNS Bob Hope (T-AKR-300)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Bob Hope&amp;quot; (T-AKR-300)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866543" start="61857" end="61892" title="USNS Fisher (T-AKR-301)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Fisher&amp;quot; (T-AKR-301)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866711" start="61899" end="61932" title="USNS Seay (T-AKR-302)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Seay&amp;quot; (T-AKR-302)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866612" start="61939" end="61976" title="USNS Mendonca (T-AKR-303)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mendonca&amp;quot; (T-AKR-303)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708529" start="61983" end="62020" title="USNS Pililaau (T-AKR-304)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pililaau&amp;quot; (T-AKR-304)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866511" start="62027" end="62063" title="USNS Brittin (T-AKR-305)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Brittin&amp;quot; (T-AKR-305)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866501" start="62070" end="62108" title="USNS Benavidez (T-AKR-306)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Benavidez&amp;quot; (T-AKR-306)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093825" start="62113" end="62137" title="Watson-class vehicle cargo ship" label="&amp;quot;Watson&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866763" start="62141" end="62176" title="USNS Watson (T-AKR-310)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Watson&amp;quot; (T-AKR-310)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866732" start="62183" end="62218" title="USNS Sisler (T-AKR-311)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sisler&amp;quot; (T-AKR-311)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866537" start="62225" end="62258" title="USNS Dahl (T-AKR-312)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Dahl&amp;quot; (T-AKR-312)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866693" start="62265" end="62303" title="USNS Red Cloud (T-AKR-313)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Red Cloud&amp;quot; (T-AKR-313)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866520" start="62310" end="62347" title="USNS Charlton (T-AKR-314)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Charlton&amp;quot; (T-AKR-314)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866762" start="62354" end="62390" title="USNS Watkins (T-AKR-315)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Watkins&amp;quot; (T-AKR-315)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866670" start="62397" end="62433" title="USNS Pomeroy (T-AKR-316)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pomeroy&amp;quot; (T-AKR-316)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866736" start="62440" end="62477" title="USNS Soderman (T-AKR-317)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Soderman&amp;quot; (T-AKR-317)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867319" start="62768" end="62799" title="USS Antares (AKS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antares&amp;quot; (AKS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868142" start="62869" end="62899" title="USS Castor (AKS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Castor&amp;quot; (AKS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872993" start="62902" end="62932" title="USS Pollux (AKS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pollux&amp;quot; (AKS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="62942" end="62954" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872994" start="62985" end="63015" title="USS Pollux (AKS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pollux&amp;quot; (AKS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="63017" end="63037" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871729" start="63065" end="63097" title="USS Mercury (AKS-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mercury&amp;quot; (AKS-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867023" start="63146" end="63177" title="USS Acubens (AKS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Acubens&amp;quot; (AKS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870844" start="63180" end="63210" title="USS Kochab (AKS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kochab&amp;quot; (AKS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871375" start="63213" end="63241" title="USS Luna (AKS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Luna&amp;quot; (AKS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874583" start="63244" end="63274" title="USS Talita (AKS-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Talita&amp;quot; (AKS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875152" start="63277" end="63307" title="USS Volans (AKS-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Volans&amp;quot; (AKS-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868698" start="63310" end="63341" title="USS Cybele (AKS-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cybele&amp;quot; (AKS-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699929" start="63344" end="63375" title="USS Gratia (AKS-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gratia&amp;quot; (AKS-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699934" start="63378" end="63409" title="USS Hecuba (AKS-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hecuba&amp;quot; (AKS-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870159" start="63412" end="63445" title="USS Hesperia (AKS-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hesperia&amp;quot; (AKS-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870413" start="63483" end="63515" title="USS Iolanda (AKS-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Iolanda&amp;quot; (AKS-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871267" start="63518" end="63550" title="USS Liguria (AKS-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Liguria&amp;quot; (AKS-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023086" start="63580" end="63614" title="USS Blackford (AKS-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Blackford&amp;quot; (AKS-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868925" start="63656" end="63691" title="USS Dorchester (AKS-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dorchester&amp;quot; (AKS-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198674" start="63733" end="63765" title="USS Kingman (AKS-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kingman&amp;quot; (AKS-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108090336" start="63807" end="63844" title="USS Presque Isle" label="USS &amp;quot;Presque Isle&amp;quot; (AKS-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867662" start="63933" end="63968" title="USS Belle Isle (AKS-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Belle Isle&amp;quot; (AKS-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868415" start="63981" end="64021" title="USS Coasters Harbor (AKS-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coasters Harbor&amp;quot; (AKS-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868693" start="64034" end="64075" title="USS Cuttyhunk Island (AKS-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cuttyhunk Island&amp;quot; (AKS-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867522" start="64088" end="64125" title="USS Avery Island (AKS-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Avery Island&amp;quot; (AKS-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870377" start="64138" end="64176" title="USS Indian Island (AKS-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Indian Island&amp;quot; (AKS-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870732" start="64189" end="64225" title="USS Kent Island (AKS-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kent Island&amp;quot; (AKS-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869102" start="64265" end="64298" title="USS Electron (AKS-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Electron&amp;quot; (AKS-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873129" start="64334" end="64365" title="USS Proton (AKS-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Proton&amp;quot; (AKS-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868443" start="64401" end="64435" title="USS Colington (AKS-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colington&amp;quot; (AKS-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871193" start="64471" end="64509" title="USS League Island (AKS-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;League Island&amp;quot; (AKS-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868328" start="64545" end="64576" title="USS Chimon (AKS-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chimon&amp;quot; (AKS-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867249" start="64657" end="64688" title="USS Altair (AKS-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Altair&amp;quot; (AKS-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867320" start="64691" end="64723" title="USS Antares (AKS-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antares&amp;quot; (AKS-33)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64779" end="64805" title="Ship Characteristics Board#Sequential numbering of SCB projects" label="Ship Characteristics Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870826" start="64920" end="64954" title="USS Kitty Hawk (AKV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kitty Hawk&amp;quot; (AKV-1)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64967" end="65003" title="USS Hammondsport (AKV-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hammondsport&amp;quot; (AKV-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866600" start="65078" end="65126" title="USNS LT. James E. Robinson" label="USNS &amp;quot;LT. James E. Robinson&amp;quot; (T-AKV-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933959" start="65155" end="65204" title="USNS Pvt. Joseph F. Merrell" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pvt. Joseph F. Merrell&amp;quot; (T-AKV-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866719" start="65223" end="65272" title="USNS Sgt. Jack J. Pendleton (T-AKV-5)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Jack J. Pendleton&amp;quot; (T-AKV-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393131" start="65306" end="65346" title="USNS Albert M. Boe (T-AKV-6)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Albert M. Boe&amp;quot; (T-AKV-6)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65349" end="65399" title="USNS Cardinal O&amp;#x27;Connell (T-AKV-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Cardinal O&amp;#x27;Connell&amp;quot; (T-AKV-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870856" start="65416" end="65449" title="USS Kula Gulf (AKV-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kula Gulf&amp;quot; (AKV-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868058" start="65464" end="65503" title="USS Cape Gloucester (AKV-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cape Gloucester&amp;quot; (AKV-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873751" start="65518" end="65554" title="USS Salerno Bay (AKV-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Salerno Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875042" start="65569" end="65604" title="USS Vella Gulf (AKV-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vella Gulf&amp;quot; (AKV-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874135" start="65619" end="65651" title="USS Siboney (AKV-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Siboney&amp;quot; (AKV-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873152" start="65666" end="65702" title="USS Puget Sound (AKV-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Puget Sound&amp;quot; (AKV-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q689771" start="65717" end="65749" title="USS Rendova (AKV-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rendova&amp;quot; (AKV-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867549" start="65764" end="65796" title="USS Bairoko (AKV-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bairoko&amp;quot; (AKV-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150200" start="65811" end="65850" title="USS Badoeng Strait (AKV-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Badoeng Strait&amp;quot; (AKV-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470943" start="65865" end="65896" title="USS Saidor (AKV-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saidor&amp;quot; (AKV-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149459" start="65911" end="65942" title="USS Sicily (AKV-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sicily&amp;quot; (AKV-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150157" start="65957" end="65992" title="USS Point Cruz (AKV-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Point Cruz&amp;quot; (AKV-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871825" start="66007" end="66039" title="USS Mindoro (AKV-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mindoro&amp;quot; (AKV-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873239" start="66054" end="66085" title="USS Rabaul (AKV-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rabaul&amp;quot; (AKV-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390215" start="66110" end="66140" title="USS Palau (AKV-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palau&amp;quot; (AKV-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874776" start="66155" end="66186" title="USS Tinian (AKV-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tinian&amp;quot; (AKV-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470415" start="66233" end="66269" title="USS Nehenta Bay (AKV-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nehenta Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870209" start="66283" end="66319" title="USS Hoggatt Bay (AKV-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hoggatt Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870650" start="66333" end="66370" title="USS Kadashan Bay (AKV-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kadashan Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871514" start="66384" end="66422" title="USS Marcus Island (AKV-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Marcus Island&amp;quot; (AKV-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873903" start="66436" end="66472" title="USS Savo Island (AKV-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Savo Island&amp;quot; (AKV-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873585" start="66486" end="66522" title="USS Rudyerd Bay (AKV-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rudyerd Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874183" start="66536" end="66571" title="USS Sitkoh Bay (AKV-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sitkoh Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315937" start="66585" end="66621" title="USS Takanis Bay (AKV-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Takanis Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113690" start="66635" end="66671" title="USS Lunga Point (AKV-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lunga Point&amp;quot; (AKV-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870216" start="66685" end="66719" title="USS Hollandia (AKV-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hollandia&amp;quot; (AKV-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870860" start="66733" end="66767" title="USS Kwajalein (AKV-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kwajalein&amp;quot; (AKV-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867802" start="66781" end="66818" title="USS Bougainville (AKV-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bougainville&amp;quot; (AKV-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871597" start="66833" end="66867" title="USS Matanikau (AKV-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Matanikau&amp;quot; (AKV-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468962" start="66918" end="66959" title="USS Commencement Bay (AKV-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Commencement Bay&amp;quot; (AKV-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867745" start="66984" end="67021" title="USS Block Island (AKV-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Block Island&amp;quot; (AKV-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869720" start="67043" end="67083" title="USS Gilbert Islands (AKV-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gilbert Islands&amp;quot; (AKV-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542846" start="67145" end="67176" title="USS Card (AKV-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Card&amp;quot; (T-AKV-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151189" start="67286" end="67318" title="USNS Core (T-AKV-41)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Core&amp;quot; (T-AKV-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147104" start="67365" end="67399" title="USNS Breton (T-AKV-42)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Breton&amp;quot; (T-AKV-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q829506" start="67429" end="67464" title="USNS Croatan (T-AKV-43)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Croatan&amp;quot; (T-AKV-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871912" start="67732" end="67762" title="USS Monitor (AN-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Monitor&amp;quot; (AN-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871935" start="67793" end="67823" title="USS Montauk (AN-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Montauk&amp;quot; (AN-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872501" start="67854" end="67882" title="USS Osage (AN-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Osage&amp;quot; (AN-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873890" start="67913" end="67942" title="USS Saugus (AN-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saugus&amp;quot; (AN-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870740" start="67973" end="68002" title="USS Keokuk (AN-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Keokuk&amp;quot; (AN-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969658" start="68137" end="68159" title="Aloe-class net laying ship" label="&amp;quot;Aloe&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867238" start="68163" end="68190" title="USS Aloe (AN-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aloe&amp;quot; (AN-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867444" start="68193" end="68219" title="USS Ash (AN-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ash&amp;quot; (AN-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867814" start="68222" end="68252" title="USS Boxwood (AN-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Boxwood&amp;quot; (AN-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867956" start="68255" end="68287" title="USS Butternut (AN-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Butternut&amp;quot; (AN-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549008" start="68289" end="68305" title="Operation Wigwam" label="Operation Wigwam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868147" start="68354" end="68385" title="USS Catalpa (AN-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Catalpa&amp;quot; (AN-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868290" start="68388" end="68420" title="USS Chestnut (AN-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chestnut&amp;quot; (AN-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868366" start="68423" end="68455" title="USS Cinchona (AN-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cinchona&amp;quot; (AN-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867910" start="68458" end="68489" title="USS Buckeye (AN-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Buckeye&amp;quot; (AN-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867915" start="68492" end="68525" title="USS Buckthorn (AN-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Buckthorn&amp;quot; (AN-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869035" start="68528" end="68557" title="USS Ebony (AN-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ebony&amp;quot; (AN-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869239" start="68560" end="68594" title="USS Eucalyptus (AN-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Eucalyptus&amp;quot; (AN-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868334" start="68597" end="68631" title="USS Chinquapin (AN-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chinquapin&amp;quot; (AN-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869914" start="68634" end="68666" title="USS Gum Tree (AN-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gum Tree&amp;quot; (AN-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870223" start="68669" end="68698" title="USS Holly (AN-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Holly&amp;quot; (AN-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869094" start="68701" end="68730" title="USS Elder (AN-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elder&amp;quot; (AN-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q263871" start="68732" end="68745" title="Operation Ivy" label="Operation Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871156" start="68773" end="68802" title="USS Larch (AN-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Larch&amp;quot; (AN-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871312" start="68805" end="68835" title="USS Locust (AN-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Locust&amp;quot; (AN-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871448" start="68838" end="68870" title="USS Mahogany (AN-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mahogany&amp;quot; (AN-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871477" start="68873" end="68902" title="USS Mango (AN-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mango&amp;quot; (AN-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869948" start="68905" end="68938" title="USS Hackberry (AN-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hackberry&amp;quot; (AN-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871817" start="68941" end="68971" title="USS Mimosa (AN-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mimosa&amp;quot; (AN-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871998" start="68974" end="69006" title="USS Mulberry (AN-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mulberry&amp;quot; (AN-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872623" start="69009" end="69037" title="USS Palm (AN-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palm&amp;quot; (AN-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705792" start="69040" end="69069" title="USS Hazel (AN-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hazel&amp;quot; (AN-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873338" start="69072" end="69103" title="USS Redwood (AN-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Redwood&amp;quot; (AN-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705791" start="69106" end="69138" title="USS Rosewood (AN-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rosewood&amp;quot; (AN-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873811" start="69141" end="69175" title="USS Sandalwood (AN-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sandalwood&amp;quot; (AN-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872345" start="69178" end="69208" title="USS Nutmeg (AN-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nutmeg&amp;quot; (AN-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874645" start="69211" end="69243" title="USS Teaberry (AN-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Teaberry&amp;quot; (AN-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874646" start="69246" end="69274" title="USS Teak (AN-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Teak&amp;quot; (AN-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872800" start="69277" end="69311" title="USS Pepperwood (AN-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pepperwood&amp;quot; (AN-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875712" start="69314" end="69341" title="USS Yew (AN-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yew&amp;quot; (AN-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696997" start="69342" end="69369" title="Ailanthus-class net laying ship" label="&amp;quot;Ailanthus&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867107" start="69373" end="69406" title="USS Ailanthus (AN-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ailanthus&amp;quot; (AN-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705788" start="69445" end="69479" title="USS Bitterbush (AN-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bitterbush&amp;quot; (AN-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867297" start="69482" end="69512" title="USS Anaqua (AN-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Anaqua&amp;quot; (AN-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867579" start="69515" end="69546" title="USS Baretta (AN-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Baretta&amp;quot; (AN-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868398" start="69549" end="69582" title="USS Cliffrose (AN-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cliffrose&amp;quot; (AN-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873880" start="69585" end="69618" title="USS Satinleaf (AN-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Satinleaf&amp;quot; (AN-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868567" start="69621" end="69653" title="USS Corkwood (AN-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Corkwood&amp;quot; (AN-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868571" start="69656" end="69686" title="USS Cornel (AN-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cornel&amp;quot; (AN-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871594" start="69689" end="69719" title="USS Mastic (AN-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mastic&amp;quot; (AN-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705784" start="69722" end="69753" title="USS Canotia (AN-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Canotia&amp;quot; (AN-47)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871136" start="69756" end="69789" title="USS Lancewood (AN-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lancewood&amp;quot; (AN-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872648" start="69792" end="69822" title="USS Papaya (AN-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Papaya&amp;quot; (AN-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868369" start="69825" end="69857" title="USS Cinnamon (AN-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cinnamon&amp;quot; (AN-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874153" start="69860" end="69894" title="USS Silverbell (AN-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Silverbell&amp;quot; (AN-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874224" start="69897" end="69929" title="USS Snowbell (AN-52)" label="USS &amp;quot;Snowbell&amp;quot; (AN-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146805" start="69942" end="69956" title="Typhoon Louise (1945)" label="Typhoon Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874296" start="69980" end="70013" title="USS Spicewood (AN-53)" label="USS &amp;quot;Spicewood&amp;quot; (AN-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705783" start="70016" end="70050" title="USS Manchineel (AN-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manchineel&amp;quot; (AN-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874820" start="70053" end="70086" title="USS Torchwood (AN-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Torchwood&amp;quot; (AN-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875614" start="70089" end="70124" title="USS Winterberry (AN-56)" label="USS &amp;quot;Winterberry&amp;quot; (AN-56)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875080" start="70127" end="70159" title="USS Viburnum (AN-57)" label="USS &amp;quot;Viburnum&amp;quot; (AN-57)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866970" start="70162" end="70191" title="USS Abele (AN-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abele&amp;quot; (AN-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874670" start="70194" end="70227" title="USS Terebinth (AN-59)" label="USS &amp;quot;Terebinth&amp;quot; (AN-59)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868152" start="70230" end="70261" title="USS Catclaw (AN-60)" label="USS &amp;quot;Catclaw&amp;quot; (AN-60)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868327" start="70264" end="70298" title="USS Chinaberry (AN-61)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chinaberry&amp;quot; (AN-61)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870245" start="70301" end="70332" title="USS Hoptree (AN-62)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hoptree&amp;quot; (AN-62)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875491" start="70335" end="70368" title="USS Whitewood (AN-63)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whitewood&amp;quot; (AN-63)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866957" start="70385" end="70420" title="USS Palo Blanco (AN-64)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palo Blanco&amp;quot; (AN-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866958" start="70423" end="70457" title="USS Palo Verde (AN-65)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palo Verde&amp;quot; (AN-65)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872905" start="70460" end="70489" title="USS Pinon (AN-66)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinon&amp;quot; (AN-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874097" start="70492" end="70525" title="USS Shellbark (AN-67)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shellbark&amp;quot; (AN-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874154" start="70528" end="70562" title="USS Silverleaf (AN-68)" label="USS &amp;quot;Silverleaf&amp;quot; (AN-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874349" start="70565" end="70597" title="USS Stagbush (AN-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stagbush&amp;quot; (AN-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866959" start="70600" end="70632" title="USS Allthorn (AN-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Allthorn&amp;quot; (AN-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866960" start="70635" end="70665" title="USS Tesota (AN-71)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tesota&amp;quot; (AN-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866961" start="70668" end="70698" title="USS Yaupon (AN-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yaupon&amp;quot; (AN-72)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633851" start="70701" end="70732" title="USS Precept (AN-73)" label="USS &amp;quot;Precept&amp;quot; (AN-73)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633850" start="70735" end="70767" title="USS Boxelder (AN-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Boxelder&amp;quot; (AN-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633853" start="70770" end="70801" title="USS Prefect (AN-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prefect&amp;quot; (AN-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631090" start="70804" end="70837" title="USS Satinwood (AN-76)" label="USS &amp;quot;Satinwood&amp;quot; (AN-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633859" start="70840" end="70872" title="USS Seagrape (AN-77)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seagrape&amp;quot; (AN-77)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933223" start="70873" end="70897" title="Cohoes-class net laying ship" label="&amp;quot;Cohoes&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868437" start="70901" end="70931" title="USS Cohoes (AN-78)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cohoes&amp;quot; (AN-78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869236" start="70934" end="70963" title="USS Etlah (AN-79)" label="USS &amp;quot;Etlah&amp;quot; (AN-79)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="70965" end="70985" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874467" start="71013" end="71044" title="USS Suncook (AN-80)" label="USS &amp;quot;Suncook&amp;quot; (AN-80)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871474" start="71081" end="71113" title="USS Manayunk (AN-81)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manayunk&amp;quot; (AN-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871537" start="71116" end="71148" title="USS Marietta (AN-82)" label="USS &amp;quot;Marietta&amp;quot; (AN-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11671621" start="71151" end="71181" title="USS Nahant (AN-83)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nahant&amp;quot; (AN-83)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872145" start="71184" end="71214" title="USS Naubuc (AN-84)" label="USS &amp;quot;Naubuc&amp;quot; (AN-84)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872438" start="71217" end="71247" title="USS Oneota (AN-85)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oneota&amp;quot; (AN-85)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872682" start="71284" end="71320" title="USS Passaconaway (AN-86)" label="USS &amp;quot;Passaconaway&amp;quot; (AN-86)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872685" start="71323" end="71354" title="USS Passaic (AN-87)" label="USS &amp;quot;Passaic&amp;quot; (AN-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874063" start="71357" end="71391" title="USS Shakamaxon (AN-88)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shakamaxon&amp;quot; (AN-88)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874810" start="71428" end="71461" title="USS Tonawanda (AN-89)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tonawanda&amp;quot; (AN-89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874908" start="71464" end="71494" title="USS Tunxis (AN-90)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tunxis&amp;quot; (AN-90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875370" start="71497" end="71527" title="USS Waxsaw (AN-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Waxsaw&amp;quot; (AN-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875704" start="71530" end="71559" title="USS Yazoo (AN-92)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yazoo&amp;quot; (AN-92)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867956" start="71584" end="71617" title="USS Butternut (AN-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Butternut&amp;quot; (ANL-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408172" start="71790" end="71799" title="T1 tanker" label="T1 tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144252" start="71921" end="71947" title="Patapsco-class gasoline tanker" label="&amp;quot;Patapsco&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872691" start="71969" end="72001" title="USS Patapsco (AOG-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Patapsco&amp;quot; (AOG-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q729219" start="72015" end="72031" title="Operation Castle" label="Operation Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870760" start="72059" end="72087" title="USS Kern (AOG-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kern&amp;quot; (AOG-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873470" start="72090" end="72124" title="USS Rio Grande (AOG-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rio Grande&amp;quot; (AOG-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875179" start="72127" end="72157" title="USS Wabash (AOG-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wabash&amp;quot; (AOG-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874505" start="72160" end="72195" title="USS Susquehanna (AOG-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Susquehanna&amp;quot; (AOG-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867089" start="72198" end="72228" title="USS Agawam (AOG-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Agawam&amp;quot; (AOG-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q263871" start="72230" end="72243" title="Operation Ivy" label="Operation Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869120" start="72271" end="72302" title="USS Elkhorn (AOG-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elkhorn&amp;quot; (AOG-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869672" start="72305" end="72336" title="USS Genesee (AOG-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Genesee&amp;quot; (AOG-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870815" start="72339" end="72373" title="USS Kishwaukee (AOG-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kishwaukee&amp;quot; (AOG-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872180" start="72376" end="72409" title="USS Nemasket (AOG-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nemasket&amp;quot; (AOG-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874804" start="72412" end="72446" title="USS Tombigbee (AOG-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tombigbee&amp;quot; (AOG-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="72448" end="72468" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868266" start="72496" end="72529" title="USS Chehalis (AOG-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chehalis&amp;quot; (AOG-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868287" start="72602" end="72636" title="USS Chestatee (AOG-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chestatee&amp;quot; (AOG-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868294" start="72639" end="72673" title="USS Chewaucan (AOG-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chewaucan&amp;quot; (AOG-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871505" start="72676" end="72710" title="USS Maquoketa (AOG-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maquoketa&amp;quot; (AOG-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700778" start="72713" end="72749" title="USS Mattabesset (AOG-52)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mattabesset&amp;quot; (AOG-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872083" start="72752" end="72786" title="USS Namakogon (AOG-53)" label="USS &amp;quot;Namakogon&amp;quot; (AOG-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096018" start="72789" end="72822" title="USS Natchaug (AOG-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Natchaug&amp;quot; (AOG-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872206" start="72825" end="72858" title="USS Nespelen (AOG-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nespelen&amp;quot; (AOG-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872341" start="72861" end="72893" title="USS Noxubee (AOG-56)" label="USS &amp;quot;Noxubee&amp;quot; (AOG-56)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023094" start="72896" end="72931" title="USS Pecatonica (AOG-57)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pecatonica&amp;quot; (AOG-57)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872900" start="72934" end="72967" title="USS Pinnebog (AOG-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinnebog&amp;quot; (AOG-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875190" start="72970" end="73002" title="USS Wacissa (AOG-59)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wacissa&amp;quot; (AOG-59)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869955" start="73031" end="73062" title="USS Halawa (AOG-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Halawa&amp;quot; (AOG-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868501" start="73065" end="73099" title="USS Conasauga (AOG-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Conasauga&amp;quot; (AOG-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093597" start="73100" end="73126" title="Mettawee-class gasoline tanker" label="&amp;quot;Mettawee&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871767" start="73147" end="73180" title="USS Mettawee (AOG-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mettawee&amp;quot; (AOG-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364168" start="73183" end="73218" title="USS Pasquotank (AOG-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pasquotank&amp;quot; (AOG-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873747" start="73221" end="73257" title="USS Sakatonchee (AOG-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sakatonchee&amp;quot; (AOG-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364196" start="73260" end="73292" title="USS Seekonk (AOG-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seekonk&amp;quot; (AOG-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874033" start="73295" end="73330" title="USS Sequatchie (AOG-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sequatchie&amp;quot; (AOG-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875354" start="73333" end="73366" title="USS Wautauga (AOG-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wautauga&amp;quot; (AOG-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867281" start="73369" end="73403" title="USS Ammonusuc (AOG-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ammonusuc&amp;quot; (AOG-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874092" start="73406" end="73440" title="USS Sheepscot (AOG-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sheepscot&amp;quot; (AOG-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867989" start="73477" end="73509" title="USS Calamus (AOG-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Calamus&amp;quot; (AOG-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868348" start="73512" end="73546" title="USS Chiwaukum (AOG-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chiwaukum&amp;quot; (AOG-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869215" start="73549" end="73583" title="USS Escatawpa (AOG-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Escatawpa&amp;quot; (AOG-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869892" start="73586" end="73618" title="USS Gualala (AOG-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gualala&amp;quot; (AOG-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870200" start="73621" end="73654" title="USS Hiwassee (AOG-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hiwassee&amp;quot; (AOG-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364133" start="73657" end="73691" title="USS Kalamazoo (AOG-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kalamazoo&amp;quot; (AOG-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870669" start="73694" end="73726" title="USS Kanawha (AOG-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kanawha&amp;quot; (AOG-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872120" start="73729" end="73765" title="USS Narraguagas (AOG-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Narraguagas&amp;quot; (AOG-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364160" start="73768" end="73804" title="USS Ochlockonee (AOG-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ochlockonee&amp;quot; (AOG-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872394" start="73807" end="73838" title="USS Oconee (AOG-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oconee&amp;quot; (AOG-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872410" start="73841" end="73874" title="USS Ogeechee (AOG-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ogeechee&amp;quot; (AOG-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872455" start="73877" end="73911" title="USS Ontonagon (AOG-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ontonagon&amp;quot; (AOG-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875684" start="73914" end="73945" title="USS Yahara (AOG-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yahara&amp;quot; (AOG-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873009" start="73948" end="73984" title="USS Ponchatoula (AOG-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ponchatoula&amp;quot; (AOG-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364181" start="73987" end="74021" title="USS Quastinet (AOG-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quastinet&amp;quot; (AOG-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873714" start="74024" end="74058" title="USS Sacandaga (AOG-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sacandaga&amp;quot; (AOG-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874690" start="74061" end="74095" title="USS Tetonkaha (AOG-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tetonkaha&amp;quot; (AOG-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874828" start="74098" end="74131" title="USS Towaliga (AOG-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Towaliga&amp;quot; (AOG-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874893" start="74134" end="74167" title="USS Tularosa (AOG-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tularosa&amp;quot; (AOG-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875222" start="74170" end="74202" title="USS Wakulla (AOG-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wakulla&amp;quot; (AOG-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875682" start="74205" end="74236" title="USS Yacona (AOG-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yacona&amp;quot; (AOG-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875352" start="74239" end="74271" title="USS Waupaca (AOG-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Waupaca&amp;quot; (AOG-46)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74274" end="74306" title="USS Manokin (AOG-60)" label="USS &amp;quot;Manokin&amp;quot; (AOG-60)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74309" end="74342" title="USS Sakonnet (AOG-61)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sakonnet&amp;quot; (AOG-61)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74345" end="74379" title="USS Conemaugh (AOG-62)" label="USS &amp;quot;Conemaugh&amp;quot; (AOG-62)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74382" end="74417" title="USS Klaskanine (AOG-63)" label="USS &amp;quot;Klaskanine&amp;quot; (AOG-63)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811650" start="74467" end="74501" title="USS Klickitat (AOG-64)" label="USS &amp;quot;Klickitat&amp;quot; (AOG-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811658" start="74504" end="74539" title="USS Michigamme (AOG-65)" label="USS &amp;quot;Michigamme&amp;quot; (AOG-65)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872098" start="74542" end="74576" title="USS Nanticoke (AOG-66)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nanticoke&amp;quot; (AOG-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811668" start="74579" end="74611" title="USS Peconic (AOG-68)" label="USS &amp;quot;Peconic&amp;quot; (AOG-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718263" start="74614" end="74647" title="USS Petaluma (AOG-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Petaluma&amp;quot; (AOG-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782904" start="74668" end="74703" title="USS Piscataqua (AOG-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Piscataqua&amp;quot; (AOG-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870662" start="74749" end="74780" title="USS Kaloli (AOG-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kaloli&amp;quot; (AOG-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867429" start="74783" end="74817" title="USS Aroostook (AOG-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aroostook&amp;quot; (AOG-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869922" start="74820" end="74853" title="USS Guyandot (AOG-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Guyandot&amp;quot; (AOG-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874106" start="74856" end="74891" title="USS Shikellamy (AOG-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shikellamy&amp;quot; (AOG-47)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74904" end="74937" title="USS Nordaway (AOG-67)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nordaway&amp;quot; (AOG-67)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74940" end="74975" title="USS Quinnebaug (AOG-71)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quinnebaug&amp;quot; (AOG-71)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74978" end="75014" title="USS Sebasticook (AOG-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sebasticook&amp;quot; (AOG-72)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75017" end="75050" title="USS Kiamichi (AOG-73)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kiamichi&amp;quot; (AOG-73)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75053" end="75085" title="USS Tellico (AOG-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tellico&amp;quot; (AOG-74)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75088" end="75120" title="USS Truckee (AOG-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Truckee&amp;quot; (AOG-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706489" start="75123" end="75156" title="USNS Tonti (T-AOG-76)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Tonti&amp;quot; (T-AOG-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866697" start="75159" end="75193" title="USNS Rincon (T-AOG-77)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Rincon&amp;quot; (T-AOG-77)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75196" end="75231" title="USNS Nodaway (T-AOG-78)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Nodaway&amp;quot; (T-AOG-78)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75234" end="75270" title="USNS Petaluma (T-AOG-79)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Petaluma&amp;quot; (T-AOG-79)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75273" end="75311" title="USNS Piscataqua (T-AOG-80)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Piscataqua&amp;quot; (T-AOG-80)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866489" start="75314" end="75348" title="USNS Alatna (T-AOG-81)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Alatna&amp;quot; (T-AOG-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425035" start="75350" end="75367" title="Operation Dominic" label="Operation Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866521" start="75395" end="75436" title="USNS Chattahoochee (T-AOG-82)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Chattahoochee&amp;quot; (T-AOG-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870106" start="75592" end="75624" title="USS Henderson (AP-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Henderson&amp;quot; (AP-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868945" start="75639" end="75667" title="USS Doyen (AP-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Doyen&amp;quot; (AP-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869993" start="75683" end="75713" title="USS Hancock (AP-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hancock&amp;quot; (AP-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867401" start="75729" end="75759" title="USS Argonne (AP-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Argonne&amp;quot; (AP-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873774" start="75775" end="75806" title="USS Chaumont (AP-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chaumont&amp;quot; (AP-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875563" start="75822" end="75865" title="USS William Ward Burrows (AP-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;William Ward Burrows&amp;quot; (AP-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875455" start="75868" end="75898" title="USS Wharton (AP-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wharton&amp;quot; (AP-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="75900" end="75920" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870025" start="75948" end="75977" title="USS Harris (AP-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harris&amp;quot; (AP-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875755" start="75993" end="76022" title="USS Zeilin (AP-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zeilin&amp;quot; (AP-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871638" start="76038" end="76070" title="USS McCawley (AP-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;McCawley&amp;quot; (AP-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867585" start="76086" end="76117" title="USS Barnett (AP-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Barnett&amp;quot; (AP-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870164" start="76133" end="76164" title="USS Heywood (AP-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Heywood&amp;quot; (AP-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869691" start="76180" end="76221" title="USS George F. Elliott (AP-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;George F. Elliott&amp;quot; (AP-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869522" start="76285" end="76315" title="USS Fuller (AP-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fuller&amp;quot; (AP-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875554" start="76331" end="76372" title="USS William P. Biddle (AP-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;William P. Biddle&amp;quot; (AP-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872217" start="76388" end="76419" title="USS Neville (AP-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Neville&amp;quot; (AP-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870033" start="76447" end="76480" title="USS Harry Lee (AP-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harry Lee&amp;quot; (AP-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q877351" start="76497" end="76527" title="USS Catlin (AP-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Catlin&amp;quot; (AP-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872006" start="76542" end="76573" title="USS Munargo (AP-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Munargo&amp;quot; (AP-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394001" start="76576" end="76609" title="USS Wakefield (AP-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wakefield&amp;quot; (AP-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871991" start="76612" end="76648" title="USS Mount Vernon (AP-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mount Vernon&amp;quot; (AP-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q463091" start="76651" end="76685" title="USS West Point (AP-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;West Point&amp;quot; (AP-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872486" start="76688" end="76719" title="USS Orizaba (AP-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Orizaba&amp;quot; (AP-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871221" start="76734" end="76770" title="USS Leonard Wood (AP-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leonard Wood&amp;quot; (AP-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870602" start="76787" end="76828" title="USS Joseph T. Dickman (AP-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Joseph T. Dickman&amp;quot; (AP-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870298" start="76845" end="76883" title="USS Hunter Liggett (AP-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hunter Liggett&amp;quot; (AP-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394346" start="76900" end="76928" title="USS Kent (AP-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kent&amp;quot; (AP-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795963" start="76943" end="76978" title="USS U. S. Grant (AP-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;U. S. Grant&amp;quot; (AP-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870126" start="76993" end="77031" title="USS Henry T. Allen (AP-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Henry T. Allen&amp;quot; (AP-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868250" start="77055" end="77094" title="USS Chateau Thierry (AP-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chateau Thierry&amp;quot; (AP-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874341" start="77097" end="77130" title="USS St Mihiel (AP-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;St Mihiel&amp;quot; (AP-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676983" start="77133" end="77165" title="USS Republic (AP-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Republic&amp;quot; (AP-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870461" start="77180" end="77220" title="USS J. Franklin Bell (AP-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;J. Franklin Bell&amp;quot; (AP-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867272" start="77237" end="77276" title="USS American Legion (AP-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;American Legion&amp;quot; (AP-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865772" start="77293" end="77322" title="USAT John L. Clem" label="&amp;quot;Santa Ana&amp;quot; (AP-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873079" start="77355" end="77396" title="USS President Jackson (AP-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;President Jackson&amp;quot; (AP-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873078" start="77413" end="77452" title="USS President Adams (AP-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;President Adams&amp;quot; (AP-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873077" start="77469" end="77508" title="USS President Hayes (AP-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;President Hayes&amp;quot; (AP-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868639" start="77525" end="77562" title="USS Crescent City (AP-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Crescent City&amp;quot; (AP-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874416" start="77579" end="77612" title="USS Stratford (AP-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stratford&amp;quot; (AP-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874629" start="77615" end="77654" title="USS Tasker H. Bliss (AP-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tasker H. Bliss&amp;quot; (AP-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870280" start="77710" end="77747" title="USS Hugh L. Scott (AP-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hugh L. Scott&amp;quot; (AP-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865776" start="77851" end="77886" title="USS Thomas H. Barry (AP-45)" label="&amp;quot;Thomas H. Barry&amp;quot; (AP-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869495" start="77990" end="78027" title="USS Frederick Funston (APA-89)" label="&amp;quot;Frederick Funston&amp;quot; (AP-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870499" start="78044" end="78081" title="USS James O&amp;#x27;Hara (APA-90)" label="&amp;quot;James O&amp;#x27;Hara&amp;quot; (AP-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870595" start="78098" end="78134" title="USS Joseph Hewes (AP-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Joseph Hewes&amp;quot; (AP-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870567" start="78151" end="78184" title="USS John Penn (AP-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;John Penn&amp;quot; (AP-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869064" start="78201" end="78240" title="USS Edward Rutledge (AP-52)" label="USS &amp;quot;Edward Rutledge&amp;quot; (AP-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q304703" start="78257" end="78290" title="USS Lafayette (AP-53)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lafayette&amp;quot; (AP-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056410" start="78352" end="78385" title="USS Hermitage (AP-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hermitage&amp;quot; (AP-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867438" start="78388" end="78428" title="USS Arthur Middleton (AP-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arthur Middleton&amp;quot; (AP-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197667" start="78445" end="78481" title="USS Samuel Chase (AP-56)" label="USS &amp;quot;Samuel Chase&amp;quot; (AP-56)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869684" start="78498" end="78535" title="USS George Clymer (AP-57)" label="USS &amp;quot;George Clymer&amp;quot; (AP-57)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868217" start="78552" end="78591" title="USS Charles Carroll (AP-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;Charles Carroll&amp;quot; (AP-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874721" start="78608" end="78644" title="USS Thomas Stone (AP-59)" label="USS &amp;quot;Thomas Stone&amp;quot; (AP-59)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874718" start="78661" end="78701" title="USS Thomas Jefferson (AP-60)" label="USS &amp;quot;Thomas Jefferson&amp;quot; (AP-60)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128563" start="78718" end="78752" title="USS Monticello (AP-61)" label="USS &amp;quot;Monticello&amp;quot; (AP-61)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873346" start="78755" end="78786" title="USS Kenmore (AP-62)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kenmore&amp;quot; (AP-62)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873514" start="78802" end="78836" title="USS Rochambeau (AP-63)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rochambeau&amp;quot; (AP-63)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871925" start="78839" end="78871" title="USS Monrovia (AP-64)" label="USS &amp;quot;Monrovia&amp;quot; (AP-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868014" start="78888" end="78919" title="USS Calvert (AP-65)" label="USS &amp;quot;Calvert&amp;quot; (AP-65)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867300" start="78936" end="78965" title="USS Ancon (AP-66)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ancon&amp;quot; (AP-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868931" start="78981" end="79020" title="USS Dorothea L. Dix (AP-67)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dorothea L. Dix&amp;quot; (AP-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17300128" start="79023" end="79050" title="USS Alameda (AP-68)" label="&amp;quot;Alameda&amp;quot; (AP-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869112" start="79081" end="79125" title="USS Elizabeth C. Stanton (AP-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elizabeth C. Stanton&amp;quot; (AP-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869412" start="79128" end="79172" title="USS Florence Nightingale (AP-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Florence Nightingale&amp;quot; (AP-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871401" start="79175" end="79203" title="USS Lyon (AP-71)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lyon&amp;quot; (AP-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874497" start="79206" end="79246" title="USS Susan B. Anthony (AP-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Susan B. Anthony&amp;quot; (AP-72)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372599" start="79249" end="79282" title="USS Leedstown (AP-73)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leedstown&amp;quot; (AP-73)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871212" start="79338" end="79369" title="USS Lejeune (AP-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lejeune&amp;quot; (AP-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869600" start="79372" end="79402" title="USS Gemini (AP-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gemini&amp;quot; (AP-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867314" start="79425" end="79461" title="USS Anne Arundel (AP-76)" label="USS &amp;quot;Anne Arundel&amp;quot; (AP-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874740" start="79464" end="79496" title="USS Thurston (AP-77)" label="USS &amp;quot;Thurston&amp;quot; (AP-77)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867623" start="79499" end="79531" title="USS Bayfield (AP-78)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bayfield&amp;quot; (AP-78)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867774" start="79548" end="79579" title="USS Bolivar (AP-79)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bolivar&amp;quot; (AP-79)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868007" start="79596" end="79628" title="USS Callaway (AP-80)" label="USS &amp;quot;Callaway&amp;quot; (AP-80)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868022" start="79645" end="79676" title="USS Cambria (AP-81)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cambria&amp;quot; (AP-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868162" start="79693" end="79725" title="USS Cavalier (AP-82)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cavalier&amp;quot; (AP-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868317" start="79742" end="79773" title="USS Chilton (AP-83)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chilton&amp;quot; (AP-83)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868389" start="79790" end="79818" title="USS Clay (AP-84)" label="USS &amp;quot;Clay&amp;quot; (AP-84)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868690" start="79835" end="79865" title="USS Custer (AP-85)" label="USS &amp;quot;Custer&amp;quot; (AP-85)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868965" start="79882" end="79912" title="USS DuPage (AP-86)" label="USS &amp;quot;DuPage&amp;quot; (AP-86)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869137" start="79929" end="79959" title="USS Elmore (AP-87)" label="USS &amp;quot;Elmore&amp;quot; (AP-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869335" start="79976" end="80007" title="USS Fayette (AP-88)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fayette&amp;quot; (AP-88)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869503" start="80024" end="80055" title="USS Fremont (AP-89)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fremont&amp;quot; (AP-89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870114" start="80072" end="80103" title="USS Henrico (AP-90)" label="USS &amp;quot;Henrico&amp;quot; (AP-90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870840" start="80120" end="80148" title="USS Knox (AP-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Knox&amp;quot; (AP-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702519" start="80165" end="80194" title="USS Lamar (AP-92)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lamar&amp;quot; (AP-92)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871219" start="80211" end="80239" title="USS Leon (AP-93)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leon&amp;quot; (AP-93)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872489" start="80256" end="80286" title="USS Ormsby (AP-94)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ormsby&amp;quot; (AP-94)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872874" start="80303" end="80333" title="USS Pierce (AP-95)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pierce&amp;quot; (AP-95)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874105" start="80350" end="80382" title="USS Sheridan (AP-96)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sheridan&amp;quot; (AP-96)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874459" start="80399" end="80429" title="USS Sumter (AP-97)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sumter&amp;quot; (AP-97)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875288" start="80446" end="80476" title="USS Warren (AP-98)" label="USS &amp;quot;Warren&amp;quot; (AP-98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875373" start="80493" end="80522" title="USS Wayne (APA-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wayne&amp;quot; (AP-99)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875593" start="80539" end="80571" title="USS Windsor (AP-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot; (AP-100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871206" start="80588" end="80617" title="USS Wood (AP-101)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wood&amp;quot; (AP-101)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871092" start="80634" end="80666" title="USS Hotspur (AP-102)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hotspur&amp;quot; (AP-102)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873081" start="80669" end="80708" title="USS President Polk (AP-103)" label="USS &amp;quot;President Polk&amp;quot; (AP-103)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873080" start="80711" end="80752" title="USS President Monroe (AP-104)" label="USS &amp;quot;President Monroe&amp;quot; (AP-104)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869689" start="80755" end="80797" title="USS George F. Elliott (AP-105)" label="USS &amp;quot;George F. Elliott&amp;quot; (AP-105)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868159" start="80800" end="80833" title="USS Catskill (AP-106)" label="USS &amp;quot;Catskill&amp;quot; (AP-106)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872561" start="80858" end="80888" title="USS Ozark (AP-107)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ozark&amp;quot; (AP-107)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872501" start="80913" end="80943" title="USS Osage (AP-108)" label="USS &amp;quot;Osage&amp;quot; (AP-108)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873890" start="80968" end="80999" title="USS Saugus (AP-109)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saugus&amp;quot; (AP-109)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869632" start="81024" end="81066" title="USS General John Pope (AP-110)" label="USS &amp;quot;General John Pope&amp;quot; (AP-110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869607" start="81069" end="81116" title="USS General A. E. Anderson (AP-111)" label="USS &amp;quot;General A. E. Anderson&amp;quot; (AP-111)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869659" start="81119" end="81162" title="USS General W. A. Mann (AP-112)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. A. Mann&amp;quot; (AP-112)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869626" start="81165" end="81210" title="USS General H. W. Butner (AP-113)" label="USS &amp;quot;General H. W. Butner&amp;quot; (AP-113)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869667" start="81213" end="81262" title="USS General William Mitchell (AP-114)" label="USS &amp;quot;General William Mitchell&amp;quot; (AP-114)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869619" start="81265" end="81315" title="USS General George M. Randall (AP-115)" label="USS &amp;quot;General George M. Randall&amp;quot; (AP-115)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869638" start="81318" end="81362" title="USS General M. C. Meigs (AP-116)" label="USS &amp;quot;General M. C. Meigs&amp;quot; (AP-116)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869665" start="81365" end="81410" title="USS General W. H. Gordon (AP-117)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. H. Gordon&amp;quot; (AP-117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869666" start="81413" end="81462" title="USS General W. P. Richardson (AP-118)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. P. Richardson&amp;quot; (AP-118)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869668" start="81465" end="81512" title="USS General William Weigel (AP-119)" label="USS &amp;quot;General William Weigel&amp;quot; (AP-119)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867054" start="81515" end="81560" title="USS Admiral W. S. Benson (AP-120)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral W. S. Benson&amp;quot; (AP-120)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867054" start="81563" end="81615" title="USNS General Daniel I. Sultan (T-AP-120)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Daniel I. Sultan&amp;quot; (T-AP-120)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867053" start="81618" end="81662" title="USS Admiral W. L. Capps (AP-121)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral W. L. Capps&amp;quot; (AP-121)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867053" start="81665" end="81715" title="USNS General Hugh J. Gaffey (T-AP-121)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Hugh J. Gaffey&amp;quot; (T-AP-121)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867051" start="81732" end="81777" title="USS Admiral R. E. Coontz (AP-122)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral R. E. Coontz&amp;quot; (AP-122)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867051" start="81780" end="81834" title="USNS General Alexander M. Patch (T-AP-122)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Alexander M. Patch&amp;quot; (T-AP-122)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707203" start="81837" end="81882" title="USS Admiral E. W. Eberle (AP-123)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral E. W. Eberle&amp;quot; (AP-123)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707203" start="81885" end="81937" title="USNS General Simon B. Buckner (T-AP-123)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Simon B. Buckner&amp;quot; (T-AP-123)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867045" start="81940" end="81985" title="USS Admiral C. F. Hughes (AP-124)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral C. F. Hughes&amp;quot; (AP-124)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867045" start="81988" end="82040" title="USNS General Edwin D. Patrick (T-AP-124)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Edwin D. Patrick&amp;quot; (T-AP-124)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867049" start="82043" end="82086" title="USS Admiral H. T. Mayo (AP-125)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral H. T. Mayo&amp;quot; (AP-125)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867049" start="82089" end="82141" title="USNS General Nelson M. Walker (T-AP-125)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Nelson M. Walker&amp;quot; (T-AP-125)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867050" start="82144" end="82188" title="USS Admiral Hugh Rodman (AP-126)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral Hugh Rodman&amp;quot; (AP-126)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867050" start="82191" end="82239" title="USNS General Maurice Rose (T-AP-126)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General Maurice Rose&amp;quot; (T-AP-126)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867055" start="82242" end="82285" title="USS Admiral W. S. Sims (AP-127)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral W. S. Sims&amp;quot; (AP-127)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867055" start="82288" end="82340" title="USNS General William O. Darby (T-AP-127)" label="USNS &amp;quot;General William O. Darby&amp;quot; (T-AP-127)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394228" start="82357" end="82402" title="USS Admiral D. W. Taylor (AP-128)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral D. W. Taylor&amp;quot; (AP-128)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394239" start="82426" end="82470" title="USS Admiral F. B. Upham (AP-129)" label="USS &amp;quot;Admiral F. B. Upham&amp;quot; (AP-129)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869616" start="82494" end="82539" title="USS General G. O. Squier (AP-130)" label="USS &amp;quot;General G. O. Squier&amp;quot; (AP-130)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869656" start="82542" end="82586" title="USS General T. H. Bliss (AP-131)" label="USS &amp;quot;General T. H. Bliss&amp;quot; (AP-131)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869630" start="82589" end="82634" title="USS General J. R. Brooke (AP-132)" label="USS &amp;quot;General J. R. Brooke&amp;quot; (AP-132)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869640" start="82637" end="82685" title="USS General Oswald H. Ernst (AP-133)" label="USS &amp;quot;General Oswald H. Ernst&amp;quot; (AP-133)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869649" start="82688" end="82732" title="USS General R. L. Howze (AP-134)" label="USS &amp;quot;General R. L. Howze&amp;quot; (AP-134)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869664" start="82735" end="82779" title="USS General W. M. Black (AP-135)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. M. Black&amp;quot; (AP-135)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869625" start="82782" end="82826" title="USS General H. L. Scott (AP-136)" label="USS &amp;quot;General H. L. Scott&amp;quot; (AP-136)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869652" start="82829" end="82875" title="USS General S. D. Sturgis (AP-137)" label="USS &amp;quot;General S. D. Sturgis&amp;quot; (AP-137)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869612" start="82878" end="82923" title="USS General C. G. Morton (AP-138)" label="USS &amp;quot;General C. G. Morton&amp;quot; (AP-138)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869648" start="82926" end="82971" title="USS General R. E. Callan (AP-139)" label="USS &amp;quot;General R. E. Callan&amp;quot; (AP-139)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869635" start="82989" end="83035" title="USS General M. B. Stewart (AP-140)" label="USS &amp;quot;General M. B. Stewart&amp;quot; (AP-140)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869608" start="83038" end="83083" title="USS General A. W. Greely (AP-141)" label="USS &amp;quot;General A. W. Greely&amp;quot; (AP-141)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869614" start="83086" end="83129" title="USS General C. H. Muir (AP-142)" label="USS &amp;quot;General C. H. Muir&amp;quot; (AP-142)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869623" start="83132" end="83178" title="USS General H. B. Freeman (AP-143)" label="USS &amp;quot;General H. B. Freeman&amp;quot; (AP-143)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869624" start="83181" end="83226" title="USS General H. F. Hodges (AP-144)" label="USS &amp;quot;General H. F. Hodges&amp;quot; (AP-144)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468048" start="83229" end="83274" title="USS General Harry Taylor (AP-145)" label="USS &amp;quot;General Harry Taylor&amp;quot; (AP-145)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869662" start="83293" end="83336" title="USS General W. F. Hase (AP-146)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. F. Hase&amp;quot; (AP-146)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869615" start="83339" end="83385" title="USS General E. T. Collins (AP-147)" label="USS &amp;quot;General E. T. Collins&amp;quot; (AP-147)"/>
<link wikidata="Q263871" start="83387" end="83400" title="Operation Ivy" label="Operation Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869636" start="83428" end="83473" title="USS General M. L. Hersey (AP-148)" label="USS &amp;quot;General M. L. Hersey&amp;quot; (AP-148)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869629" start="83476" end="83520" title="USS General J. H. McRae (AP-149)" label="USS &amp;quot;General J. H. McRae&amp;quot; (AP-149)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869639" start="83523" end="83569" title="USS General M. M. Patrick (AP-150)" label="USS &amp;quot;General M. M. Patrick&amp;quot; (AP-150)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869661" start="83572" end="83619" title="USS General W. C. Langfitt (AP-151)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. C. Langfitt&amp;quot; (AP-151)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869641" start="83622" end="83665" title="USS General Omar Bundy (AP-152)" label="USS &amp;quot;General Omar Bundy&amp;quot; (AP-152)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869651" start="83668" end="83717" title="USS General R. M. Blatchford (AP-153)" label="USS &amp;quot;General R. M. Blatchford&amp;quot; (AP-153)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869633" start="83720" end="83766" title="USS General LeRoy Eltinge (AP-154)" label="USS &amp;quot;General LeRoy Eltinge&amp;quot; (AP-154)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869606" start="83769" end="83816" title="USS General A. W. Brewster (AP-155)" label="USS &amp;quot;General A. W. Brewster&amp;quot; (AP-155)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869613" start="83819" end="83865" title="USS General D. E. Aultman (AP-156)" label="USS &amp;quot;General D. E. Aultman&amp;quot; (AP-156)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869611" start="83868" end="83913" title="USS General C. C. Ballou (AP-157)" label="USS &amp;quot;General C. C. Ballou&amp;quot; (AP-157)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869663" start="83916" end="83959" title="USS General W. G. Haan (AP-158)" label="USS &amp;quot;General W. G. Haan&amp;quot; (AP-158)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869654" start="83962" end="84013" title="USS General Stuart Heintzelman (AP-159)" label="USS &amp;quot;General Stuart Heintzelman&amp;quot; (AP-159)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871912" start="84016" end="84048" title="USS Monitor (AP-160)" label="USS &amp;quot;Monitor&amp;quot; (AP-160)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871935" start="84073" end="84105" title="USS Montauk (AP-161)" label="USS &amp;quot;Montauk&amp;quot; (AP-161)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870711" start="84130" end="84162" title="USS Kenmore (AP-162)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kenmore&amp;quot; (AP-162)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364141" start="84179" end="84214" title="USS Livingston (AP-163)" label="USS &amp;quot;Livingston&amp;quot; (AP-163)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868776" start="84231" end="84265" title="USS De Grasse (AP-164)" label="USS &amp;quot;De Grasse&amp;quot; (AP-164)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873102" start="84282" end="84321" title="USS Prince Georges (AP-165)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prince Georges&amp;quot; (AP-165)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868475" start="84338" end="84368" title="USS Comet (AP-166)" label="USS &amp;quot;Comet&amp;quot; (AP-166)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84371" end="84405" title="USS John Land (AP-167)" label="USS &amp;quot;John Land&amp;quot; (AP-167)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875278" start="84408" end="84441" title="USS War Hawk (AP-168)" label="USS &amp;quot;War Hawk&amp;quot; (AP-168)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84444" end="84480" title="USS Golden City (AP-169)" label="USS &amp;quot;Golden City&amp;quot; (AP-169)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875594" start="84483" end="84520" title="USS Winged Arrow (AP-170)" label="USS &amp;quot;Winged Arrow&amp;quot; (AP-170)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874412" start="84523" end="84558" title="USS Storm King (AP-171)" label="USS &amp;quot;Storm King&amp;quot; (AP-171)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868059" start="84561" end="84598" title="USS Cape Johnson (AP-172)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cape Johnson&amp;quot; (AP-172)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791811" start="84601" end="84647" title="USS Herald of the Morning (AP-173)" label="USS &amp;quot;Herald of the Morning&amp;quot; (AP-173)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111164481" start="84650" end="84684" title="USS Arlington (AP-174)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arlington&amp;quot; (AP-174)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874363" start="84687" end="84721" title="USS Starlight (AP-175)" label="USS &amp;quot;Starlight&amp;quot; (AP-175)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869628" start="84724" end="84775" title="USS General J. C. Breckinridge (AP-176)" label="USS &amp;quot;General J. C. Breckinridge&amp;quot; (AP-176)"/>
<link wikidata="Q689442" start="84778" end="84809" title="USS Europa (AP-177)" label="USS &amp;quot;Europa&amp;quot; (AP-177)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869495" start="84812" end="84857" title="USNS Frederick Funston (T-AP-178)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Frederick Funston&amp;quot; (T-AP-178)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870499" start="84871" end="84916" title="USNS James O&amp;#x27;Hara (T-AP-179)" label="USNS &amp;quot;James O&amp;#x27;Hara&amp;quot; (T-AP-179)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866538" start="84930" end="84973" title="USNS David C. Shanks (T-AP-180)" label="USNS &amp;quot;David C. Shanks&amp;quot; (T-AP-180)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866545" start="85003" end="85048" title="USNS Fred C. Ainsworth (T-AP-181)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Fred C. Ainsworth&amp;quot; (T-AP-181)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866549" start="85081" end="85127" title="USNS George W. Goethals (T-AP-182)" label="USNS &amp;quot;George W. Goethals&amp;quot; (T-AP-182)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866569" start="85130" end="85171" title="USNS Henry Gibbins (T-AP-183)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Henry Gibbins&amp;quot; (T-AP-183)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872896" start="85174" end="85226" title="USNS Private Elden H. Johnson (T-AP-184)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Elden H. Johnson&amp;quot; (T-AP-184)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873477" start="85239" end="85292" title="USNS Private William H. Thomas (T-AP-185)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private William H. Thomas&amp;quot; (T-AP-185)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702162" start="85305" end="85354" title="USNS Sgt. Charles E. Mower (T-AP-186)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Charles E. Mower&amp;quot; (T-AP-186)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866681" start="85367" end="85418" title="USNS Private Joe P. Martinez (T-AP-187)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Joe P. Martinez&amp;quot; (T-AP-187)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866488" start="85421" end="85462" title="USNS Aiken Victory (T-AP-188)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Aiken Victory&amp;quot; (T-AP-188)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866601" start="85465" end="85516" title="USNS Lt. Raymond O. Beaudoin (T-AP-189)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Lt. Raymond O. Beaudoin&amp;quot; (T-AP-189)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85519" end="85572" title="USNS Private Sadao S. Munemori (T-AP-190)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Private Sadao S. Munemori&amp;quot; (T-AP-190)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85575" end="85626" title="USNS Sgt. Howard E. Woodford (T-AP-191)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Howard E. Woodford&amp;quot; (T-AP-191)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866721" start="85629" end="85679" title="USNS Sgt. Sylvester Antolak (T-AP-192)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Sylvester Antolak&amp;quot; (T-AP-192)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866605" start="85682" end="85722" title="USNS Marine Adder (T-AP-193)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Adder&amp;quot; (T-AP-193)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176963" start="85742" end="85781" title="USNS Marine Lynx (T-AP-194)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Lynx&amp;quot; (T-AP-194)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744596" start="85784" end="85826" title="USNS Marine Phoenix (T-AP-195)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Phoenix&amp;quot; (T-AP-195)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374154" start="85829" end="85864" title="USNS Barrett (T-AP-196)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Barrett&amp;quot; (T-AP-196)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866548" start="85867" end="85901" title="USNS Geiger (T-AP-197)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Geiger&amp;quot; (T-AP-197)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16224149" start="85904" end="85938" title="USNS Upshur (T-AP-198)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Upshur&amp;quot; (T-AP-198)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744198" start="85941" end="85980" title="USNS Marine Carp (T-AP-199)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Carp&amp;quot; (T-AP-199)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85983" end="86025" title="USNS Marine Serpent (T-AP-202)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Marine Serpent&amp;quot; (T-AP-202)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110208008" start="86099" end="86124" title="Benewah-class barracks ship" label="&amp;quot;Benewah&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867678" start="86230" end="86262" title="USS Benewah (APB-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Benewah&amp;quot; (APB-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868444" start="86265" end="86298" title="USS Colleton (APB-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Colleton&amp;quot; (APB-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169486" start="86301" end="86332" title="USS Echols (APB-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Echols&amp;quot; (APB-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42896493" start="86349" end="86382" title="USS Marlboro (APB-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Marlboro&amp;quot; (APB-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871728" start="86385" end="86416" title="USS Mercer (APB-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mercer&amp;quot; (APB-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110152378" start="86441" end="86472" title="USS Nueces (APB-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nueces&amp;quot; (APB-40)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86497" end="86527" title="USS Wythe (APB-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wythe&amp;quot; (APB-41)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86530" end="86562" title="USS Yavapai (APB-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yavapai&amp;quot; (APB-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997117" start="86565" end="86594" title="USS Yolo (APB-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yolo&amp;quot; (APB-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108090336" start="86621" end="86658" title="USS Presque Isle (APB-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Presque Isle&amp;quot; (APB-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="86684" end="86704" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023086" start="86732" end="86766" title="USS Blackford (APB-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Blackford&amp;quot; (APB-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868925" start="86805" end="86840" title="USS Dorchester (APB-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dorchester&amp;quot; (APB-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198674" start="86879" end="86911" title="USS Kingman (APB-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kingman&amp;quot; (APB-47)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86950" end="86986" title="USS Vandenburgh (APB-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vandenburgh&amp;quot; (APB-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866996" start="86989" end="87021" title="USS Accomac (APB-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Accomac&amp;quot; (APB-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386987" start="87048" end="87080" title="USS Cameron (APB-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cameron&amp;quot; (APB-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868968" start="87119" end="87150" title="USS DuPage (APB-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;DuPage&amp;quot; (APB-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680342" start="87184" end="87233" title="USNS Sgt. Jonah E. Kelley (T-APC-116)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Jonah E. Kelley&amp;quot; (T-APC-116)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866716" start="87236" end="87288" title="USNS Sgt. George D. Keathley (T-APC-117)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. George D. Keathley&amp;quot; (T-APC-117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866720" start="87307" end="87357" title="USNS Sgt. Joseph E. Muller (T-APC-118)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sgt. Joseph E. Muller&amp;quot; (T-APC-118)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676458" start="87360" end="87408" title="USNS Pvt. Jose F. Valdez (T-APC-119)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Pvt. Jose F. Valdez&amp;quot; (T-APC-119)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105730767" start="87444" end="87480" title="APc-1-class small coastal transports" label="APc-1-class small coastal transports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87485" end="87506" title="USS APc-1" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87509" end="87530" title="USS APc-2" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87533" end="87554" title="USS APc-3" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87557" end="87578" title="USS APc-4" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87581" end="87602" title="USS APc-5" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87605" end="87626" title="USS APc-6" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87629" end="87650" title="USS APc-7" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-7&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87653" end="87674" title="USS APc-8" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87677" end="87698" title="USS APc-9" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87701" end="87723" title="USS APc-10" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87726" end="87748" title="USS APc-11" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-11&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87751" end="87773" title="USS APc-12" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87776" end="87798" title="USS APc-13" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87801" end="87823" title="USS APc-14" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-14&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581572" start="87826" end="87848" title="USS APc-15" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87851" end="87873" title="USS APc-16" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-16&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87876" end="87898" title="USS APc-17" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-17&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87901" end="87923" title="USS APc-18" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87926" end="87948" title="USS APc-19" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-19&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87951" end="87973" title="USS APc-20" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866949" start="87976" end="87998" title="USS APc-21" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-21&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88079" end="88101" title="USS APc-22" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-22&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88104" end="88126" title="USS APc-23" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-23&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88129" end="88151" title="USS APc-24" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-24&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866950" start="88154" end="88176" title="USS APc-25" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-25&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88179" end="88201" title="USS APc-26" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-26&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88204" end="88226" title="USS APc-27" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-27&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88229" end="88251" title="USS APc-28" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-28&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88254" end="88276" title="USS APc-29" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-29&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88279" end="88301" title="USS APc-30" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-30&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88304" end="88326" title="USS APc-31" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-31&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88329" end="88351" title="USS APc-32" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-32&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88354" end="88376" title="USS APc-33" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88379" end="88401" title="USS APc-34" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-34&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88404" end="88426" title="USS APc-35" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-35&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88429" end="88451" title="USS APc-36" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-36&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88454" end="88476" title="USS APc-37" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-37&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88479" end="88501" title="USS APc-38" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-38&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88504" end="88526" title="USS APc-39" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-39&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88529" end="88551" title="USS APc-40" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-40&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88554" end="88576" title="USS APc-41" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-41&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88579" end="88601" title="USS APc-42" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-42&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88604" end="88626" title="USS APc-43" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-43&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88629" end="88651" title="USS APc-44" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-44&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88654" end="88676" title="USS APc-45" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-45&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88679" end="88701" title="USS APc-46" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-46&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88704" end="88726" title="USS APc-47" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-47&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88729" end="88751" title="USS APc-48" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-48&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88754" end="88776" title="USS APc-49" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-49&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88779" end="88801" title="USS APc-50" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-50&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88804" end="88826" title="USS APc-51" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-51&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88829" end="88851" title="USS APc-52" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-52&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88854" end="88876" title="USS APc-53" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-53&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88879" end="88901" title="USS APc-54" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-54&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88904" end="88926" title="USS APc-55" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-55&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88929" end="88951" title="USS APc-56" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-56&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88954" end="88976" title="USS APc-57" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-57&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88979" end="89001" title="USS APc-58" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-58&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89004" end="89026" title="USS APc-59" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-59&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89029" end="89051" title="USS APc-60" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-60&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89054" end="89076" title="USS APc-61" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-61&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89079" end="89101" title="USS APc-62" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-62&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89104" end="89126" title="USS APc-63" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-63&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89129" end="89151" title="USS APc-64" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-64&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89154" end="89176" title="USS APc-65" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-65&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89179" end="89201" title="USS APc-66" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-66&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89204" end="89226" title="USS APc-67" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-67&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89229" end="89251" title="USS APc-68" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-68&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89254" end="89276" title="USS APc-69" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-69&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89279" end="89301" title="USS APc-70" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-70&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89304" end="89326" title="USS APc-71" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-71&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89329" end="89351" title="USS APc-72" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-72&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89354" end="89376" title="USS APc-73" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-73&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89379" end="89401" title="USS APc-74" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-74&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89404" end="89426" title="USS APc-75" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-75&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89429" end="89451" title="USS APc-76" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-76&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89454" end="89476" title="USS APc-77" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-77&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89479" end="89501" title="USS APc-78" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-78&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89504" end="89526" title="USS APc-79" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-79&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89589" end="89611" title="USS APc-85" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-85&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89614" end="89636" title="USS APc-86" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-86&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89639" end="89661" title="USS APc-87" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-87&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89664" end="89686" title="USS APc-88" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-88&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89689" end="89711" title="USS APc-89" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-89&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89714" end="89736" title="USS APc-90" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-90&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89739" end="89761" title="USS APc-91" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-91&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89764" end="89786" title="USS APc-92" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-92&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89789" end="89811" title="USS APc-93" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-93&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89814" end="89836" title="USS APc-94" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-94&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89839" end="89861" title="USS APc-95" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-95&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89864" end="89886" title="USS APc-96" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-96&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89889" end="89911" title="USS APc-97" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-97&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89914" end="89936" title="USS APc-98" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-98&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90010" end="90033" title="USS APc-101" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-101&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90036" end="90059" title="USS APc-102" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-102&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90062" end="90085" title="USS APc-103" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-103&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90150" end="90173" title="USS APc-108" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-108&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90176" end="90199" title="USS APc-109" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-109&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90202" end="90225" title="USS APc-110" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-110&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90228" end="90251" title="USS APc-111" label="USS &amp;quot;APc-111&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90407" end="90428" title="USS APL-1" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639876" start="90430" end="90453" title="APL-2-class barracks ship" label="&amp;quot;APL-2&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235876" start="90457" end="90478" title="USS APL-2" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90485" end="90506" title="USS APL-3" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235882" start="90509" end="90530" title="USS APL-4" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235886" start="90537" end="90558" title="USS APL-5" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90565" end="90586" title="USS APL-6" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90589" end="90610" title="USS APL-7" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-7&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90613" end="90634" title="USS APL-8" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90637" end="90658" title="USS APL-9" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90661" end="90683" title="USS APL-10" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90686" end="90708" title="USS APL-11" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-11&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90711" end="90733" title="USS APL-12" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90784" end="90806" title="USS APL-13" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90857" end="90879" title="USS APL-14" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-14&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235888" start="90882" end="90904" title="USS APL-15" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90911" end="90933" title="USS APL-16" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-16&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639890" start="90944" end="90968" title="APL-17-class barracks ship" label="&amp;quot;APL-17&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90972" end="90994" title="USS APL-17" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-17&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235891" start="90997" end="91019" title="USS APL-18" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91026" end="91048" title="USS APL-19" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-19&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91051" end="91073" title="USS APL-20" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91076" end="91098" title="USS APL-21" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-21&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91101" end="91123" title="USS APL-22" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-22&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91126" end="91148" title="USS APL-23" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-23&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235896" start="91151" end="91173" title="USS APL-24" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-24&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91176" end="91198" title="USS APL-25" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-25&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235949" start="91201" end="91223" title="USS APL-26" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-26&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91226" end="91248" title="USS APL-27" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-27&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="91250" end="91270" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91293" end="91315" title="USS APL-28" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-28&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91318" end="91340" title="USS APL-29" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-29&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91347" end="91369" title="USS APL-30" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-30&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235959" start="91372" end="91394" title="USS APL-31" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-31&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91397" end="91419" title="USS APL-32" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-32&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91426" end="91448" title="USS APL-33" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91499" end="91521" title="USS APL-34" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-34&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91524" end="91546" title="USS APL-35" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-35&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91567" end="91589" title="USS APL-36" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-36&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169486" start="91610" end="91632" title="USS APL-37" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-37&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91653" end="91675" title="USS APL-38" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-38&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91696" end="91718" title="USS APL-39" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-39&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110152378" start="91739" end="91761" title="USS APL-40" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-40&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639906" start="91780" end="91804" title="APL-41-class barracks ship" label="&amp;quot;APL-41&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91808" end="91830" title="USS APL-41" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-41&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91833" end="91855" title="USS APL-42" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-42&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91862" end="91884" title="USS APL-43" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-43&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91887" end="91909" title="USS APL-44" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-44&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235965" start="91912" end="91934" title="USS APL-45" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-45&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91941" end="91963" title="USS APL-46" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-46&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91966" end="91988" title="USS APL-47" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-47&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91991" end="92013" title="USS APL-48" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-48&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92016" end="92038" title="USS APL-49" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-49&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92041" end="92063" title="USS APL-50" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-50&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92070" end="92092" title="USS APL-51" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-51&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92105" end="92127" title="USS APL-52" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-52&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92166" end="92188" title="USS APL-53" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-53&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92191" end="92213" title="USS APL-54" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-54&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92216" end="92238" title="USS APL-55" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-55&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92256" end="92278" title="USS APL-56" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-56&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92281" end="92303" title="USS APL-57" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-57&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92306" end="92328" title="USS APL-58" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-58&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386661" start="92349" end="92371" title="USS APL-59" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-59&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92385" end="92407" title="USS APL-60" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-60&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92464" end="92486" title="USS APL-61" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-61&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92493" end="92515" title="USS APL-62" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-62&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92522" end="92544" title="USS APL-63" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-63&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92547" end="92569" title="USS APL-64" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-64&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92570" end="92594" title="Barracks ship#APL 65 class" label="&amp;quot;APL-65&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92597" end="92619" title="USS APL-65" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-65&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92626" end="92648" title="USS APL-66" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-66&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92654" end="92678" title="Barracks ship#APL 67 class" label="&amp;quot;APL-67&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92682" end="92704" title="USS APL-65" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-67&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92711" end="92733" title="USS APL-66" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-68&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92740" end="92762" title="USS APL-69" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-69&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92769" end="92791" title="USS APL-70" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-70&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92798" end="92820" title="USS APL-71" label="USS &amp;quot;APL-71&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870826" start="93245" end="93279" title="USS Kitty Hawk (APV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kitty Hawk&amp;quot; (APV-1)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93295" end="93331" title="USS Hammondsport (APV-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hammondsport&amp;quot; (APV-2)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93347" end="93380" title="USS Lakehurst (APV-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lakehurst&amp;quot; (APV-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871685" start="93408" end="93437" title="USS Medusa (AR-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Medusa&amp;quot; (AR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824318" start="93440" end="93473" title="USS Bridgeport (AR-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bridgeport&amp;quot; (AR-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873120" start="93501" end="93534" title="USS Prometheus (AR-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Prometheus&amp;quot; (AR-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434891" start="93546" end="93575" title="USS Vestal (AR-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vestal&amp;quot; (AR-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867175" start="93587" end="93616" title="USS Alcor (AR-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alcor&amp;quot; (AR-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875164" start="93668" end="93697" title="USS Vulcan (AR-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vulcan&amp;quot; (AR-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867111" start="93700" end="93727" title="USS Ajax (AR-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ajax&amp;quot; (AR-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="93729" end="93749" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870084" start="93778" end="93807" title="USS Hector (AR-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hector&amp;quot; (AR-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870516" start="93810" end="93838" title="USS Jason (AR-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jason&amp;quot; (AR-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868819" start="93887" end="93915" title="USS Delta (AR-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Delta&amp;quot; (AR-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867853" start="93928" end="93960" title="USS Briareus (AR-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Briareus&amp;quot; (AR-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680695" start="93989" end="94018" title="USS Rigel (AR-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rigel&amp;quot; (AR-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867283" start="94066" end="94097" title="USS Amphion (AR-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Amphion&amp;quot; (AR-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867977" start="94100" end="94130" title="USS Cadmus (AR-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cadmus&amp;quot; (AR-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44077635" start="94133" end="94166" title="USS Deucalion (AR-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Deucalion&amp;quot; (AR-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043127" start="94248" end="94273" title="Xanthus-class repair ship" label="&amp;quot;Xanthus&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875665" start="94358" end="94389" title="USS Xanthus (AR-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Xanthus&amp;quot; (AR-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703897" start="94392" end="94423" title="USS Laertes (AR-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Laertes&amp;quot; (AR-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868875" start="94426" end="94458" title="USS Dionysus (AR-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dionysus&amp;quot; (AR-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870836" start="94500" end="94532" title="USS Klondike (AR-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Klondike&amp;quot; (AR-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871554" start="94545" end="94575" title="USS Markab (AR-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Markab&amp;quot; (AR-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869805" start="94630" end="94666" title="USS Grand Canyon (AR-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grand Canyon&amp;quot; (AR-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867414" start="94717" end="94750" title="USS Aristaeus (ARB-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aristaeus&amp;quot; (ARB-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872389" start="94777" end="94808" title="USS Oceanus (ARB-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oceanus&amp;quot; (ARB-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680924" start="94835" end="94864" title="USS Phaon (ARB-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Phaon&amp;quot; (ARB-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875766" start="94924" end="94952" title="USS Zeus (ARB-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zeus&amp;quot; (ARB-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871787" start="94979" end="95008" title="USS Midas (ARB-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Midas&amp;quot; (ARB-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872208" start="95035" end="95065" title="USS Nestor (ARB-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nestor&amp;quot; (ARB-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873869" start="95140" end="95172" title="USS Sarpedon (ARB-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sarpedon&amp;quot; (ARB-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680933" start="95199" end="95230" title="USS Telamon (ARB-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Telamon&amp;quot; (ARB-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874946" start="95291" end="95322" title="USS Ulysses (ARB-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ulysses&amp;quot; (ARB-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868822" start="95349" end="95381" title="USS Demeter (ARB-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Demeter&amp;quot; (ARB-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868873" start="95409" end="95442" title="USS Diomedes (ARB-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Diomedes&amp;quot; (ARB-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870097" start="95470" end="95501" title="USS Helios (ARB-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Helios&amp;quot; (ARB-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870972" start="95529" end="95551" title="USS ARB-13" label="USS &amp;quot;ARB-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680695" start="95604" end="95633" title="USS Rigel (ARb-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rigel&amp;quot; (ARb-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873044" start="95690" end="95722" title="USS Portunus (ARC-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Portunus&amp;quot; (ARC-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866301" start="95749" end="95781" title="USCGC Yamacraw (WARC-333)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yamacraw&amp;quot; (ARC-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867079" start="95840" end="95870" title="USS Aeolus (ARC-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aeolus&amp;quot; (ARC-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875019" start="95884" end="95912" title="USS Thor" label="USS &amp;quot;Thor&amp;quot; (ARC-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866653" start="95972" end="96006" title="USNS Neptune" label="USNS &amp;quot;Neptune&amp;quot; (T-ARC-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682526" start="96009" end="96050" title="USNS Albert J. Myer" label="USNS &amp;quot;Albert J. Myer&amp;quot; (T-ARC-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866774" start="96077" end="96108" title="USNS Zeus (T-ARC-7)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Zeus&amp;quot; (T-ARC-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872122" start="96209" end="96252" title="USS Nashawena (AG-142)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nashawena&amp;quot; (AG-142 / YAG-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870649" start="96257" end="96283" title="USS Kailua (IX-71)" label="&amp;quot;Kailua&amp;quot; (IX-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012951" start="96366" end="96396" title="USS Oglala" label="USS &amp;quot;Oglala&amp;quot; (ARG-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871381" start="96452" end="96481" title="USS Luzon (ARG-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Luzon&amp;quot; (ARG-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871821" start="96484" end="96516" title="USS Mindanao (ARG-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mindanao&amp;quot; (ARG-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874930" start="96519" end="96550" title="USS Tutuila (ARG-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tutuila&amp;quot; (ARG-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872372" start="96553" end="96581" title="USS Oahu (ARG-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oahu&amp;quot; (ARG-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868167" start="96584" end="96612" title="USS Cebu (ARG-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cebu&amp;quot; (ARG-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="96614" end="96634" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868666" start="96662" end="96700" title="USS Culebra Island (ARG-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Culebra Island&amp;quot; (ARG-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871252" start="96703" end="96732" title="USS Leyte (ARG-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leyte&amp;quot; (ARG-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692069" start="96765" end="96800" title="USS Mona Island (ARG-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mona Island&amp;quot; (ARG-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872619" start="96803" end="96835" title="USS Palawan (ARG-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palawan&amp;quot; (ARG-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873771" start="96838" end="96868" title="USS Samar (ARG-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Samar&amp;quot; (ARG-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870757" start="96871" end="96912" title="USS Kermit Roosevelt (ARG-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kermit Roosevelt&amp;quot; (ARG-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302424" start="96915" end="96953" title="USS Hooper Island (ARG-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hooper Island&amp;quot; (ARG-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867605" start="97001" end="97033" title="USS Basilan" label="USS &amp;quot;Basilan&amp;quot; (ARG-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867939" start="97046" end="97077" title="USS Burias (AG-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Burias&amp;quot; (ARG-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868355" start="97103" end="97135" title="USS Chourre (ARV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dumaran&amp;quot; (ARG-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875376" start="97151" end="97183" title="USS Webster (ARV-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Masbate&amp;quot; (ARG-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002108" start="97199" end="97231" title="USS Holland (AS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Holland&amp;quot; (ARG-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867646" start="97243" end="97274" title="USS Beaver" label="USS &amp;quot;Beaver&amp;quot; (ARG-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872538" start="97298" end="97327" title="USS Otus (ARG-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Otus&amp;quot; (ARG-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870516" start="97373" end="97402" title="USS Jason (AR-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jason&amp;quot; (ARH-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703034" start="97453" end="97479" title="Achelous-class repair ship" label="&amp;quot;Achelous&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867000" start="97483" end="97515" title="USS Achelous" label="USS &amp;quot;Achelous&amp;quot; (ARL-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867289" start="97541" end="97571" title="USS Amycus" label="USS &amp;quot;Amycus&amp;quot; (ARL-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867093" start="97598" end="97628" title="USS Agenor" label="USS &amp;quot;Agenor&amp;quot; (ARL-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867058" start="97655" end="97685" title="USS Adonis" label="USS &amp;quot;Adonis&amp;quot; (ARL-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866955" start="97711" end="97732" title="USS ARL-5" label="USS &amp;quot;ARL-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866956" start="97758" end="97779" title="USS ARL-6" label="USS &amp;quot;ARL-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867483" start="97805" end="97834" title="USS Atlas (ARL-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (ARL-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869075" start="97861" end="97891" title="USS Egeria (ARL-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Egeria&amp;quot; (ARL-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869168" start="97918" end="97950" title="USS Endymion (ARL-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Endymion&amp;quot; (ARL-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022113" start="97977" end="98009" title="USS Coronis (ARL-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coronis&amp;quot; (ARL-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868637" start="98037" end="98067" title="USS Creon (ARL-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Creon&amp;quot; (ARL-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="98094" end="98114" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873047" start="98142" end="98175" title="USS Poseidon (ARL-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Poseidon&amp;quot; (ARL-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871711" start="98203" end="98236" title="USS Menelaus (ARL-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Menelaus&amp;quot; (ARL-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871845" start="98263" end="98293" title="USS Minos (ARL-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Minos&amp;quot; (ARL-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386754" start="98320" end="98353" title="USS Minotaur (ARL-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Minotaur&amp;quot; (ARL-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872044" start="98380" end="98413" title="USS Myrmidon (ARL-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Myrmidon&amp;quot; (ARL-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872343" start="98440" end="98472" title="USS Numitor (ARL-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Numitor&amp;quot; (ARL-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872641" start="98499" end="98532" title="USS Pandemus (ARL-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pandemus&amp;quot; (ARL-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872702" start="98559" end="98593" title="USS Patroclus" label="USS &amp;quot;Patroclus&amp;quot; (ARL-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872792" start="98620" end="98653" title="USS Pentheus (ARL-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pentheus&amp;quot; (ARL-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873122" start="98681" end="98716" title="USS Proserpine (ARL-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Proserpine&amp;quot; (ARL-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873553" start="98744" end="98776" title="USS Romulus (ARL-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Romulus&amp;quot; (ARL-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386936" start="98803" end="98833" title="USS Satyr (ARL-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Satyr&amp;quot; (ARL-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874292" start="98860" end="98891" title="USS Sphinx (ARL-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sphinx&amp;quot; (ARL-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874378" start="98987" end="99019" title="USS Stentor (ARL-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stentor&amp;quot; (ARL-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874614" start="99046" end="99079" title="USS Tantalus (ARL-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tantalus&amp;quot; (ARL-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874940" start="99107" end="99138" title="USS Typhon (ARL-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Typhon&amp;quot; (ARL-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867285" start="99166" end="99201" title="USS Amphitrite (ARL-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Amphitrite&amp;quot; (ARL-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867452" start="99229" end="99260" title="USS Askari" label="USS &amp;quot;Askari&amp;quot; (ARL-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397984" start="99287" end="99306" title="Operation Sandstone" label="Operation Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867665" start="99334" end="99370" title="USS Bellerophon (ARL-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bellerophon&amp;quot; (ARL-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867668" start="99398" end="99430" title="USS Bellona" label="USS &amp;quot;Bellona&amp;quot; (ARL-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868320" start="99493" end="99526" title="USS Chimaera (ARL-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chimaera&amp;quot; (ARL-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868709" start="99589" end="99622" title="USS Daedalus (ARL-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Daedalus&amp;quot; (ARL-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869779" start="99650" end="99682" title="USS Gordius (ARL-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gordius&amp;quot; (ARL-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870384" start="99710" end="99740" title="USS Indra (ARL-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Indra&amp;quot; (ARL-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870855" start="99768" end="99800" title="USS Krishna (ARL-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Krishna&amp;quot; (ARL-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873203" start="99828" end="99861" title="USS Quirinus (ARL-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quirinus&amp;quot; (ARL-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386602" start="99889" end="99919" title="USS Remus (ARL-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Remus&amp;quot; (ARL-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386604" start="99946" end="99979" title="USS Achilles (ARL-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Achilles&amp;quot; (ARL-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875106" start="100562" end="100592" title="USS Viking (ARS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Viking&amp;quot; (ARS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872511" start="100605" end="100637" title="USS Crusader (ARS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Crusader&amp;quot; (ARS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867499" start="100650" end="100684" title="USS Discoverer (ARS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Discoverer&amp;quot; (ARS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873333" start="100697" end="100728" title="USS Redwing (ARS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Redwing&amp;quot; (ARS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189546" start="100778" end="100785" title="Bizerte" label="Bizerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875280" start="100815" end="100847" title="USS Warbler (ARS-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Warbler&amp;quot; (ARS-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875529" start="100860" end="100891" title="USS Willet (ARS-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Willet&amp;quot; (ARS-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867831" start="100904" end="100934" title="USS Brant (ARS-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brant&amp;quot; (ARS-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283888" start="100945" end="100968" title="Diver-class rescue and salvage ship" label="&amp;quot;Diver&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868883" start="100972" end="101001" title="USS Diver (ARS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Diver&amp;quot; (ARS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869214" start="101004" end="101034" title="USS Escape (ARS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Escape&amp;quot; (ARS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869820" start="101037" end="101068" title="USS Grapple (ARS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grapple&amp;quot; (ARS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425035" start="101070" end="101087" title="Operation Dominic" label="Operation Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873074" start="101115" end="101148" title="USS Preserver (ARS-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Preserver&amp;quot; (ARS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="101150" end="101170" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874056" start="101198" end="101229" title="USS Shackle (ARS-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shackle&amp;quot; (ARS-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873125" start="101232" end="101266" title="USS Protector (ARS-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Protector&amp;quot; (ARS-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867969" start="101269" end="101299" title="USS Cable (ARS-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cable&amp;quot; (ARS-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868191" start="101302" end="101332" title="USS Chain (ARS-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chain&amp;quot; (ARS-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868672" start="101352" end="101381" title="USS Curb (ARS-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Curb&amp;quot; (ARS-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868678" start="101384" end="101416" title="USS Current (ARS-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Current&amp;quot; (ARS-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868814" start="101453" end="101485" title="USS Deliver (ARS-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Deliver&amp;quot; (ARS-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869821" start="101515" end="101545" title="USS Grasp (ARS-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grasp&amp;quot; (ARS-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873727" start="101548" end="101582" title="USS Safeguard (ARS-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Safeguard&amp;quot; (ARS-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874004" start="101616" end="101646" title="USS Seize (ARS-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seize&amp;quot; (ARS-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874221" start="101649" end="101680" title="USS Snatch (ARS-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Snatch&amp;quot; (ARS-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875010" start="101700" end="101730" title="USS Valve (ARS-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Valve&amp;quot; (ARS-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875056" start="101733" end="101762" title="USS Vent (ARS-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vent&amp;quot; (ARS-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868379" start="101765" end="101795" title="USS Clamp (ARS-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Clamp&amp;quot; (ARS-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869594" start="101832" end="101861" title="USS Gear (ARS-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gear&amp;quot; (ARS-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867296" start="101961" end="101992" title="USS Anchor (ARS-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Anchor&amp;quot; (ARS-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869280" start="101995" end="102029" title="USS Extractor (ARS-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Extractor&amp;quot; (ARS-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869281" start="102081" end="102115" title="USS Extricate (ARS-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Extricate&amp;quot; (ARS-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873415" start="102166" end="102199" title="USS Restorer (ARS-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Restorer&amp;quot; (ARS-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873407" start="102228" end="102260" title="USS Rescuer (ARS-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rescuer&amp;quot; (ARS-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866991" start="102357" end="102392" title="USS Accelerate (ARS-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Accelerate&amp;quot; (ARS-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870010" start="102395" end="102429" title="USS Harjurand (ARS-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harjurand&amp;quot; (ARS-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875387" start="102458" end="102489" title="USS Weight (ARS-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Weight&amp;quot; (ARS-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874542" start="102492" end="102523" title="USS Swivel (ARS-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Swivel&amp;quot; (ARS-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874566" start="102551" end="102582" title="USS Tackle (ARS-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tackle&amp;quot; (ARS-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022956" start="102598" end="102623" title="Bolster-class rescue and salvage ship" label="&amp;quot;Bolster&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867776" start="102627" end="102659" title="USS Bolster (ARS-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bolster&amp;quot; (ARS-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549008" start="102661" end="102677" title="Operation Wigwam" label="Operation Wigwam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868536" start="102705" end="102739" title="USS Conserver (ARS-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Conserver&amp;quot; (ARS-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870210" start="102769" end="102799" title="USS Hoist (ARS-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hoist&amp;quot; (ARS-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872464" start="102802" end="102836" title="USS Opportune (ARS-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Opportune&amp;quot; (ARS-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873322" start="102839" end="102873" title="USS Reclaimer (ARS-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Reclaimer&amp;quot; (ARS-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873323" start="102903" end="102936" title="USS Recovery (ARS-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Recovery&amp;quot; (ARS-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874988" start="103141" end="103172" title="USS Urgent (ARS-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Urgent&amp;quot; (ARS-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97463155" start="103238" end="103265" title="Safeguard-class rescue and salvage ship" label="&amp;quot;Safeguard&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602564" start="103269" end="103303" title="USS Safeguard (ARS-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Safeguard&amp;quot; (ARS-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866553" start="103310" end="103340" title="USS Grasp (ARS-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grasp&amp;quot; (ARS-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468211" start="103347" end="103378" title="USS Salvor (ARS-52)" label="USS &amp;quot;Salvor&amp;quot; (ARS-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866552" start="103385" end="103417" title="USS Grapple (ARS-53)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grapple&amp;quot; (ARS-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869935" start="103478" end="103510" title="USS Gypsy (ARS(D)-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gypsy&amp;quot; (ARS(D)-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871706" start="103564" end="103597" title="USS Mender" label="USS &amp;quot;Mender&amp;quot; (ARS(D)-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873765" start="103651" end="103686" title="USS Salvager" label="USS &amp;quot;Salvager&amp;quot; (ARS(D)-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875588" start="103739" end="103774" title="USS Windlass" label="USS &amp;quot;Windlass&amp;quot; (ARS(D)-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876881" start="103861" end="103899" title="USS Laysan Island (ARST-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Laysan Island&amp;quot; (ARST-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876887" start="103927" end="103957" title="USS Okala (ARST-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Okala&amp;quot; (ARST-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876893" start="103985" end="104017" title="USS Palmyra (ARST-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Palmyra&amp;quot; (ARST-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874566" start="104080" end="104111" title="USS Tackle (ARS-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tackle&amp;quot; (ARST-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110655751" start="104186" end="104211" title="Chourre-class aircraft repair ship" label="&amp;quot;Chourre&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868355" start="104232" end="104263" title="USS Chourre (ARV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chourre&amp;quot; (ARV-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875376" start="104276" end="104307" title="USS Webster (ARV-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Webster&amp;quot; (ARV-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664558" start="104319" end="104346" title="Aventinus-class aircraft repair ship" label="&amp;quot;Aventinus&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q110664559" start="104474" end="104498" title="Fabius-class aircraft repair ship" label="&amp;quot;Fabius&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867162" start="104668" end="104714" title="USNS Corpus Christi Bay (T-ARVH-1)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Corpus Christi Bay&amp;quot; (T-ARVH-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869422" start="104848" end="104883" title="Arkansas-class monitor" label="&amp;quot;Arkansas&amp;quot;-class monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869528" start="104888" end="104917" title="USS Fulton (AS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fulton&amp;quot; (AS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874455" start="104933" end="104964" title="USS Bushnell (AS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bushnell&amp;quot; (AS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002108" start="104987" end="105017" title="USS Holland (AS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Holland&amp;quot; (AS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867186" start="105034" end="105062" title="USS Alert (AS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alert&amp;quot; (AS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867646" start="105065" end="105094" title="USS Beaver (AS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Beaver&amp;quot; (AS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868025" start="105123" end="105152" title="USS Camden (AS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Camden&amp;quot; (AS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873260" start="105180" end="105210" title="USS Rainbow (AS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rainbow&amp;quot; (AS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873901" start="105213" end="105244" title="USS Savannah (AS-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Savannah&amp;quot; (AS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868052" start="105259" end="105289" title="USS Canopus (AS-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Canopus&amp;quot; (AS-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867401" start="105340" end="105371" title="USS Argonne (AS-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Argonne&amp;quot; (AS-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642311" start="105394" end="105418" title="Fulton-class submarine tender" label="&amp;quot;Fulton&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869529" start="105422" end="105452" title="USS Fulton (AS-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fulton&amp;quot; (AS-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="105454" end="105474" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874293" start="105502" end="105532" title="USS Sperry (AS-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sperry&amp;quot; (AS-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867951" start="105535" end="105567" title="USS Bushnell (AS-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bushnell&amp;quot; (AS-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870268" start="105570" end="105611" title="USS Howard W. Gilmore (AS-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Howard W. Gilmore&amp;quot; (AS-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872199" start="105614" end="105644" title="USS Nereus (AS-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nereus&amp;quot; (AS-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872485" start="105647" end="105676" title="USS Orion (AS-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Orion&amp;quot; (AS-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873133" start="105679" end="105710" title="USS Proteus (AS-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Proteus&amp;quot; (AS-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869863" start="105766" end="105797" title="USS Griffin (AS-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Griffin&amp;quot; (AS-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872767" start="105800" end="105830" title="USS Pelias (AS-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pelias&amp;quot; (AS-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872538" start="105854" end="105882" title="USS Otus (AS-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Otus&amp;quot; (AS-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867318" start="105899" end="105930" title="USS Antaeus (AS-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Antaeus&amp;quot; (AS-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869254" start="105953" end="105984" title="USS Euryale (AS-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Euryale&amp;quot; (AS-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867078" start="106041" end="106070" title="USS Aegir (AS-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Aegir&amp;quot; (AS-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867324" start="106073" end="106105" title="USS Anthedon (AS-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Anthedon&amp;quot; (AS-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867346" start="106108" end="106138" title="USS Apollo (AS-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Apollo&amp;quot; (AS-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868414" start="106141" end="106171" title="USS Clytie (AS-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Clytie&amp;quot; (AS-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868051" start="106191" end="106222" title="USS Canopus (AS-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Canopus&amp;quot; (AS-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872224" start="106248" end="106283" title="USS New England (AS-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;New England&amp;quot; (AS-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870294" start="106367" end="106397" title="USS Hunley (AS-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hunley&amp;quot; (AS-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870215" start="106400" end="106431" title="USS Holland (AS-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Holland&amp;quot; (AS-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874159" start="106464" end="106498" title="USS Simon Lake (AS-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Simon Lake&amp;quot; (AS-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868050" start="106501" end="106532" title="USS Canopus (AS-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Canopus&amp;quot; (AS-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870877" start="106586" end="106621" title="USS L. Y. Spear (AS-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;L. Y. Spear&amp;quot; (AS-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868887" start="106624" end="106653" title="USS Dixon (AS-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Dixon&amp;quot; (AS-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339054" start="106674" end="106705" title="Emory S. Land-class submarine tender" label="&amp;quot;Emory S. Land&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320785" start="106709" end="106746" title="USS Emory S. Land (AS-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Emory S. Land&amp;quot; (AS-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869481" start="106753" end="106788" title="USS Frank Cable (AS-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Frank Cable&amp;quot; (AS-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871660" start="106795" end="106824" title="USS McKee (AS-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;McKee&amp;quot; (AS-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875502" start="106894" end="106925" title="USS Widgeon (ASR-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Widgeon&amp;quot; (ASR-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="106937" end="106957" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869305" start="106985" end="107015" title="USS Falcon (ASR-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Falcon&amp;quot; (ASR-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868297" start="107028" end="107059" title="USS Chewink (ASR-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chewink&amp;quot; (ASR-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871464" start="107072" end="107103" title="USS Mallard (ASR-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mallard&amp;quot; (ASR-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872492" start="107116" end="107147" title="USS Ortolan (ASR-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ortolan&amp;quot; (ASR-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872879" start="107160" end="107190" title="USS Pigeon (ASR-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pigeon&amp;quot; (ASR-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868208" start="107282" end="107317" title="USS Chanticleer (ASR-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chanticleer&amp;quot; (ASR-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868600" start="107320" end="107350" title="USS Coucal (ASR-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coucal&amp;quot; (ASR-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869417" start="107387" end="107419" title="USS Florikan (ASR-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Florikan&amp;quot; (ASR-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869839" start="107422" end="107455" title="USS Greenlet (ASR-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Greenlet&amp;quot; (ASR-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871409" start="107458" end="107488" title="USS Macaw (ASR-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Macaw&amp;quot; (ASR-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870825" start="107590" end="107624" title="USS Kittiwake (ASR-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kittiwake&amp;quot; (ASR-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872834" start="107627" end="107658" title="USS Petrel (ASR-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Petrel&amp;quot; (ASR-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874463" start="107661" end="107693" title="USS Sunbird (ASR-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sunbird&amp;quot; (ASR-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874863" start="107696" end="107727" title="USS Tringa (ASR-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tringa&amp;quot; (ASR-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875067" start="107730" end="107761" title="USS Verdin (ASR-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Verdin&amp;quot; (ASR-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875586" start="107789" end="107823" title="USS Windhover (ASR-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Windhover&amp;quot; (ASR-18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872780" start="107878" end="107910" title="USS Penguin (ASR-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Penguin&amp;quot; (ASR-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867762" start="107923" end="107956" title="USS Bluebird (ASR-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bluebird&amp;quot; (ASR-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q660408" start="107971" end="108003" title="USS Skylark (ASR-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Skylark&amp;quot; (ASR-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783592" start="108163" end="108202" title="Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle" label="deep submergence rescue vehicles (DSRV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872878" start="108207" end="108238" title="USS Pigeon (ASR-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pigeon&amp;quot; (ASR-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872494" start="108241" end="108273" title="USS Ortolan (ASR-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ortolan&amp;quot; (ASR-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811666" start="108336" end="108368" title="USS Patapsco (AT-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Patapsco&amp;quot; (AT-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872722" start="108371" end="108403" title="USS Patuxent (AT-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Patuxent&amp;quot; (AT-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875266" start="108406" end="108435" title="USS Wando (AT-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wando&amp;quot; (AT-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868273" start="108452" end="108483" title="USS Chemung (AT-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chemung&amp;quot; (AT-18)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108500" end="108533" title="USS Allegheny (AT-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Allegheny&amp;quot; (AT-19)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870431" start="108569" end="108601" title="USS Iroquois (AT-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Iroquois&amp;quot; (AT-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872505" start="108604" end="108635" title="USS Osceola (AT-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Osceola&amp;quot; (AT-47)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108638" end="108668" title="USS Peoria (AT-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Peoria&amp;quot; (AT-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051663" start="108671" end="108705" title="USS Piscataqua (AT-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Piscataqua&amp;quot; (AT-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873051" start="108708" end="108739" title="USS Potomac (AT-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Potomac&amp;quot; (AT-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874959" start="108742" end="108771" title="USS Uncas (AT-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Uncas&amp;quot; (AT-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872158" start="108788" end="108818" title="USS Navajo (AT-52)" label="USS &amp;quot;Navajo&amp;quot; (AT-52)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108834" end="108855" title="USS AT-53" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-53&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868514" start="108858" end="108891" title="USS Conestoga (AT-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Conestoga&amp;quot; (AT-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869674" start="108940" end="108971" title="USS Genesee (AT-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Genesee&amp;quot; (AT-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871390" start="109021" end="109051" title="USS Lykens (AT-56)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lykens&amp;quot; (AT-56)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873969" start="109065" end="109098" title="USS Sea Rover (AT-57)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sea Rover&amp;quot; (AT-57)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109113" end="109146" title="USS Undaunted (AT-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;Undaunted&amp;quot; (AT-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868194" start="109149" end="109182" title="USS Challenge (AT-59)" label="USS &amp;quot;Challenge&amp;quot; (AT-59)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109220" end="109254" title="USS Bay Spring (AT-60)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bay Spring&amp;quot; (AT-60)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109257" end="109288" title="USS Cahokia (AT-61)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cahokia&amp;quot; (AT-61)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753558" start="109291" end="109322" title="USS Tamaroa (AT-62)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tamaroa&amp;quot; (AT-62)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867024" start="109339" end="109371" title="USS Acushnet (AT-63)" label="USS &amp;quot;Acushnet&amp;quot; (AT-63)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109374" end="109407" title="USS Tuscarora (AT-77)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tuscarora&amp;quot; (AT-77)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109410" end="109439" title="USS Carib (AT-78)" label="USS &amp;quot;Carib&amp;quot; (AT-78)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109442" end="109470" title="USS Yuma (AT-79)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot; (AT-79)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109473" end="109502" title="USS Yaqui (AT-80)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yaqui&amp;quot; (AT-80)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109505" end="109527" title="USS AT-119" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-119&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109530" end="109552" title="USS AT-120" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-120&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109555" end="109588" title="USS Maricopa (AT-146)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maricopa&amp;quot; (AT-146)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109591" end="109623" title="USS Esselen (AT-147)" label="USS &amp;quot;Esselen&amp;quot; (AT-147)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109626" end="109657" title="USS Chetco (AT-166)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chetco&amp;quot; (AT-166)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109660" end="109691" title="USS Chatot (AT-167)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chatot&amp;quot; (AT-167)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874249" start="109719" end="109749" title="USS Sonoma (AT-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sonoma&amp;quot; (AT-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872453" start="109752" end="109783" title="USS Ontario (AT-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ontario&amp;quot; (AT-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784178" start="109785" end="109810" title="Arapaho-class tugboat" label="&amp;quot;Arapaho&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705778" start="109814" end="109845" title="USS Arapaho (AT-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arapaho&amp;quot; (AT-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871891" start="109862" end="109892" title="USS Mohave (AT-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mohave&amp;quot; (AT-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874764" start="109931" end="109964" title="USS Tillamook (AT-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tillamook&amp;quot; (AT-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61451757" start="109979" end="110005" title="Bagaduce-class tugboat" label="&amp;quot;Bagaduce&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q55063947" start="110009" end="110041" title="USS Sagamore (AT-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sagamore&amp;quot; (AT-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867540" start="110044" end="110076" title="USS Bagaduce (AT-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bagaduce&amp;quot; (AT-21)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110079" end="110111" title="USS Tadousac (AT-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tadousac&amp;quot; (AT-22)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110114" end="110144" title="USS Kalmia (AT-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kalmia&amp;quot; (AT-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870771" start="110147" end="110179" title="USS Kewaydin (AT-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kewaydin&amp;quot; (AT-24)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110182" end="110212" title="USS Umpqua (AT-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Umpqua&amp;quot; (AT-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875256" start="110215" end="110246" title="USS Wandank (AT-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wandank&amp;quot; (AT-26)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110249" end="110280" title="USS Tatnuck (AT-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tatnuck&amp;quot; (AT-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874474" start="110283" end="110315" title="USS Sunnadin (AT-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sunnadin&amp;quot; (AT-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61451748" start="110318" end="110349" title="USS Mahopac (AT-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mahopac&amp;quot; (AT-29)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110352" end="110382" title="USS Sciota (AT-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sciota&amp;quot; (AT-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870851" start="110385" end="110413" title="USS Koka (AT-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Koka&amp;quot; (AT-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872107" start="110442" end="110470" title="USS Napa (AT-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Napa&amp;quot; (AT-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872903" start="110513" end="110543" title="USS Pinola (AT-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinola&amp;quot; (AT-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867204" start="110546" end="110577" title="USS Algorma (AT-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Algorma&amp;quot; (AT-34)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110580" end="110615" title="USS Carrabasset (AT-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Carrabasset&amp;quot; (AT-35)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110618" end="110651" title="USS Contocook (AT-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Contocook&amp;quot; (AT-36)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110654" end="110682" title="USS Iuka (AT-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Iuka&amp;quot; (AT-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870744" start="110685" end="110718" title="USS Keosanqua (AT-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Keosanqua&amp;quot; (AT-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871939" start="110721" end="110753" title="USS Montcalm (AT-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Montcalm&amp;quot; (AT-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681510" start="110754" end="110780" title="Cherokee-class tugboat" label="&amp;quot;Cherokee&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872159" start="110783" end="110813" title="USS Navajo (AT-64)" label="USS &amp;quot;Navajo&amp;quot; (AT-64)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874012" start="110862" end="110894" title="USS Seminole (AT-65)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seminole&amp;quot; (AT-65)"/>
<link wikidata="Q864870" start="110918" end="110924" title="Tulagi" label="Tulagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868281" start="110953" end="110985" title="USS Cherokee (AT-66)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cherokee&amp;quot; (AT-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867341" start="110988" end="111018" title="USS Apache (AT-67)" label="USS &amp;quot;Apache&amp;quot; (AT-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867367" start="111021" end="111052" title="USS Arapaho (AT-68)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arapaho&amp;quot; (AT-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868344" start="111055" end="111087" title="USS Chippewa (AT-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chippewa&amp;quot; (AT-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744020" start="111090" end="111121" title="USS Choctaw (AT-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Choctaw&amp;quot; (AT-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744055" start="111124" end="111152" title="USS Hopi (AT-71)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hopi&amp;quot; (AT-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870811" start="111155" end="111184" title="USS Kiowa (AT-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kiowa&amp;quot; (AT-72)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744096" start="111187" end="111220" title="USS Menominee (AT-73)" label="USS &amp;quot;Menominee&amp;quot; (AT-73)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872745" start="111223" end="111253" title="USS Pawnee (AT-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pawnee&amp;quot; (AT-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874166" start="111256" end="111285" title="USS Sioux (AT-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sioux&amp;quot; (AT-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744222" start="111288" end="111315" title="USS Ute (AT-76)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ute&amp;quot; (AT-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867565" start="111318" end="111349" title="USS Bannock (AT-81)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bannock&amp;quot; (AT-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868080" start="111352" end="111381" title="USS Carib (AT-82)" label="USS &amp;quot;Carib&amp;quot; (AT-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868306" start="111384" end="111417" title="USS Chickasaw (AT-83)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chickasaw&amp;quot; (AT-83)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868635" start="111420" end="111448" title="USS Cree (AT-84)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cree&amp;quot; (AT-84)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871291" start="111451" end="111480" title="USS Lipan (AT-85)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lipan&amp;quot; (AT-85)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871596" start="111483" end="111513" title="USS Mataco (AT-86)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mataco&amp;quot; (AT-86)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871966" start="111516" end="111546" title="USS Moreno (AT-87)" label="USS &amp;quot;Moreno&amp;quot; (AT-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872118" start="111549" end="111585" title="USS Narragansett (AT-88)" label="USS &amp;quot;Narragansett&amp;quot; (AT-88)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679889" start="111588" end="111618" title="USS Nauset (AT-89)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nauset&amp;quot; (AT-89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872908" start="111680" end="111709" title="USS Pinto (AT-90)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinto&amp;quot; (AT-90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874018" start="111712" end="111742" title="USS Seneca (AT-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seneca&amp;quot; (AT-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874642" start="111745" end="111775" title="USS Tawasa (AT-92)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tawasa&amp;quot; (AT-92)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874657" start="111778" end="111809" title="USS Tekesta (AT-93)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tekesta&amp;quot; (AT-93)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875738" start="111812" end="111840" title="USS Yuma (AT-94)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot; (AT-94)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875780" start="111843" end="111871" title="USS Zuni (AT-95)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zuni&amp;quot; (AT-95)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744019" start="111874" end="111906" title="USS Chilula (AT-153)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chilula&amp;quot; (AT-153)"/>
<link wikidata="Q322510" start="111907" end="111931" title="Abnaki-class tugboat" label="&amp;quot;Abnaki&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866980" start="111934" end="111964" title="USS Abnaki (AT-96)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abnaki&amp;quot; (AT-96)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867247" start="111967" end="111996" title="USS Alsea (AT-97)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alsea&amp;quot; (AT-97)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867413" start="111999" end="112030" title="USS Arikara (AT-98)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arikara&amp;quot; (AT-98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872780" start="112033" end="112063" title="USS Chetco (AT-99)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chetco&amp;quot; (AT-99)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120521" start="112080" end="112113" title="USS Chowanoc (AT-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chowanoc&amp;quot; (AT-100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868425" start="112116" end="112147" title="USS Cocopa (AT-101)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cocopa&amp;quot; (AT-101)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="112150" end="112182" title="USS Hidatsa (AT-102)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hidatsa&amp;quot; (AT-102)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933644" start="112185" end="112218" title="USS Hitchiti (AT-103)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hitchiti&amp;quot; (AT-103)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="112221" end="112255" title="USS Jicarilla (AT-104)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jicarilla&amp;quot; (AT-104)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121738" start="112258" end="112290" title="USS Moctobi (AT-105)" label="USS &amp;quot;Moctobi&amp;quot; (AT-105)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222899" start="112293" end="112324" title="USS Molala (AT-106)" label="USS &amp;quot;Molala&amp;quot; (AT-106)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872013" start="112327" end="112358" title="USS Munsee (AT-107)" label="USS &amp;quot;Munsee&amp;quot; (AT-107)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11671879" start="112361" end="112392" title="USS Pakana (AT-108)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pakana&amp;quot; (AT-108)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947497" start="112395" end="112430" title="USS Potawatomi (AT-109)" label="USS &amp;quot;Potawatomi&amp;quot; (AT-109)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873179" start="112433" end="112464" title="USS Quapaw (AT-110)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quapaw&amp;quot; (AT-110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873872" start="112467" end="112497" title="USS Sarsi (AT-111)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sarsi&amp;quot; (AT-111)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874040" start="112500" end="112532" title="USS Seranno (AT-112)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seranno&amp;quot; (AT-112)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653575" start="112535" end="112567" title="USS Takelma (AT-113)" label="USS &amp;quot;Takelma&amp;quot; (AT-113)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874641" start="112570" end="112603" title="USS Tawakoni (AT-114)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tawakoni&amp;quot; (AT-114)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121848" start="112606" end="112637" title="USS Tenino (AT-115)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tenino&amp;quot; (AT-115)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110970830" start="112640" end="112671" title="USS Tolowa (AT-116)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tolowa&amp;quot; (AT-116)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875339" start="112674" end="112706" title="USS Wateree (AT-117)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wateree&amp;quot; (AT-117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111164529" start="112709" end="112743" title="USS Wenatchee (AT-118)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wenatchee&amp;quot; (AT-118)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867003" start="112746" end="112779" title="USS Achomawi (AT-148)" label="USS &amp;quot;Achomawi&amp;quot; (AT-148)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867472" start="112782" end="112814" title="USS Atakapa (AT-149)" label="USS &amp;quot;Atakapa&amp;quot; (AT-149)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867527" start="112817" end="112848" title="USS Avoyel (AT-150)" label="USS &amp;quot;Avoyel&amp;quot; (AT-150)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868264" start="112851" end="112884" title="USS Chawasha (AT-151)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chawasha&amp;quot; (AT-151)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867985" start="112887" end="112920" title="USS Cahuilla (AT-152)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cahuilla&amp;quot; (AT-152)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868323" start="112923" end="112957" title="USS Chimariko (AT-154)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chimariko&amp;quot; (AT-154)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868686" start="112960" end="112991" title="USS Cusabo (AT-155)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cusabo&amp;quot; (AT-155)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871377" start="112994" end="113026" title="USS Luiseno (AT-156)" label="USS &amp;quot;Luiseno&amp;quot; (AT-156)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080701" start="113029" end="113060" title="USS Nipmuc (AT-157)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nipmuc&amp;quot; (AT-157)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113063" end="113097" title="USS Mosopelea (AT-158)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mosopelea&amp;quot; (AT-158)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997098" start="113100" end="113131" title="USS Paiute (AT-159)" label="USS &amp;quot;Paiute&amp;quot; (AT-159)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872647" start="113134" end="113165" title="USS Papago (AT-160)" label="USS &amp;quot;Papago&amp;quot; (AT-160)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698455" start="113168" end="113200" title="USS Salinan (AT-161)" label="USS &amp;quot;Salinan&amp;quot; (AT-161)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113203" end="113235" title="USS Shakori (AT-162)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shakori&amp;quot; (AT-162)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874991" start="113238" end="113268" title="USS Utina (AT-163)" label="USS &amp;quot;Utina&amp;quot; (AT-163)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867762" start="113271" end="113301" title="USS Yurok (AT-164)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yurok&amp;quot; (AT-164)"/>
<link wikidata="Q660408" start="113304" end="113336" title="USS Yustaga (AT-165)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yustaga&amp;quot; (AT-165)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917477" start="113337" end="113363" title="Sotoyomo-class tugboat" label="&amp;quot;Sotoyomo&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874254" start="113366" end="113388" title="USS AT-121" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-121&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113391" end="113413" title="USS AT-122" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-122&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870451" start="113416" end="113438" title="USS AT-123" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-123&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113441" end="113463" title="USS AT-124" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-124&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113466" end="113488" title="USS AT-125" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-125&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113491" end="113513" title="USS AT-126" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-126&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113516" end="113538" title="USS AT-127" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-127&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113541" end="113563" title="USS AT-128" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-128&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113566" end="113588" title="USS AT-129" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-129&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113591" end="113613" title="USS AT-130" label="USS &amp;quot;AT-130&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628625" start="113614" end="113639" title="Lapwing-class minesweeper" label="&amp;quot;Lapwing&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002100" start="113643" end="113676" title="USS Bobolink (AT-131)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bobolink&amp;quot; (AT-131)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867831" start="113689" end="113719" title="USS Brant (AT-132)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brant&amp;quot; (AT-132)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868569" start="113746" end="113780" title="USS Cormorant (AT-133)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cormorant&amp;quot; (AT-133)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682373" start="113793" end="113823" title="USS Grebe (AT-134)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grebe&amp;quot; (AT-134)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682182" start="113862" end="113897" title="USS Kingfisher (AT-135)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kingfisher&amp;quot; (AT-135)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681824" start="113910" end="113941" title="USS Oriole (AT-136)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oriole&amp;quot; (AT-136)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872552" start="113953" end="113981" title="USS Owl (AT-137)" label="USS &amp;quot;Owl&amp;quot; (AT-137)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872673" start="113993" end="114027" title="USS Partridge (AT-138)" label="USS &amp;quot;Partridge&amp;quot; (AT-138)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873258" start="114040" end="114069" title="USS Rail (AT-139)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rail&amp;quot; (AT-139)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873506" start="114082" end="114112" title="USS Robin (AT-140)" label="USS &amp;quot;Robin&amp;quot; (AT-140)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873975" start="114124" end="114156" title="USS Seagull (AT-141)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seagull&amp;quot; (AT-141)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874673" start="114169" end="114198" title="USS Tern (AT-142)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tern&amp;quot; (AT-142)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874912" start="114211" end="114242" title="USS Turkey (AT-143)" label="USS &amp;quot;Turkey&amp;quot; (AT-143)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875119" start="114255" end="114285" title="USS Vireo (AT-144)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vireo&amp;quot; (AT-144)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875635" start="114298" end="114331" title="USS Woodcock (AT-145)" label="USS &amp;quot;Woodcock&amp;quot; (AT-145)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871162" start="114344" end="114373" title="USS Lark (AT-168)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lark&amp;quot; (AT-168)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875472" start="114386" end="114423" title="USS Whippoorwill (AT-169)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whippoorwill&amp;quot; (AT-169)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874254" start="114640" end="114674" title="USS Sotoyomo (ATA-121)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sotoyomo&amp;quot; (ATA-121)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114677" end="114700" title="USS ATA-122" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-122&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870451" start="114703" end="114733" title="USS Iuka (ATA-123)" label="USS &amp;quot;Iuka&amp;quot; (ATA-123)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114736" end="114759" title="USS ATA-124" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-124&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114762" end="114785" title="USS ATA-125" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-125&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114788" end="114811" title="USS ATA-126" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-126&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114814" end="114837" title="USS ATA-127" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-127&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114840" end="114863" title="USS ATA-128" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-128&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114866" end="114889" title="USS ATA-170" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-170&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114892" end="114915" title="USS ATA-171" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-171&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114918" end="114941" title="USS ATA-172" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-172&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114944" end="114967" title="USS ATA-173" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-173&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875338" start="114970" end="115003" title="USS Wateree (ATA-174)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wateree&amp;quot; (ATA-174)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115005" end="115046" title="USNS Wateree (T-ATA-174" label="1)|USNS &amp;quot;Wateree&amp;quot; (T-ATA-174|1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874250" start="115050" end="115082" title="USS Sonoma (ATA-175)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sonoma&amp;quot; (ATA-175)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874812" start="115085" end="115118" title="USS Tonkawa (ATA-176)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tonkawa&amp;quot; (ATA-176)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115120" end="115161" title="USNS Tonkawa (T-ATA-176" label="1)|USNS &amp;quot;Tonkawa&amp;quot; (T-ATA-176|1)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115165" end="115188" title="USS ATA-177" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-177&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874903" start="115191" end="115223" title="USS Tunica (ATA-178)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tunica&amp;quot; (ATA-178)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867218" start="115226" end="115261" title="USS Allegheny (ATA-179)" label="USS &amp;quot;Allegheny&amp;quot; (ATA-179)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115264" end="115287" title="USS ATA-180" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-180&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="115289" end="115309" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866995" start="115337" end="115371" title="USS Accokeek (ATA-181)" label="USS &amp;quot;Accokeek&amp;quot; (ATA-181)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874956" start="115374" end="115408" title="USS Unadilla (ATA-182)" label="USS &amp;quot;Unadilla&amp;quot; (ATA-182)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872340" start="115411" end="115445" title="USS Nottoway (ATA-183)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nottoway&amp;quot; (ATA-183)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115448" end="115480" title="USS Kalmia (ATA-184)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kalmia&amp;quot; (ATA-184)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870852" start="115483" end="115513" title="USS Koka (ATA-185)" label="USS &amp;quot;Koka&amp;quot; (ATA-185)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867983" start="115550" end="115583" title="USS Cahokia (ATA-186)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cahokia&amp;quot; (ATA-186)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873754" start="115586" end="115618" title="USS Salish (ATA-187)" label="USS &amp;quot;Salish&amp;quot; (ATA-187)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872786" start="115655" end="115690" title="USS Penobscot (ATA-188)" label="USS &amp;quot;Penobscot&amp;quot; (ATA-188)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873367" start="115693" end="115727" title="USS Reindeer (ATA-189)" label="USS &amp;quot;Reindeer&amp;quot; (ATA-189)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873775" start="115730" end="115763" title="USS Samoset (ATA-190)" label="USS &amp;quot;Samoset&amp;quot; (ATA-190)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="115766" end="115789" title="USS ATA-191" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-191&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874765" start="115792" end="115827" title="USS Tillamook (ATA-192)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tillamook&amp;quot; (ATA-192)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874352" start="115864" end="115898" title="USS Stallion (ATA-193)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stallion&amp;quot; (ATA-193)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867542" start="115901" end="115935" title="USS Bagaduce (ATA-194)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bagaduce&amp;quot; (ATA-194)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707302" start="115938" end="115971" title="USS Tatnuck (ATA-195)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tatnuck&amp;quot; (ATA-195)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707304" start="115974" end="116007" title="USS Mahopac (ATA-196)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mahopac&amp;quot; (ATA-196)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874475" start="116010" end="116044" title="USS Sunnadin (ATA-197)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sunnadin&amp;quot; (ATA-197)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870745" start="116047" end="116082" title="USS Keosanqua (ATA-198)" label="USS &amp;quot;Keosanqua&amp;quot; (ATA-198)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874964" start="116085" end="116120" title="USS Undaunted (ATA-199)" label="USS &amp;quot;Undaunted&amp;quot; (ATA-199)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116123" end="116146" title="USS ATA-200" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-200&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868193" start="116149" end="116184" title="USS Challenge (ATA-201)" label="USS &amp;quot;Challenge&amp;quot; (ATA-201)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875250" start="116187" end="116222" title="USS Wampanoag (ATA-202)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wampanoag&amp;quot; (ATA-202)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132475847" start="116225" end="116260" title="USS Navigator (ATA-203)" label="USS &amp;quot;Navigator&amp;quot; (ATA-203)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875257" start="116263" end="116296" title="USS Wandank (ATA-204)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wandank&amp;quot; (ATA-204)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873920" start="116299" end="116331" title="USS Sciota (ATA-205)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sciota&amp;quot; (ATA-205)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872904" start="116334" end="116366" title="USS Pinola (ATA-206)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinola&amp;quot; (ATA-206)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869712" start="116369" end="116403" title="USS Geronimo (ATA-207)" label="USS &amp;quot;Geronimo&amp;quot; (ATA-207)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873734" start="116406" end="116440" title="USS Sagamore (ATA-208)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sagamore&amp;quot; (ATA-208)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874952" start="116443" end="116475" title="USS Umpqua (ATA-209)" label="USS &amp;quot;Umpqua&amp;quot; (ATA-209)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653553" start="116478" end="116511" title="USS Catawba (ATA-210)" label="USS &amp;quot;Catawba&amp;quot; (ATA-210)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872160" start="116514" end="116546" title="USS Navajo (ATA-211)" label="USS &amp;quot;Navajo&amp;quot; (ATA-211)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867207" start="116549" end="116582" title="USS Algorma (ATA-212)" label="USS &amp;quot;Algorma&amp;quot; (ATA-212)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116585" end="116619" title="USS Keywadin (ATA-213)" label="USS &amp;quot;Keywadin&amp;quot; (ATA-213)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456379" start="116620" end="116645" title="ATA-214-class tug" label="&amp;quot;ATA-214&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866957" start="116649" end="116672" title="USS ATA-214" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-214&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866958" start="116691" end="116714" title="USS ATA-215" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-215&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866959" start="116733" end="116756" title="USS ATA-216" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-216&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866960" start="116775" end="116798" title="USS ATA-217" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-217&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866961" start="116801" end="116824" title="USS ATA-218" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-218&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116842" end="116876" title="USS Maricopa (ATA-146)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maricopa&amp;quot; (ATA-146)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116879" end="116911" title="USS Chetco (ATA-166)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chetco&amp;quot; (ATA-166)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116914" end="116946" title="USS Chatot (ATA-167)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chatot&amp;quot; (ATA-167)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116949" end="116972" title="USS ATA-219" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-219&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116975" end="116998" title="USS ATA-220" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-220&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117001" end="117024" title="USS ATA-221" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-221&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117027" end="117050" title="USS ATA-222" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-222&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117053" end="117076" title="USS ATA-223" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-223&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117079" end="117102" title="USS ATA-224" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-224&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117105" end="117128" title="USS ATA-225" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-225&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117131" end="117154" title="USS ATA-226" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-226&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117157" end="117180" title="USS ATA-227" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-227&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117183" end="117206" title="USS ATA-228" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-228&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117209" end="117232" title="USS ATA-229" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-229&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117235" end="117258" title="USS ATA-230" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-230&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117304" end="117327" title="USS ATA-234" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-234&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117330" end="117353" title="USS ATA-235" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-235&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117356" end="117379" title="USS ATA-236" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-236&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117382" end="117405" title="USS ATA-237" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-237&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117408" end="117431" title="USS ATA-238" label="USS &amp;quot;ATA-238&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117434" end="117460" title="USNS T-ATA-239" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-ATA-239&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117463" end="117489" title="USNS T-ATA-240" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-ATA-240&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117492" end="117518" title="USNS T-ATA-241" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-ATA-241&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117521" end="117547" title="USNS T-ATA-242" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-ATA-242&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117550" end="117576" title="USNS T-ATA-243" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-ATA-243&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117579" end="117605" title="USNS T-ATA-244" label="USNS &amp;quot;T-ATA-244&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117608" end="117643" title="USS Tuscarora (ATA-245)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tuscarora&amp;quot; (ATA-245)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868281" start="117829" end="117862" title="USS Cherokee (ATF-66)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cherokee&amp;quot; (ATF-66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867341" start="117865" end="117896" title="USS Apache (ATF-67)" label="USS &amp;quot;Apache&amp;quot; (ATF-67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q729219" start="117898" end="117914" title="Operation Castle" label="Operation Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867367" start="117942" end="117974" title="USS Arapaho (ATF-68)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arapaho&amp;quot; (ATF-68)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868344" start="117977" end="118010" title="USS Chippewa (ATF-69)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chippewa&amp;quot; (ATF-69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744020" start="118013" end="118045" title="USS Choctaw (ATF-70)" label="USS &amp;quot;Choctaw&amp;quot; (ATF-70)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744055" start="118048" end="118077" title="USS Hopi (ATF-71)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hopi&amp;quot; (ATF-71)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870811" start="118080" end="118110" title="USS Kiowa (ATF-72)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kiowa&amp;quot; (ATF-72)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744096" start="118113" end="118147" title="USS Menominee (ATF-73)" label="USS &amp;quot;Menominee&amp;quot; (ATF-73)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872745" start="118150" end="118181" title="USS Pawnee (ATF-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pawnee&amp;quot; (ATF-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874166" start="118184" end="118214" title="USS Sioux (ATF-75)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sioux&amp;quot; (ATF-75)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744222" start="118244" end="118272" title="USS Ute (ATF-76)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ute&amp;quot; (ATF-76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425035" start="118274" end="118291" title="Operation Dominic" label="Operation Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867565" start="118319" end="118351" title="USS Bannock (ATF-81)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bannock&amp;quot; (ATF-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868080" start="118354" end="118384" title="USS Carib (ATF-82)" label="USS &amp;quot;Carib&amp;quot; (ATF-82)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868306" start="118387" end="118421" title="USS Chickasaw (ATF-83)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chickasaw&amp;quot; (ATF-83)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868635" start="118450" end="118479" title="USS Cree (ATF-84)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cree&amp;quot; (ATF-84)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871291" start="118509" end="118539" title="USS Lipan (ATF-85)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lipan&amp;quot; (ATF-85)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871596" start="118569" end="118600" title="USS Mataco (ATF-86)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mataco&amp;quot; (ATF-86)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871966" start="118603" end="118634" title="USS Moreno (ATF-87)" label="USS &amp;quot;Moreno&amp;quot; (ATF-87)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872118" start="118637" end="118674" title="USS Narragansett (ATF-88)" label="USS &amp;quot;Narragansett&amp;quot; (ATF-88)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11679889" start="118677" end="118708" title="USS Nauset (ATF-89)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nauset&amp;quot; (ATF-89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872908" start="118711" end="118741" title="USS Pinto (ATF-90)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinto&amp;quot; (ATF-90)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874018" start="118744" end="118775" title="USS Seneca (ATF-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seneca&amp;quot; (ATF-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874642" start="118778" end="118809" title="USS Tawasa (ATF-92)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tawasa&amp;quot; (ATF-92)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549008" start="118811" end="118827" title="Operation Wigwam" label="Operation Wigwam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874657" start="118855" end="118887" title="USS Tekesta (ATF-93)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tekesta&amp;quot; (ATF-93)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875738" start="118890" end="118919" title="USS Yuma (ATF-94)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yuma&amp;quot; (ATF-94)"/>
<link wikidata="Q263871" start="118921" end="118934" title="Operation Ivy" label="Operation Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875780" start="118950" end="118979" title="USS Zuni (ATF-95)" label="USS &amp;quot;Zuni&amp;quot; (ATF-95)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744019" start="118982" end="119014" title="USS Chilula (AT-153)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chilula&amp;quot; (AT-153)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866980" start="119043" end="119074" title="USS Abnaki (ATF-96)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abnaki&amp;quot; (ATF-96)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867247" start="119077" end="119107" title="USS Alsea (ATF-97)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alsea&amp;quot; (ATF-97)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867413" start="119110" end="119142" title="USS Arikara (ATF-98)" label="USS &amp;quot;Arikara&amp;quot; (ATF-98)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120521" start="119172" end="119206" title="USS Chowanoc (ATF-100)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chowanoc&amp;quot; (ATF-100)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868425" start="119256" end="119288" title="USS Cocopa (ATF-101)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cocopa&amp;quot; (ATF-101)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933618" start="119321" end="119354" title="USS Hidatsa (ATF-102)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hidatsa&amp;quot; (ATF-102)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933644" start="119357" end="119391" title="USS Hitchiti (ATF-103)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hitchiti&amp;quot; (ATF-103)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110970611" start="119425" end="119460" title="USS Jicarilla (ATF-104)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jicarilla&amp;quot; (ATF-104)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121738" start="119463" end="119496" title="USS Moctobi (ATF-105)" label="USS &amp;quot;Moctobi&amp;quot; (ATF-105)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407231" start="119498" end="119510" title="Project SHAD" label="Project SHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222899" start="119550" end="119582" title="USS Molala (ATF-106)" label="USS &amp;quot;Molala&amp;quot; (ATF-106)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872013" start="119612" end="119644" title="USS Munsee (ATF-107)" label="USS &amp;quot;Munsee&amp;quot; (ATF-107)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11671879" start="119674" end="119706" title="USS Pakana (ATF-108)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pakana&amp;quot; (ATF-108)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947497" start="119709" end="119745" title="USS Potawatomi (ATF-109)" label="USS &amp;quot;Potawatomi&amp;quot; (ATF-109)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873179" start="119748" end="119780" title="USS Quapaw (ATF-110)" label="USS &amp;quot;Quapaw&amp;quot; (ATF-110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873872" start="119783" end="119814" title="USS Sarsi (ATF-111)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sarsi&amp;quot; (ATF-111)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874040" start="119891" end="119924" title="USS Seranno (ATF-112)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seranno&amp;quot; (ATF-112)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653575" start="119927" end="119960" title="USS Takelma (ATF-113)" label="USS &amp;quot;Takelma&amp;quot; (ATF-113)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874641" start="119994" end="120028" title="USS Tawakoni (ATF-114)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tawakoni&amp;quot; (ATF-114)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121848" start="120057" end="120089" title="USS Tenino (ATF-115)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tenino&amp;quot; (ATF-115)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110970830" start="120092" end="120124" title="USS Tolowa (ATF-116)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tolowa&amp;quot; (ATF-116)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875339" start="120127" end="120160" title="USS Wateree (ATF-117)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wateree&amp;quot; (ATF-117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111164529" start="120221" end="120256" title="USS Wenatchee (ATF-118)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wenatchee&amp;quot; (ATF-118)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867003" start="120293" end="120327" title="USS Achomawi (ATF-148)" label="USS &amp;quot;Achomawi&amp;quot; (ATF-148)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867472" start="120364" end="120397" title="USS Atakapa (ATF-149)" label="USS &amp;quot;Atakapa&amp;quot; (ATF-149)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867527" start="120400" end="120432" title="USS Avoyel (ATF-150)" label="USS &amp;quot;Avoyel&amp;quot; (ATF-150)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868264" start="120435" end="120469" title="USS Chawasha (ATF-151)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chawasha&amp;quot; (ATF-151)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867985" start="120472" end="120506" title="USS Cahuilla (ATF-152)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cahuilla&amp;quot; (ATF-152)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868323" start="120509" end="120544" title="USS Chimariko (ATF-154)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chimariko&amp;quot; (ATF-154)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868686" start="120547" end="120579" title="USS Cusabo (ATF-155)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cusabo&amp;quot; (ATF-155)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871377" start="120582" end="120615" title="USS Luiseno (ATF-156)" label="USS &amp;quot;Luiseno&amp;quot; (ATF-156)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080701" start="120618" end="120650" title="USS Nipmuc (ATF-157)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nipmuc&amp;quot; (ATF-157)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111023639" start="120653" end="120688" title="USS Mosopelea (ATF-158)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mosopelea&amp;quot; (ATF-158)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997098" start="120691" end="120723" title="USS Paiute (ATF-159)" label="USS &amp;quot;Paiute&amp;quot; (ATF-159)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872647" start="120726" end="120758" title="USS Papago (ATF-160)" label="USS &amp;quot;Papago&amp;quot; (ATF-160)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698455" start="120761" end="120794" title="USS Salinan (ATF-161)" label="USS &amp;quot;Salinan&amp;quot; (ATF-161)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110799248" start="120797" end="120830" title="USS Shakori (ATF-162)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shakori&amp;quot; (ATF-162)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874991" start="120833" end="120864" title="USS Utina (ATF-163)" label="USS &amp;quot;Utina&amp;quot; (ATF-163)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867762" start="120867" end="120898" title="USS Yurok (ATF-164)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yurok&amp;quot; (ATF-164)"/>
<link wikidata="Q660408" start="120915" end="120948" title="USS Yustaga (ATF-165)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yustaga&amp;quot; (ATF-165)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107083" start="120964" end="120990" title="Powhatan-class tugboat" label="&amp;quot;Powhatan&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468207" start="120994" end="121031" title="USNS Powhatan (T-ATF-166)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Powhatan&amp;quot; (T-ATF-166)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115924" start="121034" end="121075" title="USNS Narragansett (T-ATF-167)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Narragansett&amp;quot; (T-ATF-167)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174780" start="121078" end="121114" title="USNS Catawba (T-ATF-168)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Catawba&amp;quot; (T-ATF-168)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468195" start="121121" end="121156" title="USNS Navajo (T-ATF-169)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Navajo&amp;quot; (T-ATF-169)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468193" start="121163" end="121198" title="USNS Mohawk (T-ATF-170)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Mohawk&amp;quot; (T-ATF-170)"/>
<link wikidata="Q915557" start="121205" end="121239" title="USNS Sioux (T-ATF-171)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Sioux&amp;quot; (T-ATF-171)"/>
<link wikidata="Q478051" start="121246" end="121281" title="USNS Apache (T-ATF-172)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Apache&amp;quot; (T-ATF-172)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121469" end="121503" title="USS Allegheny (ATO-19)" label="USS &amp;quot;Allegheny&amp;quot; (ATO-19)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121506" end="121540" title="USS Undaunted (ATO-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;Undaunted&amp;quot; (ATO-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867024" start="121543" end="121576" title="USS Acushnet (ATO-63)" label="USS &amp;quot;Acushnet&amp;quot; (ATO-63)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121579" end="121612" title="USS Esselin (ATO-147)" label="USS &amp;quot;Esselin&amp;quot; (ATO-147)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874249" start="121640" end="121671" title="USS Sonoma (ATO-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sonoma&amp;quot; (ATO-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457830" start="121690" end="121703" title="San Pedro Bay (Philippines)" label="San Pedro Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q240753" start="121705" end="121715" title="Leyte Gulf" label="Leyte Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872453" start="121748" end="121780" title="USS Ontario (ATO-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Ontario&amp;quot; (ATO-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55063947" start="121812" end="121844" title="USS Sagamore (AT-20)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sagamore&amp;quot; (AT-20)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867540" start="121847" end="121880" title="USS Bagaduce (ATO-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bagaduce&amp;quot; (ATO-21)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121883" end="121914" title="USS Kalmia (ATO-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kalmia&amp;quot; (ATO-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870771" start="121917" end="121950" title="USS Kewaydin (ATO-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kewaydin&amp;quot; (ATO-24)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121953" end="121984" title="USS Umpqua (ATO-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Umpqua&amp;quot; (ATO-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875256" start="121987" end="122019" title="USS Wandank (ATO-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wandank&amp;quot; (ATO-26)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="122022" end="122054" title="USS Tatnuck (ATO-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tatnuck&amp;quot; (ATO-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874474" start="122057" end="122090" title="USS Sunnadin (ATO-28)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sunnadin&amp;quot; (ATO-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61451748" start="122093" end="122125" title="USS Mahopac (ATO-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mahopac&amp;quot; (ATO-29)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="122128" end="122159" title="USS Sciota (ATO-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sciota&amp;quot; (ATO-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872903" start="122162" end="122193" title="USS Pinola (ATO-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pinola&amp;quot; (ATO-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867204" start="122196" end="122228" title="USS Algorma (ATO-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Algorma&amp;quot; (ATO-34)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="122231" end="122260" title="USS Iuka (ATO-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Iuka&amp;quot; (ATO-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870744" start="122263" end="122297" title="USS Keosanqua (ATO-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Keosanqua&amp;quot; (ATO-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871939" start="122300" end="122333" title="USS Montcalm (ATO-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Montcalm&amp;quot; (ATO-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002100" start="122363" end="122397" title="USS Bobolink (ATO-131)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bobolink&amp;quot; (ATO-131)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868569" start="122400" end="122435" title="USS Cormorant (ATO-133)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cormorant&amp;quot; (ATO-133)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682182" start="122438" end="122474" title="USS Kingfisher (ATO-135)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kingfisher&amp;quot; (ATO-135)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681824" start="122477" end="122509" title="USS Oriole (ATO-136)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oriole&amp;quot; (ATO-136)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872552" start="122512" end="122541" title="USS Owl (ATO-137)" label="USS &amp;quot;Owl&amp;quot; (ATO-137)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872673" start="122544" end="122579" title="USS Partridge (ATO-138)" label="USS &amp;quot;Partridge&amp;quot; (ATO-138)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="122601" end="122609" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873258" start="122644" end="122674" title="USS Rail (ATO-139)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rail&amp;quot; (ATO-139)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873506" start="122677" end="122708" title="USS Robin (ATO-140)" label="USS &amp;quot;Robin&amp;quot; (ATO-140)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873975" start="122711" end="122744" title="USS Seagull (ATO-141)" label="USS &amp;quot;Seagull&amp;quot; (ATO-141)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874673" start="122747" end="122777" title="USS Tern (ATO-142)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tern&amp;quot; (ATO-142)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874912" start="122780" end="122812" title="USS Turkey (ATO-143)" label="USS &amp;quot;Turkey&amp;quot; (ATO-143)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875119" start="122815" end="122846" title="USS Vireo (ATO-144)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vireo&amp;quot; (ATO-144)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875635" start="122849" end="122883" title="USS Woodcock (ATO-145)" label="USS &amp;quot;Woodcock&amp;quot; (ATO-145)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871162" start="122886" end="122916" title="USS Lark (ATO-168)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lark&amp;quot; (ATO-168)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875472" start="122919" end="122957" title="USS Whippoorwill (ATO-169)" label="USS &amp;quot;Whippoorwill&amp;quot; (ATO-169)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="122980" end="123003" title="Type V ship#ATR-1 class rescue tug" label="&amp;quot;ATR-1&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123007" end="123028" title="USS ATR-1" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123031" end="123052" title="USS ATR-2" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123055" end="123076" title="USS ATR-3" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123079" end="123100" title="USS ATR-4" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-4&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123103" end="123124" title="USS ATR-5" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-5&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123127" end="123148" title="USS ATR-6" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-6&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123151" end="123172" title="USS ATR-7" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-7&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123175" end="123196" title="USS ATR-8" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-8&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123199" end="123220" title="USS ATR-9" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-9&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123223" end="123245" title="USS ATR-10" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-10&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123248" end="123270" title="USS ATR-11" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-11&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123273" end="123295" title="USS ATR-12" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123298" end="123320" title="USS ATR-13" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-13&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123323" end="123345" title="USS ATR-14" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-14&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123348" end="123370" title="USS ATR-15" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-15&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123373" end="123395" title="USS ATR-16" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-16&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123398" end="123420" title="USS ATR-17" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-17&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123423" end="123445" title="USS ATR-18" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-18&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123448" end="123470" title="USS ATR-19" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-19&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632944" start="123473" end="123495" title="USS ATR-20" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123498" end="123520" title="USS ATR-21" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-21&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123523" end="123545" title="USS ATR-22" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-22&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123548" end="123570" title="USS ATR-23" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-23&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123573" end="123595" title="USS ATR-24" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-24&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123598" end="123620" title="USS ATR-25" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-25&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123623" end="123645" title="USS ATR-26" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-26&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123648" end="123670" title="USS ATR-27" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-27&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123673" end="123695" title="USS ATR-28" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-28&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123698" end="123720" title="USS ATR-29" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-29&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123723" end="123745" title="USS ATR-30" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-30&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48861727" start="123748" end="123770" title="USS ATR-31" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-31&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123773" end="123795" title="USS ATR-32" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-32&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123798" end="123820" title="USS ATR-33" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-33&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123823" end="123845" title="USS ATR-34" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-34&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123848" end="123870" title="USS ATR-35" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-35&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123873" end="123895" title="USS ATR-36" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-36&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123898" end="123920" title="USS ATR-37" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-37&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123923" end="123945" title="USS ATR-38" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-38&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123948" end="123970" title="USS ATR-39" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-39&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="123973" end="123995" title="USS ATR-40" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-40&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="123997" end="124017" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124045" end="124067" title="USS ATR-41" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-41&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124070" end="124092" title="USS ATR-42" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-42&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874254" start="124123" end="124145" title="USS ATR-43" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-43&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124148" end="124170" title="USS ATR-44" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-44&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870451" start="124173" end="124195" title="USS ATR-45" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-45&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124198" end="124220" title="USS ATR-46" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-46&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124223" end="124245" title="USS ATR-47" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-47&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124248" end="124270" title="USS ATR-51" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-51&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124273" end="124295" title="USS ATR-52" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-52&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124298" end="124320" title="USS ATR-53" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-53&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124323" end="124345" title="USS ATR-54" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-54&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124348" end="124370" title="USS ATR-55" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-55&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124373" end="124395" title="USS ATR-56" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-56&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124398" end="124420" title="USS ATR-57" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-57&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124423" end="124445" title="USS ATR-58" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-58&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124448" end="124470" title="USS ATR-59" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-59&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124473" end="124495" title="USS ATR-60" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-60&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124498" end="124520" title="USS ATR-61" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-61&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124523" end="124545" title="USS ATR-62" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-62&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124548" end="124570" title="USS ATR-63" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-63&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124573" end="124595" title="USS ATR-64" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-64&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124598" end="124620" title="USS ATR-65" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-65&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124623" end="124645" title="USS ATR-66" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-66&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124648" end="124670" title="USS ATR-67" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-67&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124673" end="124695" title="USS ATR-68" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-68&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124698" end="124720" title="USS ATR-69" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-69&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124723" end="124745" title="USS ATR-70" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-70&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124748" end="124770" title="USS ATR-71" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-71&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124773" end="124795" title="USS ATR-72" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-72&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124798" end="124820" title="USS ATR-73" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-73&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124823" end="124845" title="USS ATR-74" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-74&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124848" end="124870" title="USS ATR-75" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-75&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124873" end="124895" title="USS ATR-76" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-76&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124898" end="124920" title="USS ATR-77" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-77&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124923" end="124945" title="USS ATR-78" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-78&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124948" end="124970" title="USS ATR-79" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-79&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124973" end="124995" title="USS ATR-80" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-80&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124998" end="125020" title="USS ATR-81" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-81&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125023" end="125045" title="USS ATR-82" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-82&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125048" end="125070" title="USS ATR-83" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-83&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125073" end="125095" title="USS ATR-84" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-84&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125098" end="125120" title="USS ATR-85" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-85&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125123" end="125145" title="USS ATR-86" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-86&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125148" end="125170" title="USS ATR-87" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-87&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125207" end="125229" title="USS ATR-88" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-88&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125232" end="125254" title="USS ATR-89" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-89&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125257" end="125279" title="USS ATR-90" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-90&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125282" end="125304" title="USS ATR-91" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-91&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125307" end="125329" title="USS ATR-92" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-92&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125332" end="125354" title="USS ATR-93" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-93&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125357" end="125379" title="USS ATR-94" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-94&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125382" end="125404" title="USS ATR-95" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-95&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125407" end="125429" title="USS ATR-96" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-96&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125432" end="125454" title="USS ATR-97" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-97&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125457" end="125479" title="USS ATR-98" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-98&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125482" end="125504" title="USS ATR-99" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-99&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125507" end="125530" title="USS ATR-100" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-100&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875338" start="125533" end="125556" title="USS ATR-101" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-101&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874250" start="125559" end="125582" title="USS ATR-102" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-102&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874812" start="125585" end="125608" title="USS ATR-103" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-103&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125611" end="125634" title="USS ATR-104" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-104&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874903" start="125637" end="125660" title="USS ATR-105" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-105&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867218" start="125663" end="125686" title="USS ATR-106" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-106&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125689" end="125712" title="USS ATR-107" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-107&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866995" start="125715" end="125738" title="USS ATR-108" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-108&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874956" start="125741" end="125764" title="USS ATR-109" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-109&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872340" start="125767" end="125790" title="USS ATR-110" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-110&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125793" end="125816" title="USS ATR-111" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-111&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870852" start="125819" end="125842" title="USS ATR-112" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-112&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867983" start="125845" end="125868" title="USS ATR-113" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-113&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873754" start="125871" end="125894" title="USS ATR-114" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-114&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872786" start="125897" end="125920" title="USS ATR-115" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-115&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873367" start="125923" end="125946" title="USS ATR-116" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-116&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873775" start="125949" end="125972" title="USS ATR-117" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-117&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125975" end="125998" title="USS ATR-118" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-118&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874765" start="126001" end="126024" title="USS ATR-119" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-119&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874352" start="126027" end="126050" title="USS ATR-120" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-120&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867542" start="126053" end="126076" title="USS ATR-121" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-121&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707302" start="126079" end="126102" title="USS ATR-122" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-122&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707304" start="126105" end="126128" title="USS ATR-123" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-123&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874475" start="126131" end="126154" title="USS ATR-124" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-124&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870745" start="126157" end="126180" title="USS ATR-125" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-125&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874964" start="126183" end="126206" title="USS ATR-126" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-126&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126209" end="126232" title="USS ATR-127" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-127&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868193" start="126235" end="126258" title="USS ATR-128" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-128&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875250" start="126261" end="126284" title="USS ATR-129" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-129&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132475847" start="126287" end="126310" title="USS ATR-130" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-130&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875257" start="126313" end="126336" title="USS ATR-131" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-131&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873920" start="126339" end="126362" title="USS ATR-132" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-132&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872904" start="126365" end="126388" title="USS ATR-133" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-133&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869712" start="126391" end="126414" title="USS ATR-134" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-134&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873734" start="126417" end="126440" title="USS ATR-135" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-135&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874952" start="126443" end="126466" title="USS ATR-136" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-136&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653553" start="126469" end="126492" title="USS ATR-137" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-137&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872160" start="126495" end="126518" title="USS ATR-138" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-138&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867207" start="126521" end="126544" title="USS ATR-139" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-139&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126547" end="126570" title="USS ATR-140" label="USS &amp;quot;ATR-140&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28097270" start="126606" end="126631" title="Edenton-class salvage and rescue ship" label="&amp;quot;Edenton&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865999" start="126634" end="126665" title="USS Edenton (ATS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Edenton&amp;quot; (ATS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867639" start="126715" end="126747" title="USS Beaufort (ATS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Beaufort&amp;quot; (ATS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867898" start="126750" end="126783" title="USS Brunswick (ATS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Brunswick&amp;quot; (ATS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63365513" start="126810" end="126834" title="Navajo-class rescue and salvage ship" label="&amp;quot;Navajo&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q766646" start="127421" end="127444" title="USS Mississippi (BB-23)" label="USS Mississippi (BB-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867110" start="127458" end="127474" title="USS Ajax (AG-15)" label="USS Ajax (AG-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866446" start="127497" end="127540" title="USS Christiana (YAG-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Christiana&amp;quot; (IX-80 / YAG-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875653" start="127577" end="127606" title="USS Wright (AV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wright&amp;quot; (AV-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870515" start="127656" end="127684" title="USS Jason (AC-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jason&amp;quot; (AV-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q860057" start="127724" end="127754" title="USS Langley (CV-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Langley&amp;quot; (AV-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872759" start="127875" end="127886" title="USS Pecos (AO-6)" label="rescue ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547391" start="127921" end="127951" title="USS Curtiss (AV-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Curtiss&amp;quot; (AV-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867162" start="127981" end="128013" title="USS Albemarle (AV-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Albemarle&amp;quot; (AV-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604565" start="128119" end="128148" title="USS Patoka (AO-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Patoka&amp;quot; (AV-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195180" start="128173" end="128200" title="Currituck class seaplane tender" label="&amp;quot;Currituck&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868682" start="128203" end="128235" title="USS Currituck (AV-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Currituck&amp;quot; (AV-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052260" start="128238" end="128274" title="USS Norton Sound" label="USS &amp;quot;Norton Sound&amp;quot; (AV-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872893" start="128290" end="128325" title="USS Pine Island (AV-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pine Island&amp;quot; (AV-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873753" start="128328" end="128367" title="USS Salisbury Sound" label="USS &amp;quot;Salisbury Sound&amp;quot; (AV-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874608" start="128409" end="128439" title="USS Tangier (AV-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tangier&amp;quot; (AV-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872970" start="128547" end="128578" title="USS Pocomoke (AV-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pocomoke&amp;quot; (AV-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868203" start="128611" end="128645" title="USS Chandeleur (AV-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chandeleur&amp;quot; (AV-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870725" start="128696" end="128735" title="USS Kenneth Whiting (AV-14)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kenneth Whiting&amp;quot; (AV-14)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869975" start="128773" end="128803" title="USS Hamlin (AV-15)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hamlin&amp;quot; (AV-15)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615494" start="128806" end="128839" title="USS St. George (AV-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;St George&amp;quot; (AV-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868671" start="128842" end="128882" title="USS Cumberland Sound (AV-17)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cumberland Sound&amp;quot; (AV-17)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867448" start="129218" end="129237" title="USS Ashland (LSD-1)" label="USS Ashland (AV-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618439" start="129323" end="129361" title="USS Alameda County (AVB-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alameda County&amp;quot; (AVB-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874591" start="129387" end="129430" title="USS Tallahatchie County (AVB-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tallahatchie County&amp;quot; (AVB-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393448" start="129507" end="129541" title="USNS Curtiss (T-AVB-4)" label="USNS &amp;quot;Curtiss&amp;quot; (T-AVB-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100454" start="129628" end="129653" title="Clemson-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Clemson&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129734" end="129762" title="#Small seaplane tenders (AVP)" label="Small seaplane tenders (AVP)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129827" end="129854" title="List of United States Navy amphibious warfare ships#High-speed transport (APD)" label="High-speed transports (APD)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130158" end="130189" title="USS Greene (DD-266)#Seaplane tender (1940-1944)" label="USS &amp;quot;Greene&amp;quot; (AVD-13)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130345" end="130378" title="#Auxiliary aircraft carriers (ACV)" label="Auxiliary aircraft carriers (ACV)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130488" end="130524" title="USS Norton Sound (AVM-1)#1950 to 1962" label="USS &amp;quot;Norton Sound&amp;quot; (AVM-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628625" start="130597" end="130622" title="Lapwing-class minesweeper" label="&amp;quot;Lapwing&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871153" start="130625" end="130656" title="USS Lapwing (AM-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lapwing&amp;quot; (AVP-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870148" start="130672" end="130701" title="USS Heron (AM-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Heron&amp;quot; (AVP-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874735" start="130718" end="130748" title="USS Thrush (AM-18)" label="USS &amp;quot;Thrush&amp;quot; (AVP-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867526" start="130765" end="130795" title="USS Avocet (AVP-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Avocet&amp;quot; (AVP-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874647" start="130812" end="130840" title="USS Teal (AM-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Teal&amp;quot; (AVP-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872769" start="130857" end="130888" title="USS Pelican (AM-27)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pelican&amp;quot; (AVP-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874520" start="130905" end="130933" title="USS Swan (AM-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Swan&amp;quot; (AVP-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q649530" start="130950" end="130980" title="USS Gannet (AM-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gannet&amp;quot; (AVP-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873822" start="131031" end="131064" title="USS Sandpiper (AM-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;Sandpiper&amp;quot; (AVP-9)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="131189" end="131221" title="#Destroyer seaplane tenders (AVD)" label="Destroyer seaplane tenders (AVD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q264886" start="131752" end="131778" title="Barnegat-class seaplane tender" label="&amp;quot;Barnegat&amp;quot;-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867582" start="131854" end="131887" title="USS Barnegat (AVP-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Barnegat&amp;quot; (AVP-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867727" start="131890" end="131923" title="USS Biscayne (AVP-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Biscayne&amp;quot; (AVP-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868126" start="131940" end="131970" title="USS Casco (AVP-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Casco&amp;quot; (AVP-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871419" start="131973" end="132006" title="USS Mackinac (AVP-13)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mackinac&amp;quot; (AVP-13)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870285" start="132009" end="132042" title="USS Humboldt (AVP-21)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hunboldt&amp;quot; (AVP-21)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871595" start="132061" end="132095" title="USS Matagorda (AVP-22)" label="USS &amp;quot;Matagorda&amp;quot; (AVP-22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866985" start="132114" end="132146" title="USS Absecon (AVP-23)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abescon&amp;quot; (AVP-23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705741" start="132149" end="132186" title="USS Chincoteague (AVP-24)" label="USS &amp;quot;Chincoteague&amp;quot; (AVP-24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868560" start="132189" end="132222" title="USS Coos Bay (AVP-25)" label="USS &amp;quot;Coos Bay&amp;quot; (AVP-25)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705950" start="132225" end="132259" title="USS Half Moon (AVP-26)" label="USS &amp;quot;Half Moon&amp;quot; (AVP-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871884" start="132262" end="132294" title="USS Mobjack (AGP-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Mobjack&amp;quot; (AVP-27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872558" start="132310" end="132345" title="USS Oyster Bay (AGP-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Oyster Bay&amp;quot; (AVP-28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873517" start="132363" end="132396" title="USS Rockaway (AVP-29)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rockaway&amp;quot; (AVP-29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873800" start="132415" end="132449" title="USS San Pablo (AVP-30)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Pablo&amp;quot; (AVP-30)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874975" start="132466" end="132497" title="USS Unimak (AVP-31)" label="USS &amp;quot;Unimak&amp;quot; (AVP-31)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875685" start="132500" end="132532" title="USS Yakutat (AVP-32)" label="USS &amp;quot;Yakutat&amp;quot; (AVP-32)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705989" start="132535" end="132569" title="USS Barataria (AVP-33)" label="USS &amp;quot;Barataria&amp;quot; (AVP-33)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867696" start="132572" end="132610" title="USS Bering Strait (AVP-34)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bering Strait&amp;quot; (AVP-34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705756" start="132613" end="132649" title="USS Castle Rock (AVP-35)" label="USS &amp;quot;Castle Rock&amp;quot; (AVP-35)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868555" start="132652" end="132687" title="USS Cook Inlet (AVP-36)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cook Inlet&amp;quot; (AVP-36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868585" start="132690" end="132721" title="USS Corson (AVP-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Corson&amp;quot; (AVP-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868993" start="132724" end="132760" title="USS Duxbury Bay (AVP-38)" label="USS &amp;quot;Duxbury Bay&amp;quot; (AVP-38)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869577" start="132763" end="132801" title="USS Gardiners Bay (AVP-39)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gardiners Bay&amp;quot; (AVP-39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869421" start="132837" end="132872" title="USS Floyds Bay (AVP-40)" label="USS &amp;quot;Floyds Bay&amp;quot; (AVP-40)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869844" start="132875" end="132913" title="USS Greenwich Bay (AVP-41)" label="USS &amp;quot;Greenwich Bay&amp;quot; (AVP-41)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870053" start="132916" end="132949" title="USS Hatteras (AVP-42)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hatteras&amp;quot; (AVP-42)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870104" start="132962" end="132996" title="USS Hempstead (AVP-43)" label="USS &amp;quot;Hempstead&amp;quot; (AVP-43)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870663" start="133009" end="133042" title="USS Kamishak (AVP-44)" label="USS &amp;quot;Kamishak&amp;quot; (AVP-44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871438" start="133055" end="133087" title="USS Magothy (AVP-45)" label="USS &amp;quot;Magothy&amp;quot; (AVP-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706002" start="133100" end="133133" title="USS Matanzas (AVP-46)" label="USS &amp;quot;Matanzas&amp;quot; (AVP-46)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871766" start="133146" end="133179" title="USS Metomkin (AVP-47)" label="USS &amp;quot;Metomkin&amp;quot; (AVP-47)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872448" start="133192" end="133223" title="USS Onslow (AVP-48)" label="USS &amp;quot;Onslow&amp;quot; (AVP-48)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872472" start="133226" end="133255" title="USS Orca (AVP-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Orca&amp;quot; (AVP-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873357" start="133293" end="133326" title="USS Rehoboth (AVP-50)" label="USS &amp;quot;Rehoboth&amp;quot; (AVP-50)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873791" start="133343" end="133378" title="USS San Carlos (AVP-51)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Carlos&amp;quot; (AVP-51)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874096" start="133397" end="133430" title="USS Shelikof (AVP-52)" label="USS &amp;quot;Shelikof&amp;quot; (AVP-52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874450" start="133433" end="133464" title="USS Suisun (AVP-53)" label="USS &amp;quot;Suisin&amp;quot; (AVP-53)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874770" start="133467" end="133501" title="USS Timbalier (AVP-54)" label="USS &amp;quot;Timbalier&amp;quot; (AVP-54)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874994" start="133504" end="133536" title="USS Valcour (AVP-55)" label="USS &amp;quot;Valcour&amp;quot; (AVP-55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875185" start="133552" end="133589" title="USS Wachapreague (AGP-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wachapreague&amp;quot; (AVP-56)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875575" start="133605" end="133640" title="USS Willoughby (AGP-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Willoughby&amp;quot; (AVP-57)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874483" start="133696" end="133726" title="USS Supply (AVS-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Supply&amp;quot; (AVS-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706307" start="133740" end="133771" title="USS Fortune (AVS-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; (AVS-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674269" start="133830" end="133861" title="USS Grumium (AVS-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Grumium&amp;quot; (AVS-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867230" start="133886" end="133917" title="USS Allioth (AVS-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Allioth&amp;quot; (AVS-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7869928" start="133988" end="134020" title="USS Gwinnett (AVS-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;Gwinnett&amp;quot; (AVS-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872281" start="134044" end="134076" title="USS Nicollet (AVS-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Nicollet&amp;quot; (AVS-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873017" start="134100" end="134132" title="USS Pontotoc (AVS-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pontotoc&amp;quot; (AVS-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7870635" start="134163" end="134194" title="USS Jupiter (AVS-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Jupiter&amp;quot; (AVS-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475425" start="134407" end="134438" title="USS Cowpens (AVT-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cowpens&amp;quot; (AVT-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033076" start="134452" end="134484" title="USS Monterey (AVT-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Monterey&amp;quot; (AVT-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297279" start="134498" end="134527" title="USS Cabot (AVT-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Cabot&amp;quot; (AVT-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698106" start="134578" end="134608" title="USS Bataan (AVT-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bataan&amp;quot; (AVT-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697251" start="134622" end="134657" title="USS San Jacinto (AVT-5)" label="USS &amp;quot;San Jacinto&amp;quot; (AVT-5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303926" start="134673" end="134703" title="USS Saipan (AVT-6)" label="USS &amp;quot;Saipan&amp;quot; (AVT-6)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304425" start="134767" end="134797" title="USS Wright (AVT-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wright&amp;quot; (AVT-7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q844756" start="134825" end="134857" title="USS Franklin (AVT-8)" label="USS &amp;quot;Franklin&amp;quot; (AVT-8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361626" start="134870" end="134905" title="USS Bunker Hill (AVT-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Bunker Hill&amp;quot; (AVT-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373098" start="134918" end="134948" title="USS Leyte (AVT-10)" label="USS &amp;quot;Leyte&amp;quot; (AVT-10)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373079" start="134961" end="135000" title="USS Philippine Sea (AVT-11)" label="USS &amp;quot;Philippine Sea&amp;quot; (AVT-11)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545498" start="135013" end="135044" title="USS Tarawa (AVT-12)" label="USS &amp;quot;Tarawa&amp;quot; (AVT-12)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423093" start="135110" end="135144" title="USS Lexington (AVT-16)" label="USS &amp;quot;Lexington&amp;quot; (AVT-16)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141369" start="135158" end="135192" title="USS Forrestal (AVT-59)" label="USS &amp;quot;Forrestal&amp;quot; (AVT-59)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874348" start="135277" end="135304" title="USS Stag (AW-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Stag&amp;quot; (AW-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875511" start="135318" end="135348" title="USS Wildcat (AW-2)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wildcat&amp;quot; (AW-2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="135361" end="135381" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7872679" start="135452" end="135480" title="USS Pasig (AW-3)" label="USS &amp;quot;Pasig&amp;quot; (AW-3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660750" start="135539" end="135568" title="USS Abatan (AW-4)" label="USS &amp;quot;Abatan&amp;quot; (AW-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875653" start="135623" end="135652" title="USS Wright (AZ-1)" label="USS &amp;quot;Wright&amp;quot; (AZ-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604565" start="135667" end="135696" title="USS Patoka (AO-9)" label="USS &amp;quot;Patoka&amp;quot; (AO-9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="136151" end="136168" title="Auxiliary cruiser" label="Auxiliary cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="136208" end="136215" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="136217" end="136224" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q108673341" start="136247" end="136307" title="Glossary of watercraft types in service of the United States" label="Glossary of watercraft types in service of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822697" start="136310" end="136357" title="List of current ships of the United States Navy" label="List of current ships of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253416" start="136360" end="136392" title="List of United States Navy ships" label="List of United States Navy ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137527" start="136434" end="136474" title="List of United States Naval Air Stations" label="List of United States Naval Air Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q194785" start="136508" end="136539" title="Military Auxiliary Radio System" label="Military Auxiliary Radio System"/>
<link wikidata="Q333386" start="136586" end="136610" title="Military Sealift Command" label="Military Sealift Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765833" start="136659" end="136682" title="Strategic sealift ships" label="Strategic sealift ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889621" start="136685" end="136720" title="United States Coast Guard Auxiliary" label="United States Coast Guard Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827277" start="136725" end="136768" title="Auxiliaries" label="auxiliary organization of support personnel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748827" wikidata="Q955842" url="?curid=748827" title="Albert Scott Crossfield">
<text>Albert Scott Crossfield (October 2, 1921 – April 19, 2006) was an American naval officer and test pilot. In 1953, he became the first pilot to fly at twice the speed of sound. Crossfield was the first of twelve pilots who flew the North American X-15, an experimental spaceplane jointly operated by the United States Air Force and NASA.

==Early years==
Born October 2, 1921, in Berkeley, California, Scott Crossfield grew up in southern California and rural southwest Washington, a son of Albert Scott Crossfield, Sr. (May 13, 1887 – October 21, 1954) and his first wife Maria Lucia Dwyer (March 8, 1892 – March 23, 1960).

Crossfield graduated from Boistfort High School southwest of Chehalis, attended the University of Washington in Seattle, then worked for Boeing. He served with the U.S. Navy as a flight instructor and fighter pilot during World War II. During this time, he flew the F6F Hellcat and F4U Corsair fighters, as well as SNJ trainers, and a variety of other aircraft. He married Alice Virginia Knoph (June 27, 1920 – September 23, 2015) on 21 April 1943 in Corpus Christi, Texas. She was of Norwegian descent and had attended Garfield High School in Seattle. From 1946 to 1950, he worked in the University of Washington&#x27;s Kirsten Wind Tunnel while earning his Bachelor of Science and Master of Science degrees in aeronautical engineering in 1949 and 1950, respectively. Their son Paul Stanley Crossfield was born in 1952 while the Crossfields resided in California.

== NACA career ==
In 1950, Crossfield joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics&#x27; (NACA) High-Speed Flight Station (later named the NASA Dryden Flight Research Center and then the Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center) at Edwards Air Force Base, California, as an aeronautical research pilot.
Crossfield demonstrated his flight test skills on his very first student solo. His instructor was not available on the designated early morning, so Crossfield, on his own, took off and went through maneuvers he had practiced with his instructor, including spin entry and spin recovery. During the first spin, Crossfield experienced vibrations, banging, and noise in the aircraft that he had never encountered with his instructor. He recovered, climbed to a higher altitude, and repeated his spin entry and spin recovery, getting the same vibration, banging and noise. On his third spin entry, at yet an even higher altitude, he looked over his shoulder as he was spinning and observed the instructor&#x27;s door disengaged and flapping in the spin. He reached back, pulled the door closed, and discovered all the vibrations, banging and noise stopped. Satisfied, he recovered from the spin, landed, and fueled the airplane. He also realized his instructor had been holding the door during their practice spin entries and recoveries, and never mentioned this door quirk. In later years, Crossfield often cited his curiosity about this solo spin anomaly and his desire to analyze what was going on and why it happened, as the start of his test pilot career.

Over the next five years, he flew nearly all of the experimental aircraft under test at Edwards, including the X-1, XF-92, X-4, X-5, Douglas D-558-I Skystreak, and the Douglas D-558-II Skyrocket. During one of his X-1 flights, the cockpit windows completely frosted and Crossfield was literally flying blind. Ever resourceful, he removed a loafer and used his sock to wipe a hole in the ice to spot his chase pilot. On November 20, 1953, he became the first to fly at twice the speed of sound as he piloted the Skyrocket to a speed of 1,291 mph (2,078 km/h, Mach 2.005). The Skyrocket D-558-II surpassed its intended design speed by 25 percent on that day. With 99 flights in the rocket-powered X-1 and D-558-II, Crossfield had—by a wide margin—more experience with rocketplanes than any other pilot in the world by the time he left Edwards to join North American Aviation in 1955.

In September 1954, Crossfield was forced to make a deadstick landing in the North American F-100 Super Sabre he was evaluating at the High-Speed Flight Station (the Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center), a feat which North American&#x27;s own test pilots doubted could be done, as the F-100 had a high landing speed. Crossfield made a perfect approach and touchdown, but was unable to bring the unpowered aircraft to a halt in a safe distance, and was forced to use the wall of the NACA hangar as a makeshift brake after narrowly missing several parked experimental aircraft (&quot;with great precision,&quot; as he later wryly joked). Crossfield was uninjured, and the F-100 was later repaired and returned to service. Crossfield left NACA in 1955.

== North American Aviation career ==

As chief engineering test pilot for North American, Crossfield played a major role in the design and development of the North American X-15 and its systems. Once it was ready to fly, it was his job to demonstrate its airworthiness at speeds ranging up to Mach 3 (2,290 mph). Because the X-15 and its systems were unproven, these tests were considered extremely hazardous. Crossfield flew 14 of the 199 total X-15 flight tests with most of these tests establishing and validating initial key parameters. Crossfield was not only involved with the design of X-15 from the beginning, but introduced many innovations, including putting engine controls of the rocket plane into the cockpit. Previously, all engine adjustments resulted from technicians making adjustments on the ground based upon results of flight profiles.

It was during this time that Crossfield was part of the U.S. Air Force&#x27;s Man In Space Soonest project.

On June 8, 1959, he completed the airplane&#x27;s first flight, an unpowered glide from 37,550 feet. The flight was troubled as the flight controls had not been set up properly. As Crossfield attempted to land the unfueled X-15, it went into what Crossfield described as &quot;a classic PIO&quot; or pilot induced oscillation. He managed to set down the X-15 on the desert runway at the bottom of one of the severe oscillations saving himself and the airframe. On September 17, 1959, he completed the first powered flight. Because of delays in the development of the X-15&#x27;s mammoth 57,000 pounds force (254 kN) thrust XLR-99 engine, the early flights were completed with a pair of interim XLR-11 rocket engines.

Shortly after launch on his third flight, one of these engines exploded. Unable to jettison his propellants, Crossfield was forced to make an emergency landing during which the excessive load on the aircraft broke its back just behind the cockpit. He was uninjured and the airplane was repaired.

On June 8, 1960, he had another close call during ground tests with the XLR-99 engine. He was seated in the cockpit of the No. 3 X-15 when a malfunctioning valve caused a catastrophic explosion. Once again he was uninjured as Dr. Toby Freedman, NAA Medical Director, pried open the cockpit to save him and despite being subjected to a later calculated acceleration force of near 50 Gs (although Crossfield stated in the Discovery Channel&#x27;s series &quot;Frontiers of Flight&quot; that he began to have debilitating issues with his night vision after the accident) and the airplane was completely rebuilt. On November 15 of the same year, he completed the X-15&#x27;s first powered flight with the XLR-99 engine. Two flights later, on December 6, he brought North American&#x27;s demonstration program to a successful conclusion as he completed his final flight in the X-15. Although it had been his hope to eventually pilot one of the craft into space, the USAF would not allow it, and gave strict orders which basically amounted to &quot;stay in the sky, stay out of space.&quot;

Altogether, he completed 16 captive flights (mated to the B-52 launch aircraft), one glide flight and 13 powered flights in the X-15. The retirement of the X-15 (due to funding cutbacks) after its record-setting Mach 6.70 (4,520 mph) flight prompted pilot Pete Knight to remark that he would have pushed it to even faster speeds if he knew it was the last flight. In his remarks to a number of aviation groups, Crossfield cited the X-15 as one of few aircraft that caused grown men to cry upon its retirement.

He remained at North American as systems director of test and quality assurance in the company&#x27;s Space and Information Systems Division where he oversaw quality, reliability engineering and systems test activities for such programs as the Apollo command and service modules and the Saturn S-II booster. In 1966, he became the division&#x27;s technical director for research engineering and test.

== Civilian career ==
In 1961, Crossfield became division director of test and quality assurance for NAA&#x27;s Paraglider project.

In 1967, Crossfield joined Eastern Air Lines where he served as a division vice president for research and development and, subsequently, as a staff vice president working with U.S. military and civilian agencies on air traffic control technologies.

In 1974–1975, he worked for Hawker Siddeley as a senior vice president supporting HS146 activities in the United States. In 1977, he joined the United States House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology where he served, until his retirement in 1993, as a technical adviser on all aspects of civil aviation research and development and became one of the nation&#x27;s leading advocates for a reinvigorated research airplane program. In 1986, this House Committee tasked Crossfield to be a member of the task group assigned to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.

In a 2000 public lecture, Crossfield described how the X-15 aeronautical calculations and design required computing power that filled four 10&#x27;x12&#x27; rooms. He went on to say that these very same calculations could be performed today on a notebook computer. He also hinted that Burt Rutan and his Scaled Composite company were performing pioneering work for a private aircraft to take-off from an airport, fly into outer space, and return to that airport. In 2004, White Knight carried Space Ship One to its successful launch and winning of the Ansari X-Prize, the first attempt by a plane since the X-15 cancellation.

== Later life ==

Crossfield was played by Scott Wilson in the 1983 film &quot;The Right Stuff&quot;.

Crossfield co-authored &quot;Always Another Dawn&quot;, a story of a rocket test pilot, with Clay Blair Jr, and authored &quot;Onward and Upward&quot; &quot;Research Airplanes, Act II&quot;.

In 1986 he created and funded the A. Scott Crossfield Aerospace Education Teacher of the Year Award presented annually under the stewardship of the Civil Air Patrol during the National Congress on Aerospace Education later called the National Conference on Aerospace Education (NCASE). After his death in 2006 and the shift of NCASE from an annual to biannual conference, Crossfields&#x27;s daughter, Sally Crossfield Farley, moved the award to the National Aviation Hall of Fame where it is presented during the Enshrinement Weekend each July in Dayton, Ohio.

In the 1991 Discovery Channel series Frontiers of Flight, Crossfield judged he &quot;...probably had more centrifuge time, pressure suit time and pressure chamber time and all of that than any man alive.&quot;

From 2001 to 2003, Crossfield trained pilots Terry Queijo, Kevin Kochersberger, Chris Johnson and Ken Hyde for The Wright Experience, preparing to fly a reproduction Wright Flyer on the 100th anniversary of the Wright Brothers&#x27; first flight on December 17, 1903. The training was successful, but the December 17, 2003 re-creation failed due to low engine power and the flyer&#x27;s rain-soaked fabric covering which added considerably to its takeoff weight. The Wright replica ultimately flew successfully at Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina after the Centennial jubilee but without media coverage.

When asked to name his favorite airplane, Crossfield replied, &quot;the one I was flying at the time,&quot; because he thoroughly enjoyed them all and their unique personalities.

== Death ==
On April 19, 2006, a Cessna 210A piloted by Crossfield was reported missing while flying from Prattville, Alabama toward Manassas, Virginia, near his home in Herndon. On April 20, authorities confirmed his body was found in the wreckage of his plane in a remote area of Ludville in Pickens County Georgia. There were severe thunderstorms in the area when air traffic controllers lost radio and radar contact with Crossfield&#x27;s plane.

The Gordon County Sheriff&#x27;s department reported that debris from Crossfield&#x27;s aircraft was found in three different locations within a quarter mile, suggesting that the plane broke up while it was still in the air.

Crossfield was returning from Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama, where he had given a speech to a class of young Air Force officers attending the Air and Space Basic Course. His funeral ceremony was held at the Arlington National Cemetery on August 15, 2006.

On September 27, 2007, the National Transportation Safety Board issued a report stating the probable cause of his crash to be as follows: &quot;The pilot&#x27;s failure to obtain updated en route weather information, which resulted in his continued instrument flight into a widespread area of severe convective activity, and the air traffic controller&#x27;s failure to provide adverse weather avoidance assistance, as required by Federal Aviation Administration directives, both of which led to the airplane&#x27;s encounter with a severe thunderstorm and subsequent loss of control.&quot; 

==Honors==
Crossfield received the Lawrence Sperry Award (1954), Octave Chanute Award (1954), Iven C. Kincheloe Award (1960), American Rocket Society (ARS) Astronautics Award (1960), Harmon International Trophy (1961 at the White House by President John F. Kennedy), Collier Trophy (1961 at the White House by President Kennedy in 1962), John J. Montgomery Award (1962), NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal (1993), and was named Honorary Fellow by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) (1999). Crossfield is the only American to be honored in the White House for his contributions in advancing aeronautical science—or any other discipline—more than once, let alone two consecutive years. He has been inducted into the International Aerospace Hall of Fame (1965), National Aviation Hall of Fame (1983), the International Space Hall of Fame (1988), the Virginia Aviation Hall of Fame (1998), Aerospace Walk of Honor (1990), The Glen A. Gilbert Memorial Award (1990), the FAI Gold Air Medal (1994) and the National Air and Space Museum Trophy (2000). Posthumously, he has been awarded the Hoyt S. Vandenberg Award, the Paul Tissandier Diploma, the Victor A. Prather Award, and the Donald D. Engen Award.

An elementary school was named in his honor near his last residence, in Herndon, Virginia (a community just northeast of Dulles International Airport). A ribbon named after him is one of the Aerospace Education Awards in the Civil Air Patrol Senior Members program. The terminal at the Chehalis-Centralia Airport (CLS) in Washington state bears his name.

He was also most proud of his A. Scott Crossfield Aerospace Education Teacher of the Year Award which is awarded annually at what is known as the &quot;Oscar Night&quot; in aviation, the Annual Enshrinement Ceremony Weekend at the National Aviation Hall of Fame held each year at the end of July in Dayton, Ohio.

Crossfield received an honorary doctor of science degree from the Florida Institute of Technology in 1982.

==Legacy==
While he was celebrated as a daring test pilot, he claimed that his actual profession was an engineer. &quot;I am an aeronautical engineer, an aerodynamicist and a designer. My flying was only primarily because I felt that it was essential to designing and building better airplanes for pilots to fly.&quot;

In the 23rd century of the &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe, Crossfield is honored with the &quot;Crossfield&quot;-class of starships, one of which, USS &quot;Discovery&quot; (NCC-1031), is the main setting of &quot;Star Trek: Discovery&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
* Thompson, Milton O. (1992) &quot;At The Edge Of Space: The X-15 Flight Program&quot;, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington and London. 

==External links==

* NASA Story on Scott Crossfield&#x27;s Death 
* Original NACA press release on Mach 2 flight 
* Spacefacts biography of Albert Scott Crossfield
* A. Scott Crossfield Elementary School near his former residence
* Statement by NASA administrator upon his death 
* Crossfield Not Warned of Storm article from &quot;Washington Post&quot;
* Accident That Killed Famed Aviator Scott Crossfield, NTSB Releases Final Report
* web site, retrieved March 25, 2008
* Arlington National Cemetery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q955842" start="0" end="23" title="Albert Scott Crossfield" label="Albert Scott Crossfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="75" end="88" title="United States Navy" label="naval officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="93" end="103" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="160" end="174" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="231" end="250" title="North American X-15" label="North American X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414565" start="268" end="278" title="spaceplane" label="spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="303" end="326" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="331" end="335" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="379" end="399" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="429" end="437" title="Southern California" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="438" end="448" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234810" start="459" end="468" title="Southwest Washington" label="southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="469" end="479" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474766" start="651" end="660" title="Boistfort, Washington" label="Boistfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q249441" start="686" end="694" title="Chehalis, Washington" label="Chehalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="709" end="733" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="737" end="744" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="762" end="768" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="789" end="798" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379318" start="804" end="821" title="flight instructor" label="flight instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="826" end="839" title="fighter pilot" label="fighter pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="847" end="859" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q465903" start="891" end="902" title="Grumman F6F Hellcat" label="F6F Hellcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q465806" start="907" end="918" title="Vought F4U Corsair" label="F4U Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="940" end="943" title="North American T-6 Texan" label="SNJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="1076" end="1097" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="1110" end="1119" title="Norwegian Americans" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523079" start="1145" end="1165" title="Garfield High School (Seattle)" label="Garfield High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1284" end="1303" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="1308" end="1325" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="1337" end="1361" title="Aerospace engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="1540" end="1583" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1640" end="1644" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="1645" end="1674" title="Dryden Flight Research Center" label="Dryden Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="1688" end="1728" title="Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center" label="Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="1733" end="1755" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384417" start="3113" end="3134" title="experimental aircraft" label="experimental aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="3172" end="3175" title="Bell X-1" label="X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129328" start="3177" end="3182" title="XF-92" label="XF-92"/>
<link wikidata="Q844879" start="3184" end="3187" title="X-4 Bantam" label="X-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q815754" start="3189" end="3192" title="Bell X-5" label="X-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252156" start="3194" end="3219" title="Douglas Skystreak" label="Douglas D-558-I Skystreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60578" start="3229" end="3255" title="Douglas Skyrocket" label="Douglas D-558-II Skyrocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="3539" end="3553" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="3619" end="3623" title="Mach (speed)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q519560" start="3910" end="3933" title="North American Aviation" label="North American Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245714" start="3995" end="4012" title="deadstick landing" label="deadstick landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q531053" start="4020" end="4052" title="North American F-100 Super Sabre" label="North American F-100 Super Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="4109" end="4149" title="Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center" label="Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="4758" end="4768" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="4857" end="4876" title="North American X-15" label="North American X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="5612" end="5626" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888510" start="5634" end="5654" title="Man In Space Soonest" label="Man In Space Soonest"/>
<link wikidata="Q589941" start="6288" end="6294" title="Reaction Motors XLR99" label="XLR-99"/>
<link wikidata="Q504411" start="6359" end="6365" title="Reaction Motors XLR11" label="XLR-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811793" start="6910" end="6923" title="Toby Freedman" label="Toby Freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="7824" end="7828" title="B-52 Stratofortress" label="B-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q974431" start="8022" end="8033" title="William J. Knight" label="Pete Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="8521" end="8527" title="Project Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="8839" end="8856" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="9028" end="9047" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="9091" end="9106" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="9145" end="9150" title="HS146" label="HS146"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="9207" end="9245" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889981" start="9246" end="9281" title="United States House Committee on Science, Space and Technology" label="Committee on Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="9620" end="9653" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q453046" start="9941" end="9951" title="Burt Rutan" label="Burt Rutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38935" start="10149" end="10163" title="Space Ship One" label="Space Ship One"/>
<link wikidata="Q568942" start="10208" end="10222" title="Ansari X-Prize" label="Ansari X-Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q718135" start="10326" end="10338" title="Scott Wilson (actor)" label="Scott Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q753317" start="10346" end="10350" title="1983 in film" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197185" start="10362" end="10377" title="The Right Stuff (film)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099176" start="10479" end="10489" title="Clay Blair" label="Clay Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="11027" end="11057" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="11125" end="11137" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="11517" end="11529" title="Wright Flyer" label="Wright Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="11562" end="11577" title="Wright Brothers" label="Wright Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029051" start="11865" end="11897" title="Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina" label="Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829786" start="12169" end="12180" title="Cessna 210" label="Cessna 210A"/>
<link wikidata="Q79509" start="12242" end="12261" title="Prattville, Alabama" label="Prattville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="12269" end="12287" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373962" start="12306" end="12313" title="Herndon, Virginia" label="Herndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q498675" start="12430" end="12444" title="Pickens County, Georgia" label="Pickens County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="12445" end="12452" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="12472" end="12484" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q200696" start="12591" end="12604" title="Gordon County, Georgia" label="Gordon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785757" start="12843" end="12865" title="Maxwell Air Force Base" label="Maxwell Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="12867" end="12886" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698282" start="12969" end="12995" title="Air and Space Basic Course" label="Air and Space Basic Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="13034" end="13061" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="13110" end="13146" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="National Transportation Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="13514" end="13545" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076768" start="13741" end="13761" title="Octave Chanute Award" label="Octave Chanute Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098670" start="13770" end="13793" title="Iven C. Kincheloe Award" label="Iven C. Kincheloe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659178" start="13859" end="13886" title="Harmon Trophy" label="Harmon International Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="13900" end="13911" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="13925" end="13940" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="13943" end="13957" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="13971" end="13982" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q25316239" start="14014" end="14038" title="John J. Montgomery Award" label="John J. Montgomery Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q465165" start="14132" end="14182" title="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" label="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="14251" end="14262" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010217" start="14510" end="14542" title="International Space Hall of Fame" label="International Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q381740" start="14594" end="14617" title="Aerospace Walk of Honor" label="Aerospace Walk of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11198862" start="14673" end="14691" title="FAI Gold Air Medal" label="FAI Gold Air Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970249" start="14707" end="14743" title="National Air and Space Museum Trophy" label="National Air and Space Museum Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q712468" start="14790" end="14808" title="Hoyt S. Vandenberg" label="Hoyt S. Vandenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q661224" start="14820" end="14843" title="Paul Tissandier Diploma" label="Paul Tissandier Diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926250" start="14849" end="14866" title="Victor Prather" label="Victor A. Prather"/>
<link wikidata="Q24176246" start="14882" end="14897" title="Donald D. Engen" label="Donald D. Engen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373962" start="14978" end="14995" title="Herndon, Virginia" label="Herndon, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="15027" end="15055" title="Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q781210" start="15131" end="15147" title="Civil Air Patrol" label="Civil Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152650" start="15642" end="15673" title="Florida Institute of Technology" label="Florida Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="16037" end="16046" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16218" end="16238" title="Star Trek: Discovery" label="Star Trek: Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314544" start="16274" end="16293" title="Milton O. Thompson" label="Thompson, Milton O."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748836" wikidata="Q3306338" url="?curid=748836" title="Nicholas Yonge">
<text>Nicholas Yonge (also spelled &quot;Young&quot;, &quot;Younge&quot;; c. 1560 in Lewes, Sussex – buried 23 October 1619 in St Michael, Cornhill, London) was an English singer and publisher. He is most famous for publishing the &quot;Musica transalpina&quot; (1588), the earliest collection of Italian madrigals with their words translated into English. The first of the Elizabethan madrigal anthologies, it was enormously popular, and began a vogue for the composition and performance of madrigals in England which lasted into the first two decades of the 17th century. William Heather, founder of the music chair at Oxford University, included the book in his portrait, painted c. 1627, confirming the longevity of &quot;Musica transalpina&#x27;s&quot; influence and popularity.

The collection contains 57 separate pieces by 18 composers, with Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder having the most, and Luca Marenzio second most. Ferrabosco was living in England until 1578, which could explain the large number of his compositions in the book; he was relatively unknown in Italy.

In 1597, Yonge published a second book (&quot;Musica transalpina: the Second Booke of Madrigalles, ... translated out of Sundrie Italian Authors&quot;). Composers such as John Wilbye and Thomas Weelkes used the pieces in both collections as models for their work.

==Notes==
==References==

*David Brown, &quot;Nicholas Yonge&quot;. &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980. 
*Gustave Reese, &quot;Music in the Renaissance&quot;. New York, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1954. 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3306338" start="0" end="14" title="Nicholas Yonge" label="Nicholas Yonge"/>
<link wikidata="Q246884" start="79" end="84" title="Lewes" label="Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="86" end="92" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594823" start="121" end="141" title="St Michael, Cornhill" label="St Michael, Cornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="143" end="149" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="158" end="165" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118216" start="231" end="249" title="Musica Transalpina" label="Musica transalpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="291" end="298" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q193217" start="299" end="308" title="madrigal (music)" label="madrigals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672803" start="568" end="583" title="William Heather" label="William Heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q726096" start="844" end="872" title="Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder" label="Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q316532" start="894" end="907" title="Luca Marenzio" label="Luca Marenzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q682089" start="1244" end="1255" title="John Wilbye" label="John Wilbye"/>
<link wikidata="Q553908" start="1260" end="1274" title="Thomas Weelkes" label="Thomas Weelkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q975127" start="1537" end="1550" title="Gustave Reese" label="Gustave Reese"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748843" wikidata="Q7835474" url="?curid=748843" title="Transylvania 6-5000">
<text>Transylvania 6-5000 may refer to:

*&quot;Transylvania 6-5000&quot; (1963 film), an animated short film starring Bugs Bunny
*&quot;Transylvania 6-5000&quot; (1985 film), a comedy-horror movie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3538025" start="36" end="79" title="Transylvania 6-5000 (1963 film)" label="&amp;quot;Transylvania 6-5000&amp;quot; (1963 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835477" start="125" end="168" title="Transylvania 6-5000 (1985 film)" label="&amp;quot;Transylvania 6-5000&amp;quot; (1985 film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748844" wikidata="Q2226786" url="?curid=748844" title="Sperner's theorem">
<text>Sperner&#x27;s theorem, in discrete mathematics, describes the largest possible families of finite sets none of which contain any other sets in the family. It is one of the central results in extremal set theory. It is named after Emanuel Sperner, who published it in 1928.

This result is sometimes called Sperner&#x27;s lemma, but the name &quot;Sperner&#x27;s lemma&quot; also refers to an unrelated result on coloring triangulations. To differentiate the two results, the result on the size of a Sperner family is now more commonly known as Sperner&#x27;s theorem.

==Statement==
A family of sets in which none of the sets is a strict subset of another is called a Sperner family, or an antichain of sets, or a clutter. For example, the family of &quot;k&quot;-element subsets of an &quot;n&quot;-element set is a Sperner family. No set in this family can contain any of the others, because a containing set has to be strictly bigger than the set it contains, and in this family all sets have equal size. The value of &quot;k&quot; that makes this example have as many sets as possible is &quot;n&quot;/2 if &quot;n&quot; is even, or either of the nearest integers to &quot;n&quot;/2 if &quot;n&quot; is odd. For this choice, the number of sets in the family is formula_1.

Sperner&#x27;s theorem states that these examples are the largest possible Sperner families over an &quot;n&quot;-element set.
Formally, the theorem states that, 
#for every Sperner family &quot;S&quot; whose union has a total of &quot;n&quot; elements, formula_2 and
#equality holds if and only if &quot;S&quot; consists of all subsets of an &quot;n&quot;-element set that have size formula_3 or all that have size formula_4.

==Partial orders==
Sperner&#x27;s theorem can also be stated in terms of partial order width. The family of all subsets of an &quot;n&quot;-element set (its power set) can be partially ordered by set inclusion; in this partial order, two distinct elements are said to be incomparable when neither of them contains the other. The width of a partial order is the largest number of elements in an antichain, a set of pairwise incomparable elements. Translating this terminology into the language of sets, an antichain is just a Sperner family, and the width of the partial order is the maximum number of sets in a Sperner family.
Thus, another way of stating Sperner&#x27;s theorem is that the width of the inclusion order on a power set is formula_5.

A graded partially ordered set is said to have the Sperner property when one of its largest antichains is formed by a set of elements that all have the same rank. In this terminology, Sperner&#x27;s theorem states that the partially ordered set of all subsets of a finite set, partially ordered by set inclusion, has the Sperner property.

== Proof ==
There are many proofs of Sperner&#x27;s theorem, each leading to different generalizations (see ).

The following proof is due to . Let &quot;sk&quot; denote the number of &quot;k&quot;-sets in &quot;S&quot;. For all 0 ≤ &quot;k&quot; ≤ &quot;n&quot;,

:formula_6

and, thus,

:formula_7

Since &quot;S&quot; is an antichain, we can sum over the above inequality from &quot;k&quot; = 0 to &quot;n&quot; and then apply the LYM inequality to obtain

:formula_8

which means

:formula_9

This completes the proof of part 1.

To have equality, all the inequalities in the preceding proof must be equalities. Since 
:formula_10
if and only if formula_11 or formula_12 we conclude that equality implies that &quot;S&quot; consists only of sets of sizes formula_13 or formula_14 For even &quot;n&quot; that concludes the proof of part 2.

For odd &quot;n&quot; there is more work to do, which we omit here because it is complicated. See , pp. 3–4.

==Generalizations==
There are several generalizations of Sperner&#x27;s theorem for subsets of formula_15 the poset of all subsets of &quot;E&quot;.

===No long chains===
A chain is a subfamily formula_16 that is totally ordered, i.e., formula_17 (possibly after renumbering). The chain has &quot;r&quot; + 1 members and length &quot;r&quot;. An &quot;r-chain-free family (also called an &quot;r-family) is a family of subsets of &quot;E&quot; that contains no chain of length &quot;r&quot;. proved that the largest size of an &quot;r&quot;-chain-free family is the sum of the &quot;r&quot; largest binomial coefficients formula_18. The case &quot;r&quot; = 1 is Sperner&#x27;s theorem.

===&quot;p&quot;-compositions of a set===
In the set formula_19 of &quot;p&quot;-tuples of subsets of &quot;E&quot;, we say a &quot;p&quot;-tuple formula_20 is ≤ another one, formula_21 if formula_22 for each &quot;i&quot; = 1,2...,&quot;p&quot;. We call formula_20 a &quot;p&quot;-composition of &quot;E&quot; if the sets formula_24 form a partition of &quot;E&quot;. proved that the maximum size of an antichain of &quot;p&quot;-compositions is the largest &quot;p&quot;-multinomial coefficient formula_25 that is, the coefficient in which all &quot;n&quot;&quot;i&quot; are as nearly equal as possible (i.e., they differ by at most 1). Meshalkin proved this by proving a generalized LYM inequality.

The case &quot;p&quot; = 2 is Sperner&#x27;s theorem, because then formula_26 and the assumptions reduce to the sets formula_27 being a Sperner family.

===No long chains in &quot;p&quot;-compositions of a set===
 combined the Erdös and Meshalkin theorems by adapting Meshalkin&#x27;s proof of his generalized LYM inequality. They showed that the largest size of a family of &quot;p&quot;-compositions such that the sets in the &quot;i&quot;-th position of the &quot;p&quot;-tuples, ignoring duplications, are &quot;r&quot;-chain-free, for every formula_28 (but not necessarily for &quot;i&quot; = &quot;p&quot;), is not greater than the sum of the formula_29 largest &quot;p&quot;-multinomial coefficients.

===Projective geometry analog===
In the finite projective geometry PG(&quot;d&quot;, &quot;F&quot;&quot;q&quot;) of dimension &quot;d&quot; over a finite field of order &quot;q&quot;, let formula_30 be the family of all subspaces. When partially ordered by set inclusion, this family is a lattice. proved that the largest size of an antichain in formula_30 is the largest Gaussian coefficient formula_32 this is the projective-geometry analog, or &quot;q&quot;-analog, of Sperner&#x27;s theorem.

They further proved that the largest size of an &quot;r&quot;-chain-free family in formula_30 is the sum of the &quot;r&quot; largest Gaussian coefficients. Their proof is by a projective analog of the LYM inequality.

===No long chains in &quot;p&quot;-compositions of a projective space===
 obtained a Meshalkin-like generalization of the Rota–Harper theorem. In PG(&quot;d&quot;, &quot;F&quot;&quot;q&quot;), a Meshalkin sequence of length &quot;p&quot; is a sequence formula_34 of projective subspaces such that no proper subspace of PG(&quot;d&quot;, &quot;F&quot;&quot;q&quot;) contains them all and their dimensions sum to formula_35. The theorem is that a family of Meshalkin sequences of length &quot;p&quot; in PG(&quot;d&quot;, &quot;F&quot;&quot;q&quot;), such that the subspaces appearing in position &quot;i&quot; of the sequences contain no chain of length &quot;r&quot; for each formula_36 is not more than the sum of the largest formula_29 of the quantities 
:formula_38 
where formula_39 (in which we assume that formula_40) denotes the &quot;p&quot;-Gaussian coefficient 
:formula_41 
and 
:formula_42 
the second elementary symmetric function of the numbers formula_43

==See also==

* Dilworth&#x27;s theorem
* Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem

==References==
*.
*.
*
*.
*.

==External links==
* Sperner&#x27;s Theorem at cut-the-knot
* Sperner&#x27;s theorem on the polymath1 wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2226786" start="0" end="22" title="Sperner&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Sperner&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q121416" start="27" end="47" title="discrete mathematics" label="discrete mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="80" end="88" title="family of sets" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="92" end="102" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422299" start="192" end="211" title="Extremal combinatorics" label="extremal set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q67293" start="231" end="246" title="Emanuel Sperner" label="Emanuel Sperner"/>
<link wikidata="Q733336" start="348" end="368" title="Sperner&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Sperner&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q739925" start="586" end="600" title="family of sets" label="family of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q819142" start="669" end="683" title="Sperner family" label="Sperner family"/>
<link wikidata="Q431937" start="691" end="700" title="antichain" label="antichain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134776" start="1779" end="1798" title="partial order width" label="partial order width"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="1863" end="1872" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="1881" end="1898" title="partially ordered" label="partially ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q431937" start="2100" end="2109" title="antichain" label="antichain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591878" start="2458" end="2464" title="Graded poset" label="graded"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="2465" end="2486" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576398" start="2507" end="2523" title="Sperner property of a partially ordered set" label="Sperner property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872826" start="3230" end="3244" title="Lubell–Yamamoto–Meshalkin inequality" label="LYM inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527834" start="6222" end="6242" title="Gaussian coefficient" label="Gaussian coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235316" start="7480" end="7509" title="elementary symmetric function" label="elementary symmetric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134776" start="7553" end="7576" title="Dilworth&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Dilworth&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q718875" start="7579" end="7600" title="Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem" label="Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811887" start="7679" end="7691" title="cut-the-knot" label="cut-the-knot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748848" wikidata="Q14680717" url="?curid=748848" title="Scottsdale Community College">
<text>Scottsdale Community College is a public community college just outside of Scottsdale, Arizona. It is on the city&#x27;s eastern boundary, on 160 acres (650,000 m2) of land belonging to the Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community. The lease was taken out in 1970 and expires in 2069. The college is part of the Maricopa County Community College District.

== History ==
Planning for Scottsdale Community College (SCC) began in 1967. On November 5, 1968, the MCCCD governing board allocated $5 million to build the campus. In the fall of 1969 SCC began holding night classes at Scottsdale High School, and on September 21, 1969, the Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community and Bureau of Indian Affairs leased 160 acres of land at Chaparral and Pima Roads for 99 years. In August 1970, SCC held its first classes at its permanent location; several temporary wooden barracks were used as classroom space while construction began on the campus. The campus was designed by Phoenix architects Drover, Welch &amp; Lindlan and built between 1970 and 1972. SCC established its nursing program in 1974 and received full accreditation in 1975. In 1977 the performing arts center opened, designed by Phoenix architects Guirey, Srnka Arnold &amp; Sprinkle. A new music building was added in 1980. In 1982 the school&#x27;s Culinary Arts Program Restaurant opened as did the Community Garden. On April 1, 1986, ground was broken for the Social Behavioral Science Building. By 1990, SCC&#x27;s student population was 10,000, up from 1,000 in 1970. The Applied Sciences Building opened in 1998, designed by local architect Doug Sydnor; it is home to The Artichoke Grill. The school&#x27;s library was built in the early 1970s and renovated in 2015. The Cloud Song Center for business students opened in 2018.

== Campus ==

SCC is the nation&#x27;s only public community college on tribal land. The college also hosts NAU-Scottsdale, which offers several undergraduate programs, as well as the SCC2NAU program. SCC2NAU is a joint admission program between Scottsdale Community College and Northern Arizona University.

== Academics ==
Scottsdale Community College offers associate degrees as well as Certificates of Completion.

==Notable alumni==
*Ryneldi Becenti, the first Native American to play in the WNBA
* Scott Emerson, Major League Baseball pitching coach
*Tim Esmay, former Arizona State head baseball coach
*Charlie Garner, former NFL football player
*Robert Garrigus, PGA Tour professional
*Bill Hader, actor (&quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; cast member (2005–2013), &quot;Trainwreck&quot;)
* Josh Miller (born 1970), American football player and football analyst
*Siera Santos, TV Host for MLB Network and NHL Network
*David Spade, actor (&quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, &quot;Just Shoot Me!&quot;, &quot;Rules of Engagement&quot;, &quot;The Benchwarmers&quot;, &quot;The Emperor&#x27;s New Groove&quot;)
*Will Tukuafu, Samoan-American NFL football player for the Chargers
*Terry Wright, former NFL football player

==References==
==Gallery==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14680717" start="0" end="28" title="Scottsdale Community College" label="Scottsdale Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="34" end="40" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="41" end="58" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49221" start="75" end="94" title="Scottsdale, Arizona" label="Scottsdale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405932" start="190" end="231" title="Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community" label="Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762585" start="313" end="355" title="Maricopa County Community College District" label="Maricopa County Community College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438189" start="579" end="601" title="Scottsdale High School" label="Scottsdale High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610731" start="991" end="1018" title="DWL Architects" label="Drover, Welch &amp;amp; Lindlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42411153" start="1211" end="1246" title="Fred M. Guirey" label="Guirey, Srnka Arnold &amp;amp; Sprinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q139901" start="2077" end="2104" title="Northern Arizona University" label="Northern Arizona University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808524" start="2237" end="2252" title="Ryneldi Becenti" label="Ryneldi Becenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="2295" end="2299" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356200" start="2302" end="2315" title="Scott Emerson (baseball)" label="Scott Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803472" start="2355" end="2364" title="Tim Esmay" label="Tim Esmay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084890" start="2408" end="2422" title="Charlie Garner" label="Charlie Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515305" start="2452" end="2467" title="Robert Garrigus" label="Robert Garrigus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14537" start="2492" end="2502" title="Bill Hader" label="Bill Hader"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="2517" end="2536" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062774" start="2574" end="2584" title="Trainwreck (film)" label="Trainwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570395" start="2594" end="2605" title="Josh Miller (American football)" label="Josh Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q111901580" start="2666" end="2678" title="Siera Santos" label="Siera Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="2692" end="2703" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954063" start="2708" end="2719" title="NHL Network (American TV channel)" label="NHL Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q298658" start="2721" end="2732" title="David Spade" label="David Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="2747" end="2766" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419644" start="2780" end="2794" title="Just Shoot Me!" label="Just Shoot Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q498569" start="2808" end="2827" title="Rules of Engagement (TV series)" label="Rules of Engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q998219" start="2841" end="2857" title="The Benchwarmers" label="The Benchwarmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223163" start="2871" end="2900" title="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s New Groove" label="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s New Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205832" start="2909" end="2921" title="Will Tukuafu" label="Will Tukuafu"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097307" start="2977" end="2989" title="Terry Wright (defensive back)" label="Terry Wright"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748850" wikidata="Q1285090" url="?curid=748850" title="Natwar Singh">
<text>Kunwar Natwar Singh, IFS (16 May 1931 – 10 August 2024) was an Indian diplomat and politician who served as the Minister of External Affairs from May 2004 to December 2005. Having been suspended by the Congress in 2006, he joined the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) in 2008 but was removed from the party within four months.

Singh was selected into the Indian Foreign Service in 1953. In 1984, he resigned from the service to contest elections as a member of the Indian National Congress party. He won the election and served as a union minister of state until 1989. Thereafter, he had a patchy political career until being made India&#x27;s foreign minister in 2004. However, 18 months later, he had to resign after the United Nations&#x27; (UN) Volcker committee named both he and the Congress party to which he belonged as beneficiaries of illegal pay-offs in the scandal related to the UN&#x27;s Oil-for-Food Programme.

In 2014, he wrote his autobiography &quot;One Life is Not Enough&quot;. This book was criticised for its attempt to create sensation, while the Congress criticised Natwar Singh for distortion of facts due to his removal from the political position.

== Early life and education==
The fourth son of Govind Singh and his wife Prayag Kaur of village &#x27;Jagheena&#x27;, Singh was born in the princely state of Bharatpur in an aristocrat Jat Hindu family related to the ruling dynasty of Bharatpur. He attended Mayo College, Ajmer and Scindia School, Gwalior, both traditional educational institutions for Indian princely clans and nobles. Thereafter he took an undergraduate degree at St. Stephen&#x27;s College, Delhi. He subsequently studied at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge University and was a visiting scholar for a period at Peking University in China.

==Diplomatic career==
Singh joined the Indian Foreign Service in 1953 and served for 31 years. One of his earliest assignments was in Beijing, China (1956–58). He was then posted to New York City at the Permanent Mission of India (1961–66) and as India&#x27;s representative to executive board of UNICEF (1962–66). He served on several UN committees between 1963 and 1966. In 1966, he was posted to the Prime Minister&#x27;s Secretariat under Indira Gandhi. He served as India&#x27;s Ambassador to Poland from 1971 to 1973, India&#x27;s Deputy High Commissioner to the United Kingdom from 1973 to 1977 and India&#x27;s Ambassador to Pakistan from 1980 to 1982. He was part of the Indian delegation to the Heads of Commonwealth Meeting in Kingston, Jamaica in 1975. He was an Indian Delegate to the 30th Session of the United Nations General Assembly, New York, Heads of Commonwealth Meeting, Lusaka, Zambia in 1979 and the 35th Session of the United Nations General Assembly, New York. He also accompanied Indira Gandhi on her State visit to the US in 1982. He served as an Executive Trustee, United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) appointed by the Secretary-General, United Nations for six years (1981–86). He also served on the Expert Group appointed by the Secretary General of the Commonwealth, London in 1982. He was appointed Secretary-General of the Seventh Non-aligned Summit in New Delhi held in 1983 and Chief Coordinator of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in New Delhi in the same year. He served as Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs from March 1982 to November 1984. He received the Padma Bhushan, the third highest civilian award in India from the Government of India, in 1984.

==Political career==
In 1984, after resigning from the Indian Foreign Service, Singh joined the Congress party and was elected to the 8th Lok Sabha from Bharatpur constituency in Rajasthan. In 1985, he was sworn in as a minister of state (who is a minister, but one level below a cabinet minister) and allotted the portfolios of steel, coal and mines, and agriculture. In 1986, he became minister of state for external affairs. In that capacity, he was elected President of the UN Conference on Disarmament and Development held in New York in 1987, and also led the Indian delegation to the 42nd Session of the UN General Assembly.

Singh remained a minister of state for external affairs until the Congress party lost power after being defeated in the general elections of 1989. In those elections, he contested and lost the Mathura seat in Uttar Pradesh. The Congress party returned to power after the elections of 1991, with P.V. Narasimha Rao as Prime Minister since Rajiv Gandhi had been assassinated. At this time, Singh was not an MP and could not be a minister. He developed differences with the Prime Minister and left the party along with N.D. Tiwari and Arjun Singh, to form a new political party, All India Indira Congress. 

In 1998, after Sonia Gandhi had regained complete control of the party, the three family loyalists merged their new party into the Congress party and returned into the service of the Gandhis. Singh was rewarded with a ticket to contest the general elections of 1998, and returned to parliament after a gap of nine years, when he was elected to the 12th Lok Sabha (1998–99) from Bharatpur. Singh had defeated the Bharatiya Janata Party’s Dr. Digamber Singh, who would go on to become Rajasthan’s Minister of Health, Family Welfare, and later Industries, and emerge as the tallest leader in eastern Rajasthan in the early 2000s, virtually upending Singh’s hold in the region. He had to sit in the opposition benches, however, and then he lost the elections of 1999. After a further hiatus of three years, he was elected (indirectly) to the Rajya Sabha from Rajasthan in 2002. The Congress party came back to power in 2004, and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh appointed Natwar Singh as the Minister for External affairs.

===Oil-for-Food scandal===
Singh assumed office on 23 May 2004 as India&#x27;s minister for external affairs. On 27 October 2005, while Singh was abroad on an official visit, the Independent Inquiry Committee headed by Paul Volcker released the report on its investigation of corruption in the Oil-for-Food Programme. It stated &quot;inter alia&quot; that &quot;India&#x27;s Congress party&quot; and Singh&#x27;s family were non-contractual (corrupt) beneficiaries of the Oil-for-Food Programme. Anil Mathrani, then Indian Ambassador to Croatia and formerly a close aide to Singh, alleged that Singh had used an official visit to Iraq to procure oil coupons for Jagat Singh from Saddam&#x27;s regime.

On 26 March 2006, the Indian Enforcement Directorate (ED) announced that it had finally tracked a sum of eighty million rupees, transferred from London-based Non-resident Indian businessman Aditya Khanna&#x27;s bank account to his own NRI account in a Delhi bank, and later withdrawn from this account to be allegedly distributed among Indian beneficiaries of the scam.

Singh was suspended by the Congress in 2006.

===Later career===
In February 2008, Singh announced he quit Congress at a Bharatiya Janata Party-sponsored rally of Jat community held at Jaipur in the presence of Vasundhara Raje, then Chief Minister of Rajasthan. On this occasion, Singh not only asserted his innocence but also launched an attack on Sonia Gandhi for having failed to defend or support him.

In mid-2008, both Singh and his son Jagat joined Mayawati&#x27;s Bahujan Samaj Party, only to be expelled by that party within four months (in November 2008) for alleged indiscipline, anti-party activities and &quot;lack of faith&quot; in the ideology of the Bahujan Samaj Movement. In fact, Singh had been demanding a Rajya Sabha seat (which had apparently been promised before he joined the party) and Mayawati had changed her mind on that matter. Jagat Singh later joined the Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP).

==Personal life and death==
In August 1967, Singh married Maharajkumari Heminder Kaur (born June 1939), the eldest daughter of the last Maharaja of Patiala State, Yadavindra Singh, the sister of Captain Amarinder Singh, the present titular Maharaja of Patiala and former chief minister of Punjab. Heminder&#x27;s mother Mohinder Kaur was also active in public life.

Natwar Singh died in Gurugram on 10 August 2024, at the age of 95.

==Autobiography==
In August 2014, Singh&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;One Life is Not Enough&quot;, was released. The book claims to reveal developments during Indira Gandhi&#x27;s, Rajiv Gandhi&#x27;s, Narasimha Rao&#x27;s and Manmohan Singh&#x27;s regimes. It also describes the changing contours of Singh&#x27;s close but complex political relationship with Indian National Congress president Sonia Gandhi over the years. The book presents Singh&#x27;s account of the Volcker report and the various political motions that took place in the background leading up to his resignation.

Congress rejected the allegations made by Singh and targeted him to have distorted facts &quot;after being removed and publishes baseless things&quot;. They added that &quot;spreading such sensationalism for shoring up the sale of a book&quot; won&#x27;t be accepted.

Sonia Gandhi also responded to the book and rejected its contents. She even expressed the intention to write her own autobiography to reveal the truth. Kallol Chakraborty writing for the &quot;Amar Ujala&quot; noted that the book fraught with the one-sided narrative may create sensation for sometime but it cannot achieve heights in the long run.

==Books published==
# &quot;E.M.Forster : A Tribute&quot; (on Forster&#x27;s Eighty Fifth Birthday), editor, with Contributions by Ahmed Ali, Narayana Menon, Raja Rao &amp; Santha Rama Rau, New York, 1964
# &quot;The Legacy of Nehru: A Memorial Tribute&quot;, New York, 1965
# &quot;Tales from Modern India&quot;, New York, 1966
# &quot;Stories from India&quot;, London, 1971
# &quot;Maharaja Suraj Mal, 1707-63: His Life and Times&quot;, London, 1981
# &quot;Curtain Raisers&quot;, Delhi, 1984
# &quot;Profiles &amp; Letters&quot;, Delhi, 1997
# &quot;The Magnificent Maharaja Bhupinder Singh of Patiala (1891–1938)&quot;, Delhi, 1997
# &quot;Heart to Heart&quot;, Delhi, 2003.
#Yours Sincerely, December 2009.
# &quot;Walking with Lions: Tales from a Diplomatic Past&quot;, Released by Hamid Ansari, March 2013.
# &quot;One Life is Not Enough: An Autobiography&quot;, August 2014.
#Treasured Epistles, August 2018.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1285090" start="0" end="19" title="Natwar Singh" label="Kunwar Natwar Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020337" start="21" end="24" title="Indian Foreign Service" label="IFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q313465" start="112" end="140" title="Minister of External Affairs (India)" label="Minister of External Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q803681" start="234" end="253" title="Bahujan Samaj Party" label="Bahujan Samaj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020337" start="348" end="370" title="Indian Foreign Service" label="Indian Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="458" end="482" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="637" end="653" title="foreign minister" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="716" end="730" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q385263" start="742" end="759" title="Paul Volcker Committee" label="Volcker committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="895" end="917" title="Oil-for-Food Programme" label="Oil-for-Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q854850" start="1311" end="1338" title="Bharatpur State" label="princely state of Bharatpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645980" start="1356" end="1359" title="Jat" label="Jat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="1360" end="1365" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237979" start="1429" end="1441" title="Mayo College" label="Mayo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q200049" start="1443" end="1448" title="Ajmer" label="Ajmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068524" start="1453" end="1467" title="Scindia School" label="Scindia School"/>
<link wikidata="Q158467" start="1469" end="1476" title="Gwalior" label="Gwalior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289309" start="1604" end="1637" title="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s College, Delhi" label="St. Stephen&amp;#x27;s College, Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q536282" start="1666" end="1699" title="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge" label="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="1754" end="1771" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1775" end="1780" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020337" start="1822" end="1844" title="Indian Foreign Service" label="Indian Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="2080" end="2086" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="2226" end="2239" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2488" end="2517" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Heads of Commonwealth Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="2521" end="2538" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="2601" end="2632" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881" start="2675" end="2681" title="Lusaka" label="Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q131878" start="2876" end="2926" title="United Nations Institute for Training and Research" label="United Nations Institute for Training and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458201" start="3243" end="3283" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q28171812" start="3336" end="3345" title="Secretary to the Government of India" label="Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q932650" start="3432" end="3445" title="Padma Bhushan" label="Padma Bhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="3498" end="3517" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020337" start="3584" end="3606" title="Indian Foreign Service" label="Indian Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="3625" end="3633" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534144" start="3663" end="3676" title="8th Lok Sabha" label="8th Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901252" start="3682" end="3691" title="Bharatpur (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Bharatpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="3708" end="3717" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="4140" end="4159" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634234" start="4355" end="4362" title="Mathura (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="4371" end="4384" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="4457" end="4475" title="P.V. Narasimha Rao" label="P.V. Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="4567" end="4569" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520007" start="4678" end="4689" title="N.D. Tiwari" label="N.D. Tiwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309208" start="4694" end="4705" title="Arjun Singh (politician, born 1930)" label="Arjun Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728948" start="4738" end="4763" title="All India Indira Congress (Tiwari)" label="All India Indira Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q163225" start="4782" end="4794" title="Sonia Gandhi" label="Sonia Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523469" start="5115" end="5129" title="12th Lok Sabha" label="12th Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="5179" end="5201" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180951" start="5204" end="5222" title="Digamber Singh" label="Dr. Digamber Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="5605" end="5616" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="5707" end="5721" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q385263" start="5963" end="5992" title="Paul Volcker Committee" label="Independent Inquiry Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q349785" start="6003" end="6015" title="Paul Volcker" label="Paul Volcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="6078" end="6100" title="Oil-for-Food Programme" label="Oil-for-Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="6463" end="6476" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280618" start="6508" end="6538" title="Enforcement Directorate" label="Indian Enforcement Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="6644" end="6663" title="Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin" label="Non-resident Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="6721" end="6732" title="Overseas bank account" label="NRI account"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="6738" end="6743" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="6978" end="7000" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645980" start="7020" end="7033" title="Jat people" label="Jat community"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="7042" end="7048" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997305" start="7068" end="7083" title="Vasundhara Raje" label="Vasundhara Raje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670755" start="7090" end="7104" title="Chief Minister" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="7108" end="7117" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q264896" start="7313" end="7321" title="Mayawati" label="Mayawati"/>
<link wikidata="Q803681" start="7329" end="7348" title="Bahujan Samaj Party" label="Bahujan Samaj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="7743" end="7764" title="Bharatiya Janta Party" label="Bharatiya Janta Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q917553" start="7921" end="7934" title="Patiala State" label="Patiala State"/>
<link wikidata="Q620287" start="7936" end="7952" title="Yadavindra Singh of Patiala" label="Yadavindra Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633236" start="7968" end="7991" title="Captain Amarinder Singh" label="Captain Amarinder Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733257" start="8013" end="8032" title="Maharaja of Patiala" label="Maharaja of Patiala"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="8062" end="8068" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286312" start="8093" end="8106" title="Rajmata Mohinder Kaur of Patiala" label="Mohinder Kaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="8366" end="8379" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="8388" end="8400" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="8409" end="8422" title="P. V. Narasimha Rao" label="Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="8434" end="8448" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="8567" end="8591" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q163225" start="8602" end="8614" title="Sonia Gandhi" label="Sonia Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176784" start="9254" end="9264" title="Amar Ujala" label="Amar Ujala"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748851" wikidata="Q2989512" url="?curid=748851" title="Fur languages">
<text>The Fur, Furan or For languages constitute a small, closely related family, which is a proposed member of the Nilo-Saharan family. Its members are:

*Fur in western Sudan and eastern Chad with around 745,600 speakers in 2004.
*Amdang (also called Mimi) in eastern Chad with around 41,100 speakers in 2000.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2989512" start="4" end="7" title="Fur languages" label="Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989512" start="9" end="14" title="Fur languages" label="Furan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989512" start="18" end="31" title="Fur languages" label="For languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="110" end="122" title="Nilo-Saharan languages" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33364" start="150" end="153" title="Fur language" label="Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="165" end="170" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="183" end="187" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28335" start="227" end="233" title="Amdang language" label="Amdang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862203" start="247" end="251" title="Mimi language" label="Mimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="264" end="268" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748852" wikidata="Q749230" url="?curid=748852" title="Corpse paint">
<text>Corpse paint is a style of body painting, used mainly by black metal bands for concerts and band photos. The body painting is used to make the musicians appear inhuman, corpse-like, or demonic, and is perhaps &quot;the most identifiable aspect of the black metal aesthetic.&quot;

Corpse paint typically involves making the face and neck white (or pale), sometimes with red marks to signify blood or laceration, and making the area around the eyes and mouth black. Musicians will often have a trademark style. Other colors are seldom used, yet there are notable exceptions, such as Attila Csihar&#x27;s use of neon colors and the bands Satyricon and Dødheimsgard experimenting with color as well.

Outside of black metal, black and white face painting has been used by a variety of other public figures such as shock rock artists (notably Arthur Brown, Alice Cooper, members of Kiss, and members of the Misfits) and professional wrestlers (e.g. Sting and Vampiro), as well as for the normal beautification or ornamentation denoted by cosmetics.

==History and usage==
The earliest rock groups to wear body painting similar to corpse paint included Screamin&#x27; Jay Hawkins and Arthur Brown in the 1960s. In the 1970s, examples of black and white face paint by rock &amp; roll performers included Secos &amp; Molhados, Alice Cooper and Kiss. Guitarist Zal Cleminson of the Sensational Alex Harvey Band wore face paint and colorful clothes, performing in a menacing demeanor that evoked the evil clown trope. Later that decade, punk rock acts like the Misfits and singer David Vanian of The Damned also used black and white face paint. On seeing shock rock pioneer Arthur Brown performing his US number two hit &quot;Fire&quot; in 1968, Alice Cooper states, &quot;Can you imagine the young Alice Cooper watching that with all his make-up and hellish performance? It was like all my Halloweens came at once!&quot;

In the late 1970s and &#x27;80s, such face paint began to be more associated with metal performers. Vocalist King Diamond of Mercyful Fate used face paint similar to corpse paint as early as 1978 in his band Black Rose, while Hellhammer and their later incarnation as Celtic Frost also wore similar face paint. Per &quot;Dead&quot; Ohlin was the first to explicitly associate stylized face paint with an attempt to look like a corpse according to drummer Jan Axel &quot;Hellhammer&quot; Blomberg of Mayhem. Brazilian band Sarcófago also pioneered the look, being dubbed by &quot;Metal Storm&quot; magazine as the first band with &quot;true&quot; corpse paint. However, Necrobutcher insists that his band Mayhem was the first to use corpse paint and credits the band&#x27;s singer Per &quot;Dead&quot; Ohlin with coining the term. Early corpse paint was meant simply to highlight an individual&#x27;s features and make them look &quot;dead.&quot;

Bands of the early Norwegian black metal scene used corpse paint extensively. Early vocalist of Mayhem Per &quot;Dead&quot; Ohlin started wearing it in the late 1980s. According to Necrobutcher, Mayhem&#x27;s bass player: &quot;It wasn&#x27;t anything to do with the way Kiss and Alice Cooper used makeup. Dead actually wanted to look like a corpse. He didn&#x27;t do it to look cool.&quot; In the early 1990s, other Norwegian black metal bands followed suit and their style and sound was adopted by bands around the world. Eventually, some Norwegian bands—such as Emperor and Satyricon—stopped wearing corpse paint, often citing its loss of individualistic meaning, as well as its increased trendiness, due to use by so many bands.

==Examples==
==See also==
*Heavy metal fashion

==References==
==External links==
* How To Apply Corpse Paint
* Dravenstales.ch Brief history of corpse paint</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="0" end="12" title="Corpse paint" label="Corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="27" end="40" title="body painting" label="body painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="57" end="68" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48422" start="169" end="175" title="Cadaver" label="corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="185" end="190" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="338" end="343" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="370" end="373" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364" start="443" end="447" title="eyes" label="eyes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="452" end="457" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="458" end="463" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q350527" start="582" end="595" title="Attila Csihar" label="Attila Csihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="610" end="620" title="neon color" label="neon color"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="636" end="645" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271568" start="650" end="662" title="Dødheimsgard" label="Dødheimsgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="738" end="751" title="face painting" label="face painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045695" start="811" end="821" title="shock rock" label="shock rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q708782" start="839" end="851" title="Arthur Brown (musician)" label="Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="853" end="865" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="878" end="882" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q311785" start="903" end="910" title="Misfits (band)" label="Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="916" end="938" title="Professional wrestling" label="professional wrestlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="945" end="950" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354240" start="955" end="962" title="Vampiro" label="Vampiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="1034" end="1043" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="1081" end="1085" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q455754" start="1148" end="1174" title="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins" label="Screamin&amp;#x27; Jay Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q708782" start="1179" end="1191" title="Arthur Brown (musician)" label="Arthur Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443916" start="1298" end="1318" title="Secos &amp;amp; Molhados" label="Secos &amp;amp; Molhados"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="1320" end="1332" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="1337" end="1341" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355532" start="1353" end="1366" title="Zal Cleminson" label="Zal Cleminson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030972" start="1374" end="1402" title="Sensational Alex Harvey Band" label="Sensational Alex Harvey Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979768" start="1491" end="1501" title="evil clown" label="evil clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1528" end="1537" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q311785" start="1552" end="1559" title="Misfits (band)" label="Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293089" start="1571" end="1583" title="David Vanian" label="David Vanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="1587" end="1597" title="The Damned (band)" label="The Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045695" start="1646" end="1656" title="shock rock" label="shock rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="1882" end="1892" title="Halloween" label="Halloweens"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1996" end="2001" title="heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313818" start="2023" end="2035" title="King Diamond" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q647370" start="2039" end="2052" title="Mercyful Fate" label="Mercyful Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q685190" start="2140" end="2150" title="Hellhammer" label="Hellhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="2182" end="2194" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q504434" start="2225" end="2251" title="Dead (musician)" label="Per &amp;quot;Dead&amp;quot; Ohlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48422" start="2341" end="2347" title="Cadaver" label="corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q370323" start="2369" end="2409" title="Jan Axel Blomberg" label="Jan Axel &amp;quot;Hellhammer&amp;quot; Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="2413" end="2419" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2421" end="2430" title="Brazil" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q176546" start="2436" end="2445" title="Sarcófago" label="Sarcófago"/>
<link wikidata="Q14491495" start="2493" end="2504" title="Metal Storm (webzine)" label="Metal Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102922" start="2583" end="2595" title="Necrobutcher" label="Necrobutcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="2848" end="2852" title="dead" label="dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="2874" end="2907" title="early Norwegian black metal scene" label="early Norwegian black metal scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="3402" end="3411" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="3426" end="3433" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="3438" end="3447" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084003" start="3622" end="3641" title="Heavy metal fashion" label="Heavy metal fashion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748853" wikidata="Q1621107" url="?curid=748853" title="History Channel">
<text>History (stylized in all caps), formerly and commonly known as the History Channel, is an American pay television network and flagship channel owned by A&amp;E Networks, a joint venture between Hearst Communications and The Walt Disney Company&#x27;s General Entertainment Content division.

The network was originally focused on history-based, social/science documentaries as well as the news. During the late 2000s, the History Channel pivoted into reality television programming. In addition to this change in format, the network has been criticized by many scientists, historians, and skeptics for broadcasting pseudo-documentaries and pseudoscientific, unsubstantiated, sensational investigative programming.

, the History Channel is available to approximately 63,000,000 pay television households in the United States-down from its 2011 peak of 99,000,000 households. International localized versions of the History Channel are available, in various forms, in India, Canada, Europe, Australia, the Middle East, Africa, Asia and Latin America.

==History==
===Twentieth century===

The company indicated that plans for a history channel were in the works in 1993, it purchased the Lou Reda Productions documentary library and long-term rights for the Hearst Entertainment documentaries archive. The History Channel was launched on January 1, 1995, initially owned by A&amp;E Television Networks. With its UK counterpart, a partnership with British Sky Broadcasting, following on November 1, 1995. Its original format focused entirely on historical series and specials.

During the 1990s, the History Channel was jokingly referred to as &quot;The Hitler Channel&quot; for its extensive coverage of World War II. Since then, much of its military-themed programming has been shifted to its sister network Military History.

A&amp;E Networks considered the History Channel to be the driver in international expansion due to a lack of international rights to A&amp;E international co-productions. As expected, the History Channel led A&amp;E&#x27;s overseas expansion in Brazil with TVA (April 1996), the Nordic and Baltic regions with Modern Times Group (1997), and in Canada (1997).

The History Channel expanded in 1998 into tours of US landmarks with Mayflower Tours having an affiliated website (historytravel.com), &quot;History Channel Traveler&quot;, and a planned quarterly magazine. While in October, the History Channel and MSG Network teamed up to produce several short-form sports history programs. A&amp;E launched History International as a spin-off from the History Channel in November 1998.

===Twenty-first century===
On February 16, 2008, a new logo was launched on the U.S. network as part of a rebranding effort. While the trademark &quot;H&quot; was kept, the triangle shape on the left acts as a play button for animation and flyouts during commercials and shows. On March 20, 2008, as part of that same rebranding effort, the History Channel dropped &quot;The&quot; and &quot;Channel&quot; from its name to become simply &quot;History&quot;.

In 2012, half of A&amp;E would be purchased by The Walt Disney Company and the other half by Hearst Communications, also putting History under their joint ownership.

In 2015, the channel would undergo another rebranding, this time by Joseph Kiely. The slogan of this rebranding was &quot;Make Your Mark&quot;. The logo was slightly changed, but retained the golden letter &#x27;H&#x27; that had become synonymous with the channel.

The &quot;History 100&quot; documentary initiative was announced in March 2018 that would produce 100 documentaries covering major events and notable figures from last 100 years.

On December 7, 2021, History received a major rebrand for the first time since February 16, 2008. The logo still kept the golden letter &#x27;H&#x27; that had been used since its launch in 1995.

== Programming ==

Programming on the History Channel has covered a wide range of historical periods and topics, while similar themed topics are often organized into themed weeks or daily marathons. Subjects include warfare, inventions, aviation, mechanical and civil engineering, technology, science, nature, artists, composers, authors, mythical creatures, monsters, unidentified flying objects, conspiracy theories, aliens, religious beliefs, disaster scenarios, apocalyptic &quot;after man&quot; scenarios, survival scenarios, alternate history, dinosaurs, doomsday, organized crime, secret societies, and 2012 superstitions. Occasionally, some programs compare contemporary culture and technology with that of the past.

The channel&#x27;s programming would expand into scripted dramas with the premiere &quot;Vikings&quot; in 2013.

== Criticism and evaluations ==
Initially, the network received mixed reviews. In an article from the American Historical Association released about a year into the channel&#x27;s lifespan, the channel&#x27;s historical consultant Libby Haight O&#x27; Connell noted that professional historians have been enlisted to work on the channel&#x27;s programs and many letters have come in from viewers both pointing out historical errors and opening up discussion with the channel creators about the events portrayed in the channel&#x27;s programs.

However, in recent years the network has been criticized for having a bias towards US history. Another former sister network, History International, more extensively covered history outside the US until 2011, when it was re-branded as H2 and started broadcasting more material that had to do with US history.

Stanley Kutner criticized the network for the series &quot;The Men Who Killed Kennedy&quot; in 2003. Kutner was one of three historians commissioned to review the documentary, which the channel disavowed and never aired again. Programs such as &quot;Modern Marvels&quot; have been praised for their presentation of detailed information in an entertaining format.

Some of the network&#x27;s series, including &quot;Ice Road Truckers&quot;, &quot;Ax Men&quot;, and &quot;Pawn Stars&quot;, garnered increased viewership ratings in the United States, while receiving criticism over the series&#x27; nonhistorical nature. US Senator Chuck Grassley is a critic of the channel and its lack of historical or educational programming, showing particular disdain for the latter two programs.

Professor Jeremy Stoddard, in his article published in 2010, raised the concern that the productions of the network presented value-laden perspectives which may mislead audiences, a phenomenon he termed &quot;the History Channel effect&quot;. Stoddard also claimed that the History Channel did not contribute to this phenomenon alone, but rather, it was caused by the misperception that documentaries are &quot;objective sources of history&quot;.

In 2011, &quot;Forbes&quot; staffer Alex Knapp wrote, &quot;The History Channel shouldn&#x27;t run stuff like this &#x27;ancient astronaut&#x27; nonsense.&quot; &quot;Forbes&quot; contributor Brad Lockwood criticized the channel&#x27;s addition of &quot;programs devoted to monsters, aliens, and conspiracies&quot;, attributing a perceived intent of boosting ratings to the network&#x27;s decision to focus on pseudoarchaeology instead of documented facts. Knapp refers readers to the &quot;Bad Archaeology&quot; website&#x27;s founder Keith Fitzpatrick-Matthews who comments, &quot;I find it incredible and frightening that a worldwide distributed television channel ...can broadcast such rubbish as &quot;Ancient Aliens&quot;.&quot; Archaeologist Kenneth Feder, author of &quot;Frauds, Myths, and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in Archaeology&quot;, called the channel&#x27;s hosting the ancient astronaut theory &quot;execrable bullshit&quot;.

In his book &quot;2012: It&#x27;s Not the End of the World&quot;, Peter Lemesurier describes the channel&#x27;s &quot;Nostradamus&quot; series, in which he was invited to participate, as &quot;largely fiction&quot; and &quot;lurid nonsense&quot;. He also lists numerous allusions made in its films to the alleged Mayan &quot;end of the world&quot; and the &quot;rare&quot; galactic alignment that was supposed by John Major Jenkins to accompany it in 2012, while Jenkins himself has described &quot;Decoding the Past&quot; as &quot;45 minutes of unabashed doomsday hype and the worst kind of inane sensationalism.&quot;

In December 2011, Politifact gave the History Channel&#x27;s claim that the United States Congress stayed open on Christmas Day for most of its first 67 years of existence a &quot;pants on fire&quot; rating, the lowest of its ratings, noting that its own research showed that both the Senate and the House had only convened once in those 67 years on a Christmas Day. It noted that because one in seven Christmases falls on a Sunday (when Congress does not meet to allow members to attend church), the claim is &quot;ridiculous&quot;. The claim had first been broadcast on the History Channel program &quot;Christmas Unwrapped – The History of Christmas&quot; before being subsequently picked up by the American Civil Liberties Union&#x27;s website on the &quot;Origins of Christmas&quot; and by the Comedy Central series &quot;The Daily Show&quot;. &quot;Daily Show&quot; host Jon Stewart responded the next day by stating it was their fault for trusting the History Channel and satirized a clip from the History Channel about UFOs and Nazis by stating, &quot;The next thing you know we&#x27;ll all find out the Nazis did not employ alien technology in their quest for world domination.&quot;

The History Channel was also singled out in a post for &quot;Smithsonian&quot; magazine. Science writer Riley Black took issue with the show &quot;Ancient Aliens&quot; for postulating the &quot;idea that aliens caused the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs.&quot; The online magazine &quot;Cracked&quot; also lampooned the channel for its strange definition of history. &quot;Cracked&quot; singled out the programs &quot;UFO Hunters&quot; and &quot;Ancient Aliens&quot; as being the very definition of non-history by presenting pseudoscience and pseudohistory. In 2015, skeptic Brian Dunning listed it at #2 on a &quot;Top 10 Worst Anti-Science Websites&quot; list.

=== Amelia Earhart documentary controversy ===

In 2017, a History Channel documentary, &quot;Amelia Earhart: The Lost Evidence&quot;, proposed that a photograph in the National Archives of Jaluit Atoll in the Marshall Islands was actually a picture of a captured Amelia Earhart and Fred Noonan. The picture showed a Caucasian male on a dock who appeared to look like Noonan and a woman sitting on the dock, but facing away from the camera, who was judged to have a physique and haircut resembling Earhart&#x27;s. The documentary theorizes that the photo was taken after Earhart and Noonan crashed at Mili Atoll. The documentary also said that physical evidence recovered from Mili matches pieces that could have fallen off an Electra during a crash or subsequent overland move to a barge. &quot;The Lost Evidence&quot; proposed that a Japanese ship seen in the photograph was the &quot;Koshu Maru&quot;, a Japanese military ship.

&quot;The Lost Evidence&quot; was soon discredited after Japanese blogger Kota Yamano found the original source of the photograph in the archives in the National Diet Library Digital Collection. The original source of the photo was a Japanese travel guide published in October 1935, implying that the photograph was taken in 1935 or before, thus it would be unrelated to Earhart and Noonan&#x27;s 1937 disappearance. Additionally, the researcher who discovered the photo also identified the ship in the right of the photo as another ship called &quot;Koshu&quot; seized by Allied Japanese forces in World War I and not the &quot;Koshu Maru&quot;.

Researcher Ben Radford performed a detailed analysis of the mistakes made by &quot;The History Channel&quot; in building their documentary on bad photographic evidence. In his &quot;Skeptical Inquirer&quot; article &quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Emmys: An Amelia Earhart Special (Non) Mystery Post-Mortem&quot;, critiquing the network&#x27;s lack of professionalism, Radford said: &quot;Given that the photograph&#x27;s provenance was established and thus the key premise of the show discredited in about half an hour of Google searching, it will be interesting to see what world class expertise... the History Channel will bring to their reinvestigation of Earhart&#x27;s disappearance.&quot; On episode 82 of his &quot;Squaring the Strange&quot; podcast, released January 4, 2019, Radford reminded listeners that in excess of 18 months had passed without an apology or explanation from the History Channel as to &quot;how their research went so horribly wrong.&quot;

==Military History Channel==
Military History is a niche spin-off from the History channel that features reruns of programs about the history of the military and significant combat events. The channel&#x27;s main competitor is Warner Bros. Discovery&#x27;s American Heroes Channel, formerly the Military Channel.

===History===
Military History was launched on January 5, 2005, after demand for more military history programs. Beginning on March 27, 2004, a military-history programming block started on now defunct network History International as a prologue. The launch was an open preview, or soft launch, as no cable operators were signed up. Dan Davids, president of the History Channel USA, planned to push for digital basic level cable carriage. Its initial programming library drew from A&amp;E and History&#x27;s programs. The channel&#x27;s initial prime time shows were under an umbrella banner of “Battle History”, which consisted of five documentary miniseries featuring each of the US military services. In the second quarter of 2005, the channel had its hard launch.

Like its parent channel, the channel dropped the word &quot;Channel&quot; from its name on March 20, 2008. Its carriage is limited to expanded tier and add-on pay-TV packages as a niche offering, and it is one of the few mainstream American cable channels in English still carried only in standard definition.

===Programming===

Military History features programs that focus on historical battles and wars, as well as programs that profile key individuals such as generals, soldiers and spies. It also airs documentaries and series that provide insight into how these wars were fought and the lives of those who served in them.

Its programming library draws from A&amp;E and History&#x27;s program libraries with an emphasis on World War II.

==History en Español==

History en Español is an American Spanish-language pay television channel. The network launched on June 24, 2004, as a counterpart to History focusing mainly on Hispanic America and world history. The network shows original programming, as well as Spanish-dubbed programs from the English-language version.

== Other media ==
=== DVD ===
* &quot;The Unknown Hitler&quot; DVD collection, including &quot;Hitler and the Occult&quot;
* &quot;Dogfight: Season 1&quot; DVD set
* &quot;The Great Depression&quot; DVD collection
* &quot;The Making of Trump&quot; 2015 DVD

===Video serials===
* &quot;Legend of the Superstition Mountains&quot; six episodes in 2015
* &quot;History Legends of War: Patton&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Lost Worlds&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Battle of Britain 1940&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Crusades – Quest for Power&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Alamo – Fight for Independence&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Civil War – Great Battles&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Digging for Truth&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Great Battles Medieval&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: Civil War The Battle of Bull Run Take Command: 1861&quot;
* &quot;The History Channel: American Civil War Take Command: 2nd Manassas&quot;

===Video games===
* &quot;The History Channel: Civil War – A Nation Divided&quot; (2006)
* &quot;&quot;The History Channel: ShootOut! – The Game&quot;&quot; (2006)
* &quot;&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The History Channel: Great Battles of Rome&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The History Channel: Battle for the Pacific&quot; (2007)
* &quot;History Civil War: Secret Missions&quot; (2008)
* &quot;History: Great Empires – Rome&quot; (2009)
* &quot;History: Ice Road Truckers&quot; (2010)
* &quot;History: Egypt – Engineering an Empire&quot; (2010)
* &quot;History: Great Battles – Medieval&quot; (2010)

== International ==
=== North America ===
==== Canada ====

History Television launched in 1997 and was not initially related to its then similarly named American counterpart. During History Television&#x27;s first several years of operation, despite sharing a similar programming focus, it rarely, if ever, acquired programming from the American channel. The phrase &quot;Not available in Canada&quot; was used heavily during The History Channel&#x27;s early years in promotional ads on American channels that were imported to Canadian pay television providers, particularly A&amp;E.

Beginning in the late 2000s, several History (US) shows were acquired for Canadian broadcast on History Television. On May 30, 2012, then-parent company Shaw Media announced that it would rebrand History Channel as a Canadian version of the US History channel in the fall of 2012, through a licensing agreement with A+E Networks. History Television would be relaunched on August 12, 2012, with another Shaw-owned specialty channel relaunched as a Canadian version of H2 soon after.

On October 21, 2014, Corus Entertainment reached an agreement to acquire Canadian French-language rights to History programming for its own channel, Historia. On March 9, 2015, the network was relaunched under History&#x27;s logo and branding, although the network still carries the Historia name. Historia was previously owned as a joint venture between Shaw and Astral Media, which made it a sister to History; Corus purchased the network in 2013.

On April 1, 2016, Corus Entertainment merged with Shaw Media, and as a result, now holds the Canadian English and French-language rights to History programming.

=== Europe ===
==== UK and Ireland ====
The British version launched in November 1995, and arrived in Ireland on November 1, 1999. The UK channel is a joint venture with Sky UK and was renamed Sky History on May 27, 2020, incorporating content from Sky Documentaries and Sky Nature.

==== Germany ====
The German version launched on November 14, 2004, and is operated by The History Channel Germany GmbH &amp; Co. KG, a joint venture between A+E Networks and NBC Universal Global Networks Germany.

==== Italy ====
The Italian version was launched on July 31, 2003, as a joint venture of A&amp;E Networks and Fox International Channels Italy; then it became a sole venture of A&amp;E Networks in 2012.

==== Spain and Portugal ====
The History Channel is available in Spain and Portugal though cable, satellite, and IPTV platforms, as well as streaming media under the brand Canal de Historia. The History Channel Iberia is a joint venture between A+E Networks and AMC Networks International Iberia.

==== Benelux ====
The Dutch version launched on May 1, 2007. This version is distributed by A&amp;E Networks Benelux. In January 2008, History HD was launched in the Netherlands. It is available on cable providers Telenet and Ziggo. It is also available on the IPTV service KPN.

==== Poland ====
A Polish version was launched on April 9, 2008. It is available on cable providers Aster, Dialog, Toya, and UPC Polska, and also through satellite television (with its HD version carried on the n platform since June 1, 2012) and an SD version on Cyfra+ (since November 2, 2009).

==== Scandinavia ====
A Scandinavian version was first launched in September 1997, broadcasting for three and later four hours a day on the analogue Viasat platform. Initially time-sharing with TV1000 Cinema, it was later moved to the Swedish TV8 channel and continued broadcasting there until November 2004. When History channel announced their own 24-hour pan-European channel, Viasat launched its own history-oriented channel, Viasat History, in the Nordic region, but with no original programming. On February 1, 2007, the History Channel returned to Sweden and also Denmark, Norway, Finland when the pan-European version was launched as a standalone channel on the Canal Digital satellite platform and later through cable operator Com hem. The History Channel launched on February 1, 2007, on the Canal Digital DTH satellite package for viewers in Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Finland. The channel is being launched by The History Channel UK, A&amp;E&#x27;s joint venture with BSkyB. Although it broadcasts in English with local subtitles, the channel is scheduled separately from the UK version.

=== Asia ===
==== India ====
The History Channel started its operations in India in late 2003 with 21st Century Fox&#x27;s STAR TV as its sales partner, managed by National Geographic until November 21, 2008. The History Channel India closed down on November 21, 2008. In 2011, History was granted permission to relaunch services in India. A joint venture of A&amp;E Networks and TV18 relaunched History TV18 in India in eight languages in 2014.

==== Southeast Asia ====

A joint venture of AETN and Astro All Asia Networks launched the History Channel in Singapore, Hong Kong, Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam, and Brunei in the second and third quarters of 2007, and in Taiwan and China by the end of the year. Some other Asian countries, such as Kuwait, Israel, and Japan, have their own versions of the network. On September 1, 2008, History Channel Asia was officially launched in Singapore and Hong Kong followed by the Philippines.

==== South Korea ====
The South Korean version of History Channel was launched on September 22, 2017, replacing the Southeast version that was previously transmitted. After the launch, A+E networks Korea launched an original series program called History in the Bottle (말술클럽).

=== Latin America ===
The Latin American version was launched in 2001. It is owned by A&amp;E and controlled in the region by Ole Distribution. It airs US programming, translated to Spanish or Portuguese or in English with Spanish or Portuguese subtitles. Also, it develops some Latin American programming in Spanish.

=== Oceania ===
==== Australia and New Zealand ====

The channel is operated by Foxtel Networks, and the programming and name of the channel is licensed to them by A&amp;E Networks.

=== Africa ===

==== South Africa ====
The History Channel was launched on December 1, 2003, as part of the DStv satellite TV package provided by MultiChoice.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="0" end="7" title="History Channel" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960579" start="21" end="29" title="all caps" label="all caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="67" end="82" title="History Channel" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="99" end="113" title="pay television" label="pay television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="114" end="121" title="television network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456998" start="126" end="142" title="flagship channel" label="flagship channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83723" start="152" end="168" title="A&amp;amp;E Networks" label="A&amp;amp;E Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="172" end="185" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="194" end="215" title="Hearst Communications" label="Hearst Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="220" end="243" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="451" end="469" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q8812380" start="615" end="635" title="pseudo-documentaries" label="pseudo-documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="640" end="656" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q918390" start="1446" end="1470" title="Sky (company)" label="British Sky Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="1565" end="1573" title="television special" label="specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1652" end="1658" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1703" end="1715" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="1808" end="1824" title="Military History (TV channel)" label="Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717767" start="2436" end="2447" title="MSG Network" label="MSG Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q264058" start="2530" end="2551" title="H2 (TV channel)" label="History International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="3115" end="3138" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="3161" end="3182" title="Hearst Communications" label="Hearst Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="3959" end="3977" title="History by period" label="historical periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="4093" end="4100" title="warfare" label="warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="4102" end="4111" title="invention" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="4114" end="4122" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="4124" end="4134" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="4139" end="4156" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="4158" end="4168" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="4170" end="4177" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="4179" end="4185" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q483501" start="4187" end="4193" title="artist" label="artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="4196" end="4204" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="4207" end="4213" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239243" start="4216" end="4234" title="mythical creatures" label="mythical creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="4236" end="4243" title="monster" label="monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="4246" end="4272" title="unidentified flying object" label="unidentified flying object"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="4275" end="4294" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307329" start="4296" end="4302" title="Extraterrestrials in fiction" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="4304" end="4321" title="religion" label="religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839081" start="4323" end="4331" title="disaster" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="4343" end="4354" title="apocalypse" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="4388" end="4396" title="survivalist" label="survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="4408" end="4425" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="4427" end="4436" title="dinosaurs" label="dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600479" start="4438" end="4446" title="Human extinction" label="doomsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="4448" end="4463" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="4465" end="4481" title="secret societies" label="secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q139274" start="4487" end="4491" title="2012 Phenomenon" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579463" start="4686" end="4705" title="Vikings (2013 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Vikings&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="5343" end="5353" title="history of the United States" label="US history"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740084" start="5386" end="5407" title="Vice on TV" label="History International"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122132" start="5495" end="5497" title="H2 (American TV channel)" label="H2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750994" start="5629" end="5655" title="The Men Who Killed Kennedy" label="The Men Who Killed Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512604" start="5820" end="5834" title="Modern Marvels" label="Modern Marvels"/>
<link wikidata="Q702432" start="5985" end="6002" title="Ice Road Truckers" label="Ice Road Truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325666" start="6016" end="6022" title="Ax Men" label="Ax Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q794145" start="6040" end="6050" title="Pawn Stars" label="Pawn Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072494" start="6166" end="6186" title="Channel drift" label="nonhistorical nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q529294" start="6199" end="6213" title="Chuck Grassley" label="Chuck Grassley"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="6740" end="6753" title="Documentary film" label="documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="6816" end="6822" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345825" start="7211" end="7228" title="pseudoarchaeology" label="pseudoarchaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501910" start="7508" end="7522" title="Ancient Aliens" label="Ancient Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390092" start="7550" end="7563" title="Kenneth Feder" label="Kenneth Feder"/>
<link wikidata="Q646988" start="7697" end="7714" title="Ancient astronauts" label="ancient astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q39978" start="7873" end="7884" title="Nostradamus" label="Nostradamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246470" start="8168" end="8186" title="John Major Jenkins" label="John Major Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q139274" start="8206" end="8210" title="2012 Phenomenon" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249549" start="8254" end="8271" title="Decoding the Past" label="Decoding the Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q427532" start="8353" end="8367" title="sensationalism" label="sensationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394318" start="8394" end="8404" title="Politifact" label="Politifact"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="8452" end="8474" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="8490" end="8503" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="8661" end="8667" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8676" end="8681" title="United States House" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="9078" end="9108" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="9175" end="9189" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="9203" end="9217" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="9253" end="9264" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="9631" end="9642" title="Smithsonian (magazine)" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501910" start="9717" end="9731" title="Ancient Aliens" label="Ancient Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="9792" end="9825" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="extinction of non-avian dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180348" start="9859" end="9866" title="Cracked.com" label="Cracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386150" start="9990" end="10001" title="UFO Hunters" label="UFO Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="10097" end="10110" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146759" start="10115" end="10128" title="pseudohistory" label="pseudohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963634" start="10147" end="10160" title="Brian Dunning (author)" label="Brian Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10330" end="10363" title="Amelia Earhart: The Lost Evidence" label="Amelia Earhart: The Lost Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q168576" start="10426" end="10438" title="Jaluit Atoll" label="Jaluit Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="10446" end="10462" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355" start="10500" end="10514" title="Amelia Earhart" label="Amelia Earhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808437" start="10519" end="10530" title="Fred Noonan" label="Fred Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q700051" start="10837" end="10847" title="Mili Atoll" label="Mili Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q477675" start="11321" end="11342" title="National Diet Library" label="National Diet Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11612392" start="11719" end="11724" title="Kōshū (survey ship)" label="Koshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="11741" end="11747" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896201" start="11827" end="11838" title="Ben Radford" label="Ben Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q214082" start="11998" end="12016" title="Skeptical Inquirer" label="Skeptical Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="12936" end="12959" title="military history" label="history of the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058645" start="13059" end="13082" title="American Heroes Channel" label="American Heroes Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740084" start="13326" end="13347" title="History International" label="History International"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14615" end="14627" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="14688" end="14704" title="Spanish-language" label="Spanish-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="14815" end="14831" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5872038" start="15057" end="15078" title="Hitler and the Occult" label="Hitler and the Occult"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15957" end="16006" title="The History Channel: Civil War – A Nation Divided" label="The History Channel: Civil War – A Nation Divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120720" start="16028" end="16081" title="Kuma Reality Games" label="&amp;quot;The History Channel: ShootOut! – The Game&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16125" end="16167" title="The History Channel: Great Battles of Rome" label="The History Channel: Great Battles of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16189" end="16232" title="The History Channel: Battle for the Pacific" label="The History Channel: Battle for the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16254" end="16288" title="History Civil War: Secret Missions" label="History Civil War: Secret Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481600" start="17256" end="17266" title="Shaw Media" label="Shaw Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124709" start="17550" end="17572" title="History2 (Canadian TV channel)" label="Canadian version of H2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135686" start="17607" end="17626" title="Corus Entertainment" label="Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450506" start="17659" end="17674" title="Canadian French" label="Canadian French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138328" start="17735" end="17743" title="Historia (TV channel)" label="Historia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750438" start="17950" end="17962" title="Astral Media" label="Astral Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="18130" end="18146" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="18369" end="18375" title="Sky UK" label="Sky UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405818" start="18448" end="18465" title="Sky Documentaries" label="Sky Documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405820" start="18470" end="18480" title="Sky Nature" label="Sky Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753607" start="18658" end="18695" title="NBCUniversal International Networks" label="NBC Universal Global Networks Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q386442" start="18808" end="18840" title="Fox Networks Group" label="Fox International Channels Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295735" start="19164" end="19197" title="AMC Networks International Southern Europe" label="AMC Networks International Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="19414" end="19421" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382166" start="19426" end="19431" title="Ziggo" label="Ziggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q338633" start="19474" end="19477" title="KPN" label="KPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865474" start="19605" end="19615" title="UPC Polska" label="UPC Polska"/>
<link wikidata="Q287662" start="19691" end="19692" title="n (Poland)" label="n"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845890" start="19743" end="19749" title="Platforma Canal+" label="Cyfra+"/>
<link wikidata="Q943681" start="19926" end="19932" title="Viasat (Nordic television service)" label="Viasat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981979" start="20020" end="20023" title="TV8 (Swedish TV channel)" label="TV8"/>
<link wikidata="Q855707" start="20207" end="20221" title="Viasat History" label="Viasat History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703272" start="20447" end="20460" title="Canal Digital" label="Canal Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="20954" end="20959" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476713" start="20978" end="20994" title="21st Century Fox" label="21st Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919785" start="21002" end="21009" title="Star India" label="STAR TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="21043" end="21062" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310201" start="21088" end="21113" title="History TV18" label="The History Channel India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310201" start="21275" end="21287" title="History TV18" label="History TV18"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242264" start="21380" end="21403" title="Astro Malaysia Holdings" label="Astro All Asia Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774656" start="21413" end="21432" title="History (Southeast Asian TV channel)" label="the History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="21436" end="21445" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="21447" end="21456" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="21458" end="21466" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="21472" end="21483" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="21485" end="21493" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21495" end="21504" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="21506" end="21513" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="21519" end="21525" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="21575" end="21581" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21586" end="21591" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="21652" end="21658" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="21660" end="21666" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="21672" end="21677" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="22207" end="22214" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q97695643" start="22247" end="22263" title="Ole Distribution" label="Ole Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="22303" end="22310" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="22314" end="22324" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976628" start="22520" end="22535" title="Foxtel" label="Foxtel Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q83723" start="22604" end="22620" title="A&amp;amp;E Networks" label="A&amp;amp;E Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155790" start="22731" end="22735" title="DStv" label="DStv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748858" wikidata="Q1156893" url="?curid=748858" title="Violent Cop">
<text>is a 1989 Japanese neo-noir action thriller film directed by Takeshi Kitano, written by Kitano and Hisashi Nozawa, and starring Kitano, Maiko Kawakami, Makoto Ashikawa, Hakuryu, Ken Yoshizawa, and Ittoku Kishibe. It follows Azuma, a Japanese police detective known for his rough and unprofessional conduct, after he is assigned to investigate drug trafficking by the &quot;yakuza&quot;. It was Kitano&#x27;s directorial debut, and marked the beginning of his career as a filmmaker.

==Plot==
Azuma is a police detective who lives with his intellectually disabled sister Akari (of whom he is very protective) and has a gambling problem that forces him to constantly borrow money. He also has a strong sense of morality and a reputation for using excessive violence when dealing with criminals, ignoring police rules and regulations when they become inconvenient; for instance, after witnessing a gang of teenage boys beat up a homeless man for fun, he enters the home of the gang&#x27;s leader and beats him before making him promise to turn himself and his friends in, which he does the next day. Azuma&#x27;s superiors, who admire him for his ability to get results, overlook his constant violations of the police code by making him write &quot;apologies&quot; whenever he does something unlawful.

Azuma and his new partner Kikuchi are assigned to investigate the murder of a drug dealer, and break up an attempted drug deal in the bathroom of a nightclub. The seller, who works for &quot;yakuza&quot; boss Nito, names Azuma&#x27;s close friend Iwaki, a vice squad detective, as his supplier. Azuma is subsequently asked to help find Iwaki, who has seemingly gone into hiding due to newspapers uncovering his ties to the &quot;yakuza&quot;, but a fisherman finds Iwaki&#x27;s corpse hanging from a noose under a bridge. Refusing to believe that his friend committed suicide, Azuma attempts to track down the dealers from before, but both men are executed by sociopathic &quot;yakuza&quot; hitman Kiyohiro. Unable to take action against the well-connected Nito, Azuma plants drugs in Kiyohiro&#x27;s apartment, apprehends him, and tortures him for information in the police station. However, this angers the police deputy chief, who forces Azuma to resign to protect the force from investigation.

Azuma spends his first day of unemployment doing what he pleases in town, but Kiyohiro and his men use the opportunity to kidnap Akari and bring her to their hideout, where they take turns raping her and getting her hooked on drugs. Kiyohiro also defies Nito&#x27;s orders and tries to stab Azuma on a busy street; Azuma grabs the knife and Kiyohiro pulls a gun, accidentally killing a young woman when his shot misses, while Azuma manages to stab Kiyohiro in the leg and escapes. The next day, he purchases ammo and an unregistered firearm from a friend at the gambling parlor and practices shooting it, preparing to battle Kiyohiro.

Knowing Azuma is coming, Kiyohiro orders his men to arm themselves for a shootout but, finding they are unwilling to fight, executes two of them, while the third attempts to flee Kiyohiro&#x27;s wrath but is gunned down by Azuma when he arrives. In the ensuing gunfight, Kiyohiro manages to shoot Azuma with multiple guns, but is shot and killed by him when he tries to find another. Azuma finally reunites with Akari, but finds she is now hopelessly addicted to drugs to the point of searching Kiyohiro&#x27;s corpse for more, and he chooses to mercy kill her with his final bullet. A badly-wounded Azuma begins to leave, but is killed by Shinkai, Nito&#x27;s former advisor, as revenge for Azuma killing Nito under the mistaken belief that he had ordered Kiyohiro to go after Akari.

Sometime later, Kikuchi, now a senior vice detective, meets with Shinkai, who explains that with the heat surrounding Azuma&#x27;s actions dying down, he wants Kikuchi to take over for Iwaki and continue to sell drugs through the police force. Kikuchi eagerly accepts Shinkai&#x27;s offer and leaves.

==Cast==
*Takeshi Kitano as Azuma 
*Maiko Kawakami as Akari
*Makoto Ashikawa as Kikuchi
*Shirō Sano as Yoshinari
*Sei Hiraizumi as Iwaki 
*Mikiko Otonashi as Iwaki&#x27;s wife
*Hakuryu as Kiyohiro
*Ittoku Kishibe as Nito
*Ken Yoshizawa as Shinkai
*Nobuyuki Katsube as Deputy Police Chief Higuchi
*Akira Hamada as Chief Detective Araki
*Yuuki Kawai as Detective Honma
*Ritsuko Amano as Honma&#x27;s Fiancée
*Tarō Ishida as Detective Tashiro
*Kenichi Endō as Emoto
*Susumu Terajima as Oda

==Title==
The Japanese title is the same as that given to the Japanese translation, by Makoto Sawa (佐和誠), of James Hadley Chase&#x27;s 1968 novel &quot;Believed Violent&quot;, published by Tokyo Sogen-sha (東京創元社) in the Sogen Mystery Library (&quot;Sogen suiri bunko&quot;: 創元推理文庫) series in June 1972. The phrase「その男、凶暴につき」appears to suggest the wording of a police wanted poster (&quot;This man, because of his extreme violence [should not be approached]&quot;), but does not usually appear on Japanese wanted posters (&quot;shimei tehai&quot;: 指名手配), and may have been Sawa&#x27;s own rendering of the English original.

After the movie, the title has been widely parodied in comics, magazine articles, books, etc. For example America&#x27;s Most Dangerous Pets was translated as &quot;Kono Petto Kyōbō Ni Tsuki&quot;, with &quot;pet&quot; instead of &quot;man&quot;.

==Production==
Although Kinji Fukasaku was the film&#x27;s original director, he stepped down over a scheduling conflict due to Kitano&#x27;s TV commitments. The distributor suggested the comedian direct it at his own pace, and Kitano accepted. The screenplay was originally written by Hisashi Nozawa, but upon taking over as director Kitano rewrote the script heavily. Despite his contributions to the screenplay, he was left uncredited as a contributing writer.

The film was originally meant to be a comedy but Kitano wanted to try being a serious actor, therefore he made the movie into a police drama.

=== Soundtrack ===
The piano theme heard several times during the movie is Erik Satie&#x27;s &quot;Gnossienne No.1&quot;. The nightclub scene briefly features the Hi-NRG/Europop song &quot;The Girl You Need&quot; by Tracey. &quot;Long Road&quot; by Roots Radics is the Reggae track playing on the &quot;yakuza&quot; cassette player.

==Reception==
&quot;Violent Cop&quot; has an approval rating of 83% on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 6 reviews, and an average rating of 7.8/10. 
The movie was a moderate financial success in Japan, and also did moderately well in limited release internationally.

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Violent Cop&quot; at the Japanese Movie Database
*http://www.kitanotakeshi.com/index.php?content=filmography&amp;show_film&amp;id=21</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="19" end="27" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="28" end="34" title="Action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="35" end="43" title="Thriller film" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q26372" start="61" end="75" title="Takeshi Kitano" label="Takeshi Kitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q799227" start="99" end="113" title="Hisashi Nozawa" label="Hisashi Nozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545218" start="136" end="150" title="Maiko Kawakami" label="Maiko Kawakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q11284673" start="169" end="176" title="Hakuryu (actor)" label="Hakuryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q873876" start="197" end="211" title="Ittoku Kishibe" label="Ittoku Kishibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q203343" start="233" end="248" title="Law enforcement in Japan" label="Japanese police"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="249" end="258" title="detective" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="273" end="305" title="Police brutality" label="rough and unprofessional conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="343" end="359" title="Illegal drug trade" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="373" end="379" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="539" end="562" title="intellectually disabled" label="intellectually disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="618" end="626" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432702" start="2069" end="2081" title="False evidence" label="plants drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="3481" end="3491" title="mercy kill" label="mercy kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q26372" start="4033" end="4047" title="Takeshi Kitano" label="Takeshi Kitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545218" start="4059" end="4073" title="Maiko Kawakami" label="Maiko Kawakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959632" start="4112" end="4122" title="Shirō Sano" label="Shirō Sano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548578" start="4137" end="4150" title="Sei Hiraizumi" label="Sei Hiraizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11284673" start="4200" end="4207" title="Hakuryu (actor)" label="Hakuryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q873876" start="4221" end="4235" title="Ittoku Kishibe" label="Ittoku Kishibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7046277" start="4271" end="4287" title="Nobuyuki Katsube" label="Nobuyuki Katsube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582083" start="4430" end="4441" title="Tarō Ishida" label="Tarō Ishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067530" start="4464" end="4476" title="Kenichi Endō" label="Kenichi Endō"/>
<link wikidata="Q738476" start="4487" end="4502" title="Susumu Terajima" label="Susumu Terajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q347912" start="4620" end="4638" title="James Hadley Chase" label="James Hadley Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q616865" start="4878" end="4891" title="wanted poster" label="wanted poster"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5171" end="5186" title=":ja:その男、凶暴につき#題名を捩った作品" label="widely parodied"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742562" start="5241" end="5275" title="America&amp;#x27;s Most Dangerous Pets" label="America&amp;#x27;s Most Dangerous Pets"/>
<link wikidata="Q470779" start="5407" end="5421" title="Kinji Fukasaku" label="Kinji Fukasaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q799227" start="5669" end="5683" title="Hisashi Nozawa" label="Hisashi Nozawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="5976" end="5988" title="police drama" label="police drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="6066" end="6076" title="Erik Satie" label="Erik Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602501" start="6090" end="6105" title="Gnossiennes (Satie)" label="Gnossienne No.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q606393" start="6154" end="6160" title="Hi-NRG" label="Hi-NRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q517415" start="6161" end="6168" title="Europop" label="Europop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091811" start="6240" end="6252" title="Roots Radics" label="Roots Radics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="6260" end="6266" title="Reggae" label="Reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="6396" end="6413" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="6422" end="6437" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748860" wikidata="Q19866912" url="?curid=748860" title="NSTAR (company)">
<text>NSTAR was a utility company that provided retail electricity and natural gas to 1.4 million customers in eastern and central Massachusetts, including the Boston urban area. NSTAR became a subsidiary of Northeast Utilities in April 2012. In February 2015, Northeast Utilities and all of its operating companies (Western Massachusetts Electric, Public Service New Hampshire, Connecticut Light and Power, Yankee Gas, and NSTAR Gas and Electric) became one large company known as Eversource Energy.

== History ==
NSTAR was formed in 1999 by the merger of BEC Energy and Commonwealth Energy System and had the following operating units: Boston Edison Company, Cambridge Electric Light Company, Commonwealth Electric Company, and NSTAR Gas Company (formerly Commonwealth Gas and Cambridge Gas Company).

As a part of deregulation of the local electrical power industry, NSTAR has divested itself of all electric generation facilities, keeping only those elements of the business which remain regulated. NSTAR sold its interest in the Seabrook Station nuclear power plant to FPL Group in 2002.

On November 16, 2006, the company announced a 7.4% increase in its dividend to an annual rate of USD1.30 per common share from the previous USD1.21.

NSTAR has ownership of unregulated district energy and telecommunications businesses, including Medical Area Total Energy Plant, LLC. which produces electricity, steam and chilled water for sale to customers in the Longwood Medical Area of Boston.

Electric power distribution in the New England area is coordinated by ISO New England, a regional transmission organization.

==Environmental record==
In 2002, NSTAR Electric and Gas Corporation was cited by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for discharging oil into the Charles River. The EPA also stated that NSTAR had failed to prepare spill plans at four of its facilities, in Brighton, Cambridge, Needham, and West Roxbury, where oil is pumped through their pipe lines. In July 2007, NSTAR Electric introduced a new program called NSTAR Green. In May 2008, NSTAR Green signed ten-year contracts for sixty megawatts of wind power from two wind farms in New York and Maine. They offered their customers a chance to buy 50-100 percent of their power from these wind farms. Power purchased through NSTAR Green would reduce reliance on fossil fuels that are traditionally used to meet the region’s electricity demand.

=== PCB spill controversy ===
NSTAR has had its share of environmental mishaps, including nearly a dozen spills at its former Watertown, Massachusetts facility. The spills, most of which occurred during the 1980s, consisted of transformer oil, which contained PCBs in high concentrations (6,200 Parts Per million). These spills have contaminated nearby Sawins and Williams Pond, both of which are downgradient of the NSTAR facility, and possibly flowed into the Charles river, which is downstream of Sawins Pond. Many local activists lobbied for NSTAR to abide by state regulations and spend the $20–40 million required to perform a PCB remediation of the affected lands. By 1997 NSTAR was responsible for nearly 50 hazardous waste sites, and by 2006 all but 5 of these had been cleaned up.

==HVDC transmission==
NSTAR has signed on a joint venture with Hydro-Québec and Northeast Utilities to build a new High-voltage direct current (HVDC) line from Windsor, Quebec (connecting with the Quebec - New England Transmission line) to a location in central New Hampshire. It is projected that the line will either run in existing right-of-way adjacent to the HVDC line that runs through New Hampshire, or it will connect to a right-of-way in northern New Hampshire that will run through the White Mountains. This 180- to 190-mile line, projected to carry 1,200 megawatts, will carry electricity to approximately one million homes.

==Merger with Northeast Utilities==
In October 2010, Northeast Utilities and NSTAR announced they would merge, with the resulting company retaining the Northeast Utilities name. Under the terms of the transaction, NSTAR shareholders received 1.312 Northeast Utilities common shares for each NSTAR share that they own. The merger was completed in 2012. On February 2, 2015, Northeast Utilities and all its subsidiaries, including NSTAR, began to brand themselves as Eversource Energy.

==References==
==External links==
*NSTAR website.
*Boston Edison Company records at Baker Library Special Collections, Harvard Business School
*FPL Press Release on purchase of Seabrook Station nuclear power plant.
*Proceedings from the Boston Edison restructuring from the Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy.
* ISO New England Inc.
* ISO-NE Morning Report Daily Capacity Analysis predictions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19866912" start="0" end="5" title="NSTAR (company)" label="NSTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="12" end="19" title="public utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="65" end="76" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="125" end="138" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="154" end="160" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344199" start="476" end="493" title="Eversource Energy" label="Eversource Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100323735" start="633" end="654" title="Boston Edison Company" label="Boston Edison Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="812" end="824" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316331" start="838" end="863" title="electrical power industry" label="electrical power industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q475652" start="1029" end="1065" title="Seabrook Station nuclear power plant" label="Seabrook Station nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430055" start="1069" end="1078" title="Florida Power &amp;amp; Light" label="FPL Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q986020" start="1454" end="1475" title="Longwood Medical Area" label="Longwood Medical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974452" start="1558" end="1573" title="ISO New England" label="ISO New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309246" start="1577" end="1611" title="regional transmission organization" label="regional transmission organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="1700" end="1731" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q794927" start="1767" end="1780" title="Charles River" label="Charles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="2119" end="2129" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="2139" end="2148" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="2332" end="2343" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428643" start="2768" end="2792" title="Sawins pond" label="Sawins and Williams Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q167840" start="3270" end="3282" title="Hydro-Québec" label="Hydro-Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344199" start="3287" end="3306" title="Northeast Utilities" label="Northeast Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="3322" end="3349" title="High-voltage direct current" label="High-voltage direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q139415" start="3367" end="3382" title="Windsor, Quebec" label="Windsor, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563634" start="3404" end="3437" title="Quebec - New England Transmission" label="Quebec - New England Transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344199" start="3897" end="3916" title="Northeast Utilities" label="Northeast Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344199" start="4309" end="4326" title="Eversource Energy" label="Eversource Energy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748861" wikidata="Q330431" url="?curid=748861" title="Kermit Roosevelt">
<text>Kermit Roosevelt Sr. MC (October 10, 1889 – June 4, 1943) was an American businessman, soldier, explorer, and writer. A son of Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th President of the United States, Kermit graduated from Harvard College, served in both World Wars (with both the British and U.S. Armies), and explored two continents with his father. He fought a lifelong battle with depression and died by suicide while serving in the US Army in Alaska during World War II.

==Childhood and education==
Kermit was born at Sagamore Hill, the family estate in Oyster Bay, New York, the second son of Theodore Roosevelt, (1858–1919) and Edith Kermit Carow (1861–1948). He had an older half-sister Alice Lee Roosevelt (1884–1980), from his father&#x27;s first marriage to Alice Hathaway Lee (1861–1884), an elder brother, Theodore III (1887–1944), a younger sister, Ethel Carow Roosevelt (1891–1977), and two younger brothers; Archibald Bulloch &quot;Archie&quot; Roosevelt (1894–1979) and Quentin Roosevelt (1897–1918).

As a child, he had little resistance to illness and infection. He had a flair for language, however, and read avidly. He showed a writing talent that led to recording his experiences in World War I in a book.

After attending the Groton School, he enrolled at Harvard College. In 1909, as a freshman, he and his father (recently out of office as president)—both of whom loved nature and outdoor sports—went on a year-long expedition in Africa funded by the Smithsonian Institution. After this trip and a swing through Europe, Roosevelt returned to Harvard and completed four years of study in two and a half years, graduating with the Class of 1912. Like his father, while at Harvard he was a member of the Porcellian Club, a student social organization.

Roosevelt became active in the Boone and Crockett Club, a wildlife conservation organization that had been co-founded by his father. One commentator wrote that Kermit embodied the ideals of the club perhaps more purely than anyone, including his father.

==River of Doubt South American expedition==

One of Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s most popular books, &quot;Through the Brazilian Wilderness&quot;, recounted the expedition into the Amazon Basin Brazilian jungle in 1913–14. The father and son went on what would become known as the Roosevelt-Rondon Scientific Expedition, exploring the Brazilian jungle with explorer Colonel Cândido Rondon. During this expedition, they explored the River of Doubt, later renamed Rio Roosevelt in honor of the President, as well as a branch of that river named the Rio Kermit in his honor. The source of the river had been discovered by Rondon earlier, but it had never been fully explored or mapped.

At the time of the expedition, Roosevelt was newly engaged to Belle Wyatt Willard, daughter of the U.S. ambassador to Spain. His mother Edith was concerned about her husband&#x27;s health and the difficulties of a new expedition, and asked Kermit to accompany his father. He did so, reluctantly delaying his marriage.

The scope of the expedition expanded beyond the original plans, leaving the participants inadequately prepared for a trip tracing the River of Doubt from its source through hundreds of kilometers of uncharted rainforest. The climate and terrain, inadequate gear and food, and two deaths (one drowning, the other murder) turned a scientific expedition into an ordeal. Roosevelt&#x27;s father contracted malaria and a serious infection resulting from a minor leg wound, weakening him to the point that he considered taking a fatal dose of morphine rather than being a burden to his companions. Roosevelt told his father that he was bringing him back literally &quot;dead or alive&quot; and if he died, he would be an even bigger burden to the expedition. Although Roosevelt contracted malaria as well, he downplayed his sickness to save quinine for TR, nearly dying himself before the physician insisted on giving him the medication by injection. Roosevelt&#x27;s determination and his rope- and canoe-handling skills were instrumental in saving his father&#x27;s life. Nonetheless, TR was plagued by flareups of malaria and inflammation so severe that they required hospitalization.

Although Kermit and TR faced skepticism about their claims of navigating a completely uncharted river over 1000 km long, they eventually silenced their critics through TR&#x27;s oratory and his popular book, &quot;Through the Brazilian Wilderness.&quot; The 1913–14 expedition was later recounted in &quot;The River of Doubt&quot; by Candice Millard (Doubleday 2005).

==Marriage and children==

After the Amazon trip, in 1914 Kermit married Belle Wyatt Willard, daughter of the U.S. Ambassador to Spain, Joseph Edward Willard. They had four children: Kermit Roosevelt Jr., Joseph Willard Roosevelt, Belle Wyatt &quot;Clochette&quot;, and Dirck. His daughter, Clochette Roosevelt, married John Gorham Palfrey, who was dean of Columbia College and a member of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. 

==Military service in World War I==
From 1914 to 1916, Roosevelt was assistant manager for National City Bank in Buenos Aires.

In 1917, as he was about to be transferred to a Russian branch, the U.S. entered the World War. He attended the Plattsburg School for officers from May to July 1917 but resigned from the U.S. Army to join the British Army. On August 22, 1917, Roosevelt was appointed an honorary captain in the British Army. He saw hard fighting in the Near East, later transferring to the United States Army. While his other brothers had had summer training at Plattsburgh, New York, Roosevelt had missed out on this training.

Roosevelt joined the British Army to fight in the Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) theater of World War I. He was attached to the 14th Light Armoured Motor Battery of the Machine Gun Corps, but the British High Command decided they could not risk his life and so they made him an officer in charge of transport (Ford Model T cars). Within months of being posted to Mesopotamia, he mastered spoken as well as written Arabic and was often relied upon as a translator with the locals. He was awarded a Military Cross on August 26, 1918.

Roosevelt relinquished his British commission on April 28, 1918, and was transferred to the AEF in France. In 1918, he learned that his youngest brother Quentin, a pilot, had been shot down over France and had been buried by the Germans with full military honors.

He was commissioned a captain in the United States Army on May 12, 1918, and commanded Battery C, 7th Artillery of the 1st Division. He participated in the Meuse-Argonne Offensive near the end of the war. He returned to the United States on March 25, 1919, and was discharged from the Army two days later.

==Between the wars==

After the war, Roosevelt went into business; he founded the Roosevelt Steamship Company and the United States Lines. He continued to enjoy outdoor activities with his brothers. In 1919, he joined the Empire State Society of the Sons of the American Revolution, to which both his father and elder brother belonged.

In 1925, Roosevelt accompanied his brother Ted on a hunting expedition across the Himalayas, over uncharted mountain passes rising from the Vale of Kashmir through the ancient Silk Route into China, in search of the legendary bighorn wild sheep called &quot;Ovis poli&quot;. He and his brother Ted documented the trip in their book &quot;East of the Sun and West of the Moon&quot;. Several trophies collected during this expedition are on display in the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago. This expedition, financed by Museum trustee James Simpson, is sometimes called the &quot;James Simpson-Roosevelt Asiatic Expedition of the Field Museum of Natural History&quot;.

In 1928–1929, Kermit Roosevelt and his brother Ted were members of the Kelley-Roosevelts Asiatic Expedition. The Roosevelt brothers told the story of their part in the expedition in their book &quot;Trailing the Giant Panda&quot;.

Kermit Roosevelt served as vice president of the New York Zoological Society from 1937 to 1939.

==Service in World War II==
By October 14, 1939, when Britain was at war with Germany, Roosevelt had negotiated a commission as a Second Lieutenant in the Middlesex Regiment with the assistance of his friend, Winston Churchill, who was by then First Lord of the Admiralty. His first task was to lead a contingent of British volunteers for the Winter War in Finland. According to a contemporary story published in &quot;Picture Post&quot;, he had resigned from the British Army to lead the expedition. Among those photographed in the article are John Hurman and Edward Graham. Hurman describes himself as half-Irish and half-English and going as a pilot. His friend, using the pseudonym Edward Graham, also a pilot, was White Russian emigre Prince Emanuel Galitzine the son of Prince Vladimir Galitzine. However, before the expedition could be launched, Finland made peace with Russia. Roosevelt served with distinction in a raid into Norway and was later sent to North Africa, where there was little action at the time. While in Norway, he was injured during the Battle of Narvik. He resumed drinking and was debilitated by an enlarged liver complicated by a resurgence of malaria. At the end of 1940, he returned to England and was discharged from the army on health grounds on May 2, 1941, by which time he had once again reached the rank of captain. Roosevelt appealed this discharge all the way to the British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, who upheld the medical discharge.

When he returned to the US, he turned to drinking to forget his problems. His wife enlisted the help of his cousin, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who ordered the FBI to track him down, and he was brought back to his family. In late April 1942, his brother Archibald sought to have him committed to a sanitarium for a year; at month&#x27;s end, he agreed to a four-month stay at an institution in Hartford. To extricate him from his current situation, the President gave him a commission as a major in the United States Army, and had him transferred and posted to Fort Richardson, Alaska, where he worked as an intelligence officer and helped establish a territorial militia of Eskimos and Aleuts. He was a member of Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 1685 in Anchorage, Alaska.

==Death==
Roosevelt died in Alaska on June 4, 1943, in his room at Fort Richardson, from suicide by a gunshot to the head. He was discovered by Dr. Sanford Couch Monroe, who later filed the autopsy report. His death was reported to his mother, Edith, as a heart attack. He was interred in Fort Richardson National Cemetery near Anchorage, where a memorial stone gateway was erected in his honor in 1949.

==Legacy==
The town of Kermit, Texas, was named for him (he had visited Winkler County, Texas, a few months earlier to hunt antelope). The town of Kermit, West Virginia, is also named after him.
The &quot;Luzon&quot;-class repair ship was named in his honor. The town of Kermit, North Dakota was also named after him.

There is an annual lecture series given in the United States by a British Army general officer and in the United Kingdom by a U.S. Army general officer named in memory of Kermit Roosevelt.

==Awards==
===United States===
*World War I Victory Medal
*Army of Occupation of Germany Medal
*Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal
*World War II Victory Medal

===Foreign decorations===
*Military Cross (United Kingdom)
*Montenegro War Cross

===Foreign medals===
*British War Medal (United Kingdom)
*Victory Medal (United Kingdom)
*1939-1945 Star (United Kingdom)
*Africa Star (United Kingdom)
*War Medal 1939–1945 (United Kingdom)

==In fiction==
Kermit Roosevelt appears as a minor character in the Wilbur Smith novel &quot;Assegai&quot; on safari in East Africa with his father.

Kermit Roosevelt appears in the second episode of 1992&#x27;s &quot;The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles&quot; television series.

He also appears fleetingly (in a dream) in William Boyd&#x27;s novel &quot;An Ice-Cream War&quot;.

The book &quot;Roosevelt&#x27;s Beast&quot; by Louis Bayard is a fictitious story of the Rondon-Roosevelt expedition, narrated by Kermit Roosevelt.

Kermit Roosevelt appears as a main character in the James Ross historical fiction &quot;Hunting Teddy Roosevelt&quot; about the safari in East Africa with his father.

Kermit Roosevelt appears in the fiction book &quot;The President&#x27;s Daughter&quot; by Kimberly Brubaker Bradley which is based on Kermit&#x27;s sister Ethel Roosevelt Derby and their time in the White House.

==Works==
* &quot;War in the Garden of Eden&quot;: memoirs from World War I
* &quot;Trailing the Giant Panda&quot; (with Theodore Roosevelt Jr.)
* &quot;The Boy Scout&#x27;s Book of True Adventure, Fourteen Honorary Scouts,&quot; with Foreword By Theodore Roosevelt and Biographical Notes By James E. West. Published by G. P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons, New York (1931) – Essays include: &quot;Adventurous Hunting&quot; by Kermit Roosevelt, &quot;Scouting Against the Apache&quot; by Frederick R. Burnham, &quot;How I Learned to Fly&quot; by Orville Wright, &quot;An Arctic Mirage&quot; by Donald B. MacMillan, &quot;In the Arctic&quot; by Lincoln Ellsworth, &quot;A Tobacco Trade&quot; by George Bird Grinnell, &quot;The Black Ghosts of the Tana River&quot; by James L. Clark, &quot;My Flight Over the Atlantic&quot; by Richard Evelyn Byrd, &quot;In the Jungles of Cochin-China&quot; by Theodore Roosevelt, &quot;Shipwreck&quot; by Robert A. Bartlett, &quot;Written in the Air&quot; by Charles Lindbergh, &quot;Tiger! Tiger!&quot; by Merian C. Cooper, &quot;The First Crossing of the Polar Sea&quot; by Lincoln Ellsworth, &quot;Bandits&quot; by Clifford H. Pope, and &quot;Adventure&quot; by Stewart Edward White. All 13 photo plates of the honorary Scouts are present; both Roosevelts in the same photo.
* &quot;East of the Sun and West of the Moon&quot; (with Theodore Roosevelt Jr.)
* &quot;The Long Trail&quot;, 1921, Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons, New York

==See also==
* Kermit Roosevelt, Jr. (son)
* Kermit Roosevelt III (grandson)

==References and notes==
==Further reading==
* &quot;The River of Doubt&quot; by Candice Millard (Doubleday 2005), 
* Edward Renehan, 1998, &quot;The Lion&#x27;s Pride: Theodore Roosevelt and His Family in Peace and War,&quot; Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press, and 0195127196, see accessed 16 June 2015.
* William E. Lemanski, 2011, &quot;Lost in the Shadow of Fame: The Neglected Story of Kermit Roosevelt: A Gallant and Tragic American,&quot; Camp Hill, PA: Sunbury Press.
* Meyer, Karl E. and Shareen Blair Brysac. &quot;Kingmakers: The Invention of the Modern Middle East&quot; (2009) pp 322–47.

==External links==
* 
**Project Gutenberg &quot;War in the Garden of Eden&quot;
*Almanac of Theodore Roosevelt: Kermit Roosevelt 
*Family Photos 
*Theodore Roosevelt Association
*Jaguar rug from South American expedition, Kansas Historical Society collections
*Death of Kermit Roosevelt </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q330431" start="0" end="20" title="Kermit Roosevelt" label="Kermit Roosevelt Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="21" end="23" title="Military Cross" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="127" end="145" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="151" end="186" title="List of Presidents of the United States" label="26th President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="268" end="275" title="British Army" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="280" end="291" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811372" start="435" end="441" title="Territory of Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="449" end="461" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398976" start="511" end="524" title="Sagamore Hill (house)" label="Sagamore Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477026" start="547" end="567" title="Oyster Bay (hamlet), New York" label="Oyster Bay, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q237590" start="623" end="641" title="Edith Roosevelt" label="Edith Kermit Carow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836665" start="683" end="702" title="Alice Roosevelt Longworth" label="Alice Lee Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836599" start="757" end="775" title="Alice Hathaway Lee Roosevelt" label="Alice Hathaway Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q449894" start="807" end="819" title="Theodore Roosevelt Jr." label="Theodore III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403210" start="851" end="872" title="Ethel Roosevelt Derby" label="Ethel Carow Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786498" start="912" end="958" title="Archibald Roosevelt" label="Archibald Bulloch &amp;quot;Archie&amp;quot; Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889668" start="975" end="992" title="Quentin Roosevelt" label="Quentin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1193" end="1204" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q872541" start="1237" end="1250" title="Groton School" label="Groton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="1267" end="1282" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019548" start="1419" end="1439" title="Smithsonian–Roosevelt African Expedition" label="year-long expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="1464" end="1487" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1555" end="1562" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975475" start="1714" end="1729" title="Porcellian Club" label="Porcellian Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943668" start="1794" end="1817" title="Boone and Crockett Club" label="Boone and Crockett Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="2197" end="2209" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366519" start="2297" end="2335" title="Roosevelt-Rondon Scientific Expedition" label="Roosevelt-Rondon Scientific Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q961743" start="2390" end="2404" title="Cândido Rondon" label="Cândido Rondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478117" start="2448" end="2462" title="River of Doubt" label="River of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478117" start="2478" end="2491" title="Roosevelt River" label="Rio Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="3228" end="3238" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="3421" end="3428" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="3854" end="3861" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10381751" start="4508" end="4526" title="The River of Doubt" label="The River of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031695" start="4536" end="4551" title="Candice Millard" label="Candice Millard"/>
<link wikidata="Q166792" start="4707" end="4728" title="Joseph Edward Willard" label="Joseph Edward Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739295" start="4754" end="4774" title="Kermit Roosevelt Jr." label="Kermit Roosevelt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6287958" start="4776" end="4800" title="Joseph Willard Roosevelt" label="Joseph Willard Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64013455" start="4891" end="4910" title="John Gorham Palfrey (academic)" label="John Gorham Palfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569677" start="4928" end="4944" title="Columbia College (New York)" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="4965" end="5003" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="United States Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045073" start="5098" end="5116" title="National City Corp." label="National City Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="5120" end="5132" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="5414" end="5421" title="captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="5580" end="5601" title="Plattsburgh (city), New York" label="Plattsburgh, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5668" end="5680" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5697" end="5708" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5738" end="5749" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723656" start="5815" end="5832" title="Machine Gun Corps" label="Machine Gun Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="5956" end="5968" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="6143" end="6157" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q464176" start="6271" end="6274" title="American Expeditionary Force" label="AEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889668" start="6332" end="6339" title="Quentin Roosevelt" label="Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6408" end="6415" title="German Empire" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644023" start="6531" end="6555" title="7th Field Artillery Regiment" label="Battery C, 7th Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q163659" start="6563" end="6575" title="1st Infantry Division (United States)" label="1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926157" start="6600" end="6623" title="Meuse-Argonne Offensive" label="Meuse-Argonne Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q477312" start="6869" end="6888" title="United States Lines" label="United States Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072229" start="7001" end="7032" title="Sons of the American Revolution" label="Sons of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q449894" start="7131" end="7134" title="Theodore Roosevelt Jr." label="Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361576" start="7228" end="7243" title="Vale of Kashmir" label="Vale of Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="7264" end="7274" title="Silk Route" label="Silk Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555464" start="7346" end="7355" title="Marco Polo sheep" label="Ovis poli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858321" start="7669" end="7762" title="Simpson-Roosevelts Asiatic Expedition" label="&amp;quot;James Simpson-Roosevelt Asiatic Expedition of the Field Museum of Natural History&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858031" start="7836" end="7872" title="Kelley-Roosevelts Asiatic Expedition" label="Kelley-Roosevelts Asiatic Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118246" start="8046" end="8073" title="New York Zoological Society" label="New York Zoological Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8224" end="8241" title="second lieutenant#United States" label="Second Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841933" start="8249" end="8267" title="Middlesex Regiment" label="Middlesex Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="8303" end="8320" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="8338" end="8365" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="8437" end="8447" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q511131" start="8513" end="8525" title="Picture Post" label="Picture Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q75388818" start="8877" end="8895" title="Vladimir Galitzine" label="Vladimir Galitzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="8947" end="8954" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="9028" end="9034" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q708217" start="9157" end="9173" title="Battle of Narvik" label="Battle of Narvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="9230" end="9235" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="9267" end="9274" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9524" end="9541" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="9704" end="9729" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="9747" end="9750" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786498" start="9841" end="9850" title="Archibald Roosevelt" label="Archibald"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="9981" end="9989" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10090" end="10108" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471914" start="10148" end="10163" title="Fort Richardson (Alaska)" label="Fort Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811372" start="10165" end="10171" title="Territory of Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q131242" start="10262" end="10268" title="Eskimo" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="10274" end="10279" title="Aleut people" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556413" start="10301" end="10325" title="Veterans of Foreign Wars" label="Veterans of Foreign Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="10339" end="10356" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471914" start="10426" end="10441" title="Fort Richardson (Alaska)" label="Fort Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471918" start="10648" end="10681" title="Fort Richardson National Cemetery" label="Fort Richardson National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q946227" start="10787" end="10800" title="Kermit, Texas" label="Kermit, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q114479" start="10836" end="10857" title="Winkler County, Texas" label="Winkler County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="10888" end="10896" title="pronghorn" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727774" start="10911" end="10932" title="Kermit, West Virginia" label="Kermit, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="11149" end="11161" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="11209" end="11218" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409491" start="11305" end="11330" title="World War I Victory Medal (United States)" label="World War I Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287176" start="11332" end="11367" title="Army of Occupation of Germany Medal" label="Army of Occupation of Germany Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338071" start="11369" end="11399" title="Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal" label="Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079534" start="11401" end="11427" title="World War II Victory Medal" label="World War II Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="11456" end="11470" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q920315" start="11533" end="11550" title="British War Medal" label="British War Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410805" start="11569" end="11582" title="Victory Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309070" start="11601" end="11615" title="1939-1945 Star" label="1939-1945 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701827" start="11634" end="11645" title="Africa Star" label="Africa Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q684444" start="11664" end="11683" title="War Medal 1939–1945" label="War Medal 1939–1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q357970" start="11770" end="11782" title="Wilbur Smith" label="Wilbur Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793747" start="11795" end="11802" title="Assegai (novel)" label="Assegai"/>
<link wikidata="Q685962" start="11920" end="11954" title="The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles" label="The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q722103" start="12024" end="12036" title="William Boyd (writer)" label="William Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q228988" start="12056" end="12072" title="An Ice-Cream War" label="An Ice-Cream War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686731" start="12128" end="12140" title="Louis Bayard" label="Louis Bayard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12282" end="12292" title="James Ross (American author from Wyoming)" label="James Ross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12318" end="12341" title="Hunting Teddy Roosevelt" label="Hunting Teddy Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43227885" start="12488" end="12513" title="Kimberly Brubaker Bradley" label="Kimberly Brubaker Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968624" start="12629" end="12654" title="War in the Garden of Eden" label="War in the Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="12858" end="12876" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133242" start="12903" end="12916" title="James E. West (Scouting)" label="James E. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q458036" start="13087" end="13107" title="Frederick Russell Burnham" label="Frederick R. Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="13145" end="13159" title="Wright brothers" label="Orville Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294023" start="13193" end="13212" title="Donald B. MacMillan" label="Donald B. MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379417" start="13243" end="13260" title="Lincoln Ellsworth" label="Lincoln Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398792" start="13293" end="13313" title="George Bird Grinnell" label="George Bird Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137525" start="13365" end="13379" title="James L. Clark" label="James L. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="13424" end="13443" title="Richard Evelyn Byrd" label="Richard Evelyn Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="13491" end="13509" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750909" start="13536" end="13554" title="Robert A. Bartlett" label="Robert A. Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="13590" end="13607" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q446427" start="13638" end="13654" title="Merian C. Cooper" label="Merian C. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q379417" start="13707" end="13724" title="Lincoln Ellsworth" label="Lincoln Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979083" start="13749" end="13765" title="Clifford H. Pope" label="Clifford H. Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468433" start="13796" end="13816" title="Stewart Edward White" label="Stewart Edward White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739295" start="14081" end="14102" title="Kermit Roosevelt, Jr." label="Kermit Roosevelt, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6394075" start="14111" end="14131" title="Kermit Roosevelt III" label="Kermit Roosevelt III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031695" start="14225" end="14240" title="Candice Millard" label="Candice Millard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="14385" end="14408" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748867" wikidata="Q1577959" url="?curid=748867" title="San Bernardino Mountains">
<text>The San Bernardino Mountains are a high and rugged mountain range in Southern California in the United States. Situated north and northeast of San Bernardino and spanning two California counties, the range tops out at at San Gorgonio Mountain – the tallest peak in Southern California. The San Bernardinos form a significant region of wilderness and are popular for hiking and skiing.

The mountains were formed about eleven million years ago by tectonic activity along the San Andreas Fault, and are still actively rising. Many local rivers originate in the range, which receives significantly more precipitation than the surrounding desert. The range&#x27;s unique and varying environment allows it to maintain some of the greatest biodiversity in the state. For over 10,000 years, the San Bernardinos and their surroundings have been inhabited by indigenous peoples, who used the mountains as a summer hunting ground.

Spanish explorers first encountered the San Bernardinos in the late 18th century, naming the eponymous San Bernardino Valley at its base. European settlement of the region progressed slowly until 1860, when the mountains became the focus of the largest gold rush ever to occur in Southern California. Waves of settlers brought in by the gold rush populated the lowlands around the San Bernardinos, and began to tap the mountains&#x27; rich timber and water resources on a large scale by the late 19th century.

Recreational development of the range began in the early 20th century, when mountain resorts were built around new irrigation reservoirs. Since then, the mountains have been extensively engineered for transportation and water supply purposes. Four major state highways and the California Aqueduct traverse the mountains today; these developments have all had significant impacts on area wildlife and plant communities.

==Geography and climate==
The San Bernardinos run for approximately from Cajon Pass in the northwest – which separates them from the San Gabriel Mountains – to San Gorgonio Pass, across which lie the San Jacinto Mountains, in the southeast. The Morongo Valley in the southeast divides the range from the Little San Bernardino Mountains. Encompassing roughly , the mountains lie mostly in San Bernardino County, with a small southern portion reaching into Riverside County. The range divides three major physiographic regions: the highly urbanized Inland Empire to the southwest, the Coachella Valley in the southeast, and the Mojave Desert to the north. Most of the range lies within the boundaries of the San Bernardino National Forest.

From its northwestern end, the crest of the mountains rises steadily until they are interrupted by the gorge of Bear Creek. The northern part of the San Bernardinos is a large upland plateau characterized by a series of extensive subalpine basins, including Big Bear Valley, and is home to several large water supply reservoirs. South of the Big Bear area the range is cut by the Santa Ana Canyon, the broad valley of the Santa Ana River, and rises dramatically to culminate at Mount San Gorgonio and eleven other peaks that exceed in elevation. The mountains feature a steep drop into the Coachella Valley and San Gorgonio Pass – the latter of which is one of the deepest mountain passes in the United States, exceeding the Grand Canyon&#x27;s depth by over .

Many cities lie at the base of the San Bernardino Mountains. These include San Bernardino, Redlands and Yucaipa in the south; Yucca Valley to the east; and Hesperia to the northwest. In addition, there are several mid-sized to large towns in the mountains themselves, including Big Bear Lake, Big Bear City, Crestline, Lake Arrowhead and Running Springs. Cities within the San Bernardino Mountains total a population of about 44,000, with this number sometimes increasing tenfold during peak tourist season. Several regional streams and rivers also have their headwaters in the mountains. The principal drainage is provided by the Santa Ana River, which runs westwards into the Pacific Ocean in Orange County. Other streams flowing off the mountains include the Whitewater River, flowing southeast through the Coachella Valley into the Salton Sea, and the Mojave River, which drains northwards into the Mojave Desert.

The San Bernardino Mountains (along with the adjacent San Gabriel and San Jacinto Mountains) are a humid island in the mostly semi-arid southern California coastal plain. Parts of the San Bernardino Mountains have annual precipitation totals in excess of 40 inches (e.g. Lake Arrowhead and Barton Flats areas), and provide an important water resource for the coastal plain below. Most of the precipitation falls between November and April; summers are mostly dry except for infrequent thunderstorms during late summer. During the colder winter storms, snow can fall below 2,000 feet, but most usually falls above 6,000 feet. Ski resorts (mostly in the Big Bear area) capitalize on this snowfall, the most reliable in California south of the Sierra Nevada Mountains.

==Geology==

The San Bernardinos are part of the Transverse Ranges of Southern California, a mountain chain formed by tectonic forces between the North American and Pacific Plates along the San Andreas Fault. An early version of the range rose in the Miocene, between eleven and five million years ago, but has largely eroded. The range was shaped into its present form during the Pleistocene epoch beginning approximately two million years ago, with regional uplift continuing to the present. The rocks that make up the mountains are much more ancient than the mountains themselves – ranging from 18 million years to 1.7 billion years old. The San Andreas Fault was also responsible for the formation of both major mountain passes that mark the east and west ends of the range.

These mountains are shaped by several primary tectonic or fault blocks – the Big Bear block, which forms the large montane plateau that characterizes the northern portions of the range; and the more complex and fractured San Gorgonio, Wilson Creek and Yucaipa Ridge blocks, which form the rugged and heavily dissected southern parts of the mountains. Because of their large, steep rise above the surrounding terrain, the San Bernardinos have been subject to great amounts of erosion that have carved out numerous river gorges. Rocks and sediment from the mountains are deposited on the surrounding valley floors as massive alluvial fans. Regional alluvial deposits can reach depths of or more, and their permeable soils constitute several major groundwater basins.

==History==

===Indigenous peoples===
Archaeological discoveries in the San Bernardino Valley suggest that humans have populated the region for at least 10,000-12,000 years. Several Native American groups held the lands surrounding the San Bernardinos. These included the Tongva, who occupied the Inland Empire area southwest of the mountains; the Cahuilla, who lived in the Coachella Valley and Salton Sea basin; and the Serrano and Chemehuevi peoples, whose territory comprised land north and northeast of the San Bernardinos, adjacent to the Mojave Desert. Most of these tribes did not have permanent settlements in the mountains, with the possible exception of a few groups of Serrano.

Indigenous peoples traveled into the mountains in the summer to hunt deer and rabbits, gather acorns, berries and nuts, and seek refuge from the desert heat. They established well-traveled trade routes, some of which were later used by Europeans to explore and settle the region. The precipitous Mojave Road (or Mojave Trail) crested the San Bernardinos east of Cajon Pass and permitted trade between people of the Inland Empire basin and the Mojave Desert. San Gorgonio Pass, which forms the largest natural break in the Transverse Ranges, also allowed interaction between coastal and desert tribes. River canyons, especially those of the Mojave and Santa Ana, provided the major means of entry to the mountains. Many archaeological sites have been discovered along Deep Creek, a tributary of the Mojave River, in particular.

===Explorers and early settlers===
During the 17th and 18th centuries, various Spanish explorers passed through coastal Southern California and claimed the area for Spain. In 1769, the Spanish government began an effort to bring what they called Alta California under their control and introduce Christianity to native peoples through the construction of missions. It was not until 1772 when the military governor of Alta California, Pedro Fages, became the first European known to reach the San Bernardino Mountains. Although the original purpose of his expedition was to pursue deserters from the Spanish army, he ended up venturing into not just the San Bernardinos but also the San Jacinto Mountains, the Mojave Desert, and eventually north into the Central Valley.
The San Bernardinos and their surrounds were sporadically explored throughout the next 50 years or so - first by Francisco Garcés, the first known European to use the Mojave Road, in 1776, followed by José Maria de Zalvidea, who surveyed the Mojave River area in 1806. In 1810, Francisco Dumetz led a small company to build a temporary chapel near what is now Redlands. On May 20, the Feast Day of Bernardino of Siena, Dumetz named the San Bernardino Valley. This name was applied to San Bernardino Peak by 1835, and was in wide use for the entire range by 1849.

In 1819, San Bernardino de Sena Estancia was created near present-day San Bernardino as an outpost of nearby Mission San Gabriel Arcángel. Although sometimes referred to as an &quot;asistencia&quot;, or &quot;a mission on a small scale with all the requisites for a mission, and with Divine Service held regularly on days of obligation, except that it lacked a resident priest&quot;, San Bernardino was an &quot;estancia&quot;, or cattle ranch. In 1820, a -long irrigation ditch or &quot;zanja&quot; was dug using Native American labor to furnish water from Mill Creek, a major stream flowing out of the San Bernardinos, to the estancia and surrounding croplands. For the next twenty years, the Spanish – then the &quot;Californios&quot; under newly independent Mexico – practiced agriculture and ranching at the foot of the mountains.

The high country of the mountains remained largely unexplored until 1845, when Benjamin D. Wilson led a party of 22 men from a rancho near present-day Riverside to catch several Mohave cattle rustlers who had fled into the mountains. Wilson was the first recorded European to see the Big Bear Valley, and named Bear Lake (today&#x27;s Baldwin Lake) for the abundance of California grizzly in the area. The party captured and skinned more than twenty bears. Later, they found and arrested the rustlers, who were hiding along the Mojave River. Wilson&#x27;s expedition opened the interior of the San Bernardinos to later exploration, and discouraged Native Americans such as the Mohave from staging similar raids over the mountains.
Beginning in 1851, Mormon colonists began emigrating to the San Bernardino Valley. The Mormons bought and subsequently split up Rancho San Bernardino, and greatly improved the area&#x27;s agricultural production by bringing in thousands of head of livestock and overhauling the local irrigation network. In order to obtain lumber for their settlements, they also began the first large-scale logging operations in the San Bernardino Mountains, starting in the Mill Creek valley. Luis Vignes built the first sawmill in the range sometime between 1851 and 1853. By 1854, six lumber mills were in operation in the mountains, some as high as the crest of the range three-quarters of a mile above San Bernardino, accessed by a twisting road through Waterman Canyon. Some of these mills were driven by waterwheels, although most were steam powered.

Prospectors William F. Holcomb and Ben Choteau&#x27;s 1860 discovery of gold on Holcomb Creek kicked off a flood of gold seekers to the San Bernardino Mountains. Mining boomtowns, including Belleville, Clapboard Town, Union Town, Bairdstown and Doble, were established almost overnight. Belleville even exceeded the population of San Bernardino itself for a short time and narrowly lost to the latter city for election as the county seat. Numerous mills and processing plants were constructed in the area, which became known as Holcomb Valley. In 1873, Eli &quot;Lucky&quot; Baldwin built California&#x27;s largest stamp mill in Holcomb Valley. Although another major gold strike was made in that same year, area deposits petered out by the 1880s, and the mountains were quickly depopulated, with most of the miners settling down in the San Bernardino Valley and the Mojave Desert near present-day Hesperia. Many structures built by miners, including chutes, sluices and a few cabins, can still be found in the area today.

===Reservoirs and recreation===
In 1880, Frank Elwood Brown designed the first dam in the Big Bear Valley, forming Big Bear Lake – the world&#x27;s largest artificial reservoir at the time – to supply water to citrus farms around San Bernardino. By 1910, a new dam had been built, increasing the size of the lake threefold. An unintended effect of the lake was to dramatically increase tourism in the San Bernardino Mountains, and its shores were developed with lodges and visitor facilities by the 1920s. The old logging camp of Big Bear Lake was expanded to accommodate increasing numbers of tourists from all over Southern California.

Originally proposed in 1891 by the Arrowhead Reservoir and Power Company – and reportedly inspired by the success of the Big Bear Lake project – Lake Arrowhead was to be one of a series of three reservoirs that would divert water draining off the northwestern San Bernardino Mountains into the San Bernardino Valley, and furnish water to a 260 KW hydroelectric plant. Although the project was never completed to full extent, Arrowhead became one of the most popular fishing destinations in Southern California. In the early 20th century, John Baylis built the Pinecrest Resort on Lake Arrowhead. This was followed by several other tourist developments, including the Skyland Inn and Thousand Pines Camp. Most early tourists arrived by stagecoach, though in time the old Mormon logging road through Waterman Canyon was overhauled, allowing for the passage of automobiles.
Development of resorts also proliferated on rivers and high mountain valleys. The Seven Oaks Camp was established on the banks of the Santa Ana River in 1890, and resorts also grew up at Crestline and Running Springs in higher regions of the San Bernardino Mountains. Snow in the San Bernardinos was seen as an obstacle before the 1920s and practically shut down recreation in the winter. However, more and more Southern Californians braved the dangers of winter travel in the mountains, and Lake Arrowhead became a sought-after winter destination by the 1930s.

Skiing did not become a popular recreational activity in the mountains until a simple sling lift was built at Big Bear in 1938. By 1949, a -long chair lift was built, hugely increasing the amount of skiers the area&#x27;s resorts could accommodate. Known as the Lynn Lift, it operated until 1970, but was demolished in 1981 due to its limited capacity. Tommi Tyndall, who founded ski schools at Big Bear, Mill Creek, Snow Summit and Sugarloaf Mountain, is widely credited for introducing and later advocating the sport in the San Bernardino Mountains, as well as for bringing snowmaking technology, without which the present-day ski industry would be severely crippled during dry winters.

==Infrastructure==

===Transportation===
During the early 20th century, the roads that serviced the San Bernardino Mountains were steep and narrow. Conflicts occurred between those who believed that the automobile could provide fast and cheap transportation up the steep grades of the mountains, and those who worried that cars were dangerous and would cause accidents with the stagecoaches then in use. In 1908, W.C. Vaughan drove up the Waterman Canyon road to Lake Arrowhead in protest of county restrictions, with police in hot pursuit. In spite of a total ban on automobiles imposed by the county the following year, Jack Heyser took a car down the narrow stage roads around modern-day Crestline in 1910, proving that the mountains could be safely serviced by automobiles.
By 1911, cars had largely replaced horse-drawn carts as the primary mode of transport in the mountains, and new toll roads were constructed through the range to service them. Among the first were roads through Cajon Pass, City Creek Canyon (SR 330), and Mill Creek and Santa Ana Canyons (SR 38). The largest and most famous road through the San Bernardinos – California State Route 18, more popularly known as the Rim of the World Highway for as it winds through the mountains – was dedicated on July 18, 1915. Traveling from Crestline through Big Bear City and north into the Mojave Desert, the Rim of the World Highway is one of the most spectacular roads in Southern California, affording motorists wide views of the San Bernardino Valley, Santa Ana Canyon, and Big Bear Lake.

===Water management===
In the late 1950s, work began on the California Aqueduct, a massive system of canals and pipelines designed to bring water from Northern California to growing cities in the parched south. The East Branch of the aqueduct passes over the San Bernardino Mountains through a complex arrangement of pumping stations, reservoirs and power stations. The aqueduct feeds Silverwood Lake, a large reservoir created by the construction of a dam on the northern flank of the San Bernardinos in 1973. From Silverwood, the water passes through the mountains via the San Bernardino Tunnel, and drops down to the Devil Canyon Power Plant in the San Bernardino Valley, using the enormous hydraulic head afforded by the mountains to generate up to 276 MW of power.

The streams of the San Bernardino Mountains are also prone to flash floods, a danger that has prompted the construction of numerous flood control dams throughout the range. The largest of these is Seven Oaks Dam – the sixth highest dam in the United States – on the Santa Ana River. In 1969, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers deemed the Santa Ana the greatest flood threat in the United States west of the Mississippi River because of its course through heavily developed areas. Completed in 1999, the dam is designed to completely contain a 350-year flood. Many other dams, including Mojave Forks Dam on the Mojave River and various retention basins and check dams on smaller drainages, provide more localized flood and sediment control.

==Ecology and wildlife==
The San Bernardino Mountains, along with the nearby San Gabriel and San Jacinto ranges, is considered a sky island – a high mountain region whose plants and animals vary dramatically from those in the surrounding semi-arid lands. The San Bernardinos in particular comprise the largest forested region in Southern California, and support some 1,600 species of plants. Foothill regions are primarily composed of chaparral and evergreen oak woodland communities, with a transition to forests of deciduous oak, yellow pine, Jeffrey pine, incense cedar and several fir species at elevations above . Deeper within the mountains, perennial streams fed by springs and lakes nourish stands of alders, willows and cottonwoods.

About 440 species of wildlife inhabit the mountains, including many endangered species such as the San Bernardino flying squirrel, California Spotted Owl, Mountain yellow-legged frog, Southern rubber boa, and Andrew&#x27;s marbled butterfly. The mountains once had an abundant population of California grizzly, but hunting eliminated their populations by 1906. Black bears roam the highlands today, but they are not native to the region: they were imported from the Sierra Nevada by the California Department of Fish and Game in the 1930s, in part to attract tourists to the mountains.

==See also==
*List of mountain ranges of California
*San Gorgonio Wilderness
*Santa Ana Mountains

==References==
==Works cited==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==

==External links==

*Restoring the San Bernardino Mountains 
*San Bernardino Mountains at SummitPost
*San Bernardino National Forest
*San Gorgonio Wilderness Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1577959" start="4" end="28" title="San Bernardino Mountains" label="San Bernardino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="51" end="65" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="69" end="88" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="143" end="157" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364408" start="221" end="242" title="San Gorgonio Mountain" label="San Gorgonio Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="377" end="380" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="474" end="491" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="922" end="929" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860775" start="1025" end="1046" title="San Bernardino Valley" label="San Bernardino Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q400256" start="1687" end="1701" title="State highways in California" label="state highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307376" start="1710" end="1729" title="California Aqueduct" label="California Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886676" start="1926" end="1936" title="Cajon Pass" label="Cajon Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="1986" end="2007" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897453" start="2013" end="2030" title="San Gorgonio Pass" label="San Gorgonio Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337721" start="2053" end="2074" title="San Jacinto Mountains" label="San Jacinto Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651844" start="2157" end="2188" title="Little San Bernardino Mountains" label="Little San Bernardino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q108053" start="2241" end="2262" title="San Bernardino County" label="San Bernardino County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108111" start="2308" end="2324" title="Riverside County" label="Riverside County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331865" start="2436" end="2452" title="Coachella Valley" label="Coachella Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="2479" end="2492" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413436" start="2559" end="2589" title="San Bernardino National Forest" label="San Bernardino National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876383" start="2704" end="2714" title="Bear Creek (Santa Ana River)" label="Bear Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761189" start="3014" end="3029" title="Santa Ana River" label="Santa Ana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q118841" start="3317" end="3329" title="Grand Canyon" label="Grand Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753830" start="3445" end="3453" title="Redlands, California" label="Redlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q598567" start="3458" end="3465" title="Yucaipa, California" label="Yucaipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q862684" start="3480" end="3492" title="Yucca Valley, California" label="Yucca Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q773516" start="3510" end="3518" title="Hesperia, California" label="Hesperia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430708" start="3632" end="3645" title="Big Bear Lake, California" label="Big Bear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q542794" start="3647" end="3660" title="Big Bear City, California" label="Big Bear City"/>
<link wikidata="Q522914" start="3662" end="3671" title="Crestline, California" label="Crestline"/>
<link wikidata="Q979424" start="3673" end="3687" title="Lake Arrowhead, California" label="Lake Arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966095" start="3692" end="3707" title="Running Springs, California" label="Running Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="3914" end="3924" title="headwaters" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4032" end="4045" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="4049" end="4062" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996346" start="4116" end="4132" title="Whitewater River (California)" label="Whitewater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q503301" start="4190" end="4200" title="Salton Sea" label="Salton Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535751" start="4210" end="4222" title="Mojave River" label="Mojave River"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="5089" end="5106" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="5186" end="5200" title="North American Plate" label="North American"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="5205" end="5212" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="5230" end="5247" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="5291" end="5298" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="5421" end="5432" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q992062" start="5878" end="5890" title="Fault-block mountain" label="fault blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="6443" end="6455" title="alluvial fan" label="alluvial fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="6565" end="6576" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6768" end="6783" title="Indigenous peoples of the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479279" start="6858" end="6864" title="Tongva" label="Tongva"/>
<link wikidata="Q547748" start="6934" end="6942" title="Cahuilla" label="Cahuilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q617532" start="7008" end="7015" title="Serrano people" label="Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q283510" start="7020" end="7030" title="Chemehuevi" label="Chemehuevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895010" start="7573" end="7584" title="Mojave Road" label="Mojave Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="8460" end="8468" title="Spanish missions in California" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q389243" start="8539" end="8550" title="Pedro Fages" label="Pedro Fages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="8859" end="8873" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622310" start="8988" end="9004" title="Francisco Garcés" label="Francisco Garcés"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293360" start="9076" end="9098" title="José Maria de Zalvidea" label="José Maria de Zalvidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483330" start="9153" end="9169" title="Francisco Dumetz" label="Francisco Dumetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q316295" start="9273" end="9292" title="Bernardino of Siena" label="Bernardino of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413445" start="9448" end="9479" title="San Bernardino de Sena Estancia" label="San Bernardino de Sena Estancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939046" start="9548" end="9576" title="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel" label="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q613739" start="9851" end="9859" title="estancia" label="estancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858253" start="9997" end="10007" title="Mill Creek (Southern California)" label="Mill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="10159" end="10169" title="Californio" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="10183" end="10200" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="newly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888476" start="10355" end="10373" title="Benjamin D. Wilson" label="Benjamin D. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679045" start="10403" end="10409" title="Ranchos of California" label="rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q49243" start="10427" end="10436" title="Riverside, California" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q921253" start="10454" end="10460" title="Mohave people" label="Mohave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850572" start="10611" end="10623" title="Baldwin Lake (San Bernardino County, California)" label="Baldwin Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565286" start="10646" end="10664" title="California grizzly" label="California grizzly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="11026" end="11032" title="Mormon" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291226" start="11135" end="11156" title="Rancho San Bernardino" label="Rancho San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008806" start="11862" end="11880" title="William F. Holcomb" label="William F. Holcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697855" start="12403" end="12432" title="Lucky Baldwin" label="Eli &amp;quot;Lucky&amp;quot; Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q364000" start="12465" end="12475" title="stamp mill" label="stamp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14681604" start="12989" end="13002" title="Big Bear Lake" label="Big Bear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352879" start="13658" end="13672" title="Lake Arrowhead Reservoir" label="Lake Arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="13857" end="13859" title="kilowatt" label="KW"/>
<link wikidata="Q522914" start="14571" end="14580" title="Crestline, California" label="Crestline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966095" start="14585" end="14600" title="Running Springs, California" label="Running Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548314" start="15364" end="15375" title="Snow Summit" label="Snow Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635015" start="15380" end="15398" title="Sugarloaf Mountain (San Bernardino County, California)" label="Sugarloaf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q720493" start="15523" end="15533" title="snowmaking" label="snowmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123143" start="16637" end="16647" title="City Creek (California)" label="City Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q624283" start="16656" end="16662" title="California State Route 330" label="SR 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q624342" start="16703" end="16708" title="California State Route 38" label="SR 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q624327" start="16774" end="16799" title="California State Route 18" label="California State Route 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307376" start="17256" end="17275" title="California Aqueduct" label="California Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="17347" end="17366" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348010" start="17581" end="17596" title="Silverwood Lake" label="Silverwood Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q369743" start="17890" end="17904" title="hydraulic head" label="hydraulic head"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="17953" end="17955" title="Megawatt" label="MW"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="18029" end="18040" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275150" start="18164" end="18178" title="Seven Oaks Dam" label="Seven Oaks Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="18263" end="18291" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="18372" end="18389" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183619" start="18551" end="18567" title="Mojave Forks Dam" label="Mojave Forks Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413117" start="18600" end="18615" title="retention basin" label="retention basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052083" start="18621" end="18630" title="check dam" label="check dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584931" start="18835" end="18845" title="sky island" label="sky island"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="19141" end="19150" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924659" start="19238" end="19249" title="Pinus classification" label="yellow pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q251370" start="19251" end="19263" title="Jeffrey pine" label="Jeffrey pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q765246" start="19265" end="19278" title="incense cedar" label="incense cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="19415" end="19420" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="19423" end="19429" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838136" start="19435" end="19446" title="Populus fremontii" label="cottonwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q30139134" start="19548" end="19578" title="San Bernardino flying squirrel" label="San Bernardino flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q748921" start="19580" end="19602" title="Spotted owl" label="California Spotted Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559586" start="19604" end="19631" title="Mountain yellow-legged frog" label="Mountain yellow-legged frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957764" start="19633" end="19652" title="Southern rubber boa" label="Southern rubber boa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19658" end="19689" title="Andrew&amp;#x27;s marbled butterfly" label="Andrew&amp;#x27;s marbled butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="19810" end="19820" title="American black bear" label="Black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="19915" end="19928" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020421" start="19936" end="19974" title="California Department of Fish and Game" label="California Department of Fish and Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123824" start="20050" end="20087" title="List of mountain ranges of California" label="List of mountain ranges of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414265" start="20089" end="20112" title="San Gorgonio Wilderness" label="San Gorgonio Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756672" start="20114" end="20133" title="Santa Ana Mountains" label="Santa Ana Mountains"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748868" wikidata="Q6508033" url="?curid=748868" title="Le guide culinaire">
<text>Le Guide Culinaire () is Georges Auguste Escoffier&#x27;s 1903 French restaurant cuisine cookbook, his first. It is regarded as a classic and still in print. Escoffier developed the recipes while working at the Savoy, Ritz and Carlton hotels from the late 1880s to the time of publication. The hotels and restaurants Escoffier worked in were on the cutting edge of modernity, doing away with many overwrought elements of the Victorian era while serving the elite of society.

==History==
The first edition was printed in 1903 in French, the second edition was published in 1907, the third in 1912, and the current fourth edition in 1921.

Many of the recipes Escoffier developed while working at the Savoy in London, and later the Ritz in Paris. He kept notes on note cards. Recipes were often created and named for famous patrons including royalty, nouveaux riches, and artists. After leaving the Savoy in 1898, he began work on the book.

==Usage and style==
The original text was printed for the use of professional chefs and kitchen staff; Escoffier&#x27;s introduction to the first edition explains his intention that &quot;Le Guide Culinaire&quot; be used toward the education of the younger generation of cooks. This usage of the book still holds today; many culinary schools still use it as their culinary textbook.

Its style is to give recipes as brief descriptions and to assume that the reader either knows or can look up the keywords in the description.

==English and other editions==

An abridged, English translation of &quot;Le guide Culinaire&quot; 1e – 1903, was published in 1907 as &quot;A Guide to Modern Cookery&quot;. A second edition of the translation was published in 1957 with an additional introduction by Eugène Herbodeau.
An English translation of &quot;Le Guide Culinaire&quot; 4e – 1921, by H. L. Cracknell and R. J. Kaufmann, was published in 1979 as &quot;The Complete Guide to the Art of Modern Cookery: The First Translation into English in Its Entirety of Le Guide Culinaire&quot;, including &quot;some 2,000 additional recipes&quot; omitted from the more than 5000 recipes of the 1907 translation. The 1979 translation was subsequently republished as &quot;Escoffier: The Complete Guide to the Art of Modern Cookery&quot; (1983), and a revised second edition with new forewords was published as &quot;Escoffier: Le Guide Culinaire, Revised&quot; (2011).

&quot;Le Répertoire de la Cuisine&quot;, written by Escoffier&#x27;s student Louis Saulnier and published in 1914, is considered a companion guide to &quot;Le Guide Culinaire&quot; by Escoffier.

==References==

*Escoffier, Georges Auguste., &quot;Le Guide Culinaire&quot;, 4th edition. France: Flammarion, 1921 (renewed 1993).
*Escoffier, Georges Auguste, Trans. anon., &quot;The Escoffier Cookbook&quot;. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1969.

== External links ==
* Online text of &quot;Le Guide Culinaire&quot; (Escoffier, 1903, in French) from Google Books
* Online text of &quot;A Guide to Modern Cookery&quot; (Escoffier, 1907, in English) from archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313744" start="25" end="50" title="Georges Auguste Escoffier" label="Georges Auguste Escoffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="63" end="88" title="French cuisine" label="French restaurant cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="1019" end="1023" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q313744" start="1044" end="1053" title="Escoffier" label="Escoffier"/>
<link wikidata="Q156839" start="1212" end="1217" title="Cook (profession)" label="cooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167149" start="1266" end="1281" title="culinary school" label="culinary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111686" start="1305" end="1313" title="culinary" label="culinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="1314" end="1322" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="1346" end="1353" title="recipes" label="recipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128340" start="1438" end="1446" title="Index term" label="keywords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226741" start="2400" end="2427" title="Le Répertoire de la Cuisine" label="Le Répertoire de la Cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="2945" end="2957" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="3048" end="3059" title="archive.org" label="archive.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748872" wikidata="Q16330" url="?curid=748872" title="A (Cyrillic)">
<text>А (А а; italics: &quot;A ɑ&quot;) is a letter of the Cyrillic script. It commonly represents an open central unrounded vowel , halfway between the pronunciation of in &quot;cat&quot; and &quot;father&quot;. The Cyrillic letter А is romanized using the Latin letter A.

==History==
The Cyrillic letter А was derived directly from the Greek letter Alpha (). In the Early Cyrillic alphabet its name was (azǔ), meaning the letter &quot;I&quot;. In the Cyrillic numeral system, the Cyrillic letter А has a value of 1.

==Form==
Throughout history, the Cyrillic letter А has had various shapes, but today is standardised on one that looks exactly like the Latin letter A, including the italic and lower case forms.

==Usage==
In most languages that use the Cyrillic alphabet – such as Bulgarian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, Russian, Rusyn, Serbian, Macedonian and Montenegrin – the Cyrillic letter А represents the open central unrounded vowel . In Ingush and Chechen the Cyrillic letter А represents both the open back unrounded vowel and the mid-central vowel . In Tuvan the letter can be written as a double vowel.
==Related letters and other similar characters==
*A a : Latin letter A
*Á á : Latin letter Á
*Α α : Greek letter Alpha
*Ă ă : Latin letter A with Breve
*Â â : Latin letter A with Circumflex
*Ā ā : Latin letter A with Macron
*Æ æ : Latin letter Æ
*Ă ă : Latin letter A with breve

==Computing codes==

==See also==
* Cyrillic characters in Unicode

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16330" start="0" end="1" title="A (Cyrillic)" label="А"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="53" end="68" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493584" start="96" end="124" title="open central unrounded vowel" label="open central unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9659" start="252" end="266" title="A" label="Latin letter A"/>
<link wikidata="Q9887" start="333" end="351" title="Alpha (letter)" label="Greek letter Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q442244" start="363" end="386" title="Early Cyrillic alphabet" label="Early Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q491668" start="448" end="471" title="Cyrillic numerals" label="Cyrillic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q239178" start="627" end="645" title="Homoglyph" label="looks exactly like"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="680" end="686" title="Italic type" label="italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="691" end="701" title="lower case" label="lower case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="779" end="788" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="790" end="799" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="801" end="811" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="813" end="820" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="822" end="827" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="829" end="836" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="838" end="848" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="853" end="864" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493584" start="904" end="932" title="open central unrounded vowel" label="open central unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33509" start="938" end="944" title="Ingush language" label="Ingush"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="949" end="956" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q431471" start="999" end="1024" title="open back unrounded vowel" label="open back unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="1033" end="1050" title="mid-central vowel" label="mid-central vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34119" start="1056" end="1061" title="Tuvan language" label="Tuvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="1093" end="1105" title="double vowel" label="double vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9659" start="1163" end="1177" title="A" label="Latin letter A"/>
<link wikidata="Q9982" start="1185" end="1199" title="Á" label="Latin letter Á"/>
<link wikidata="Q9887" start="1207" end="1225" title="Α" label="Greek letter Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q336228" start="1233" end="1258" title="Ă" label="Latin letter A with Breve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9985" start="1266" end="1296" title="Â" label="Latin letter A with Circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q336022" start="1304" end="1330" title="Ā" label="Latin letter A with Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9990" start="1338" end="1352" title="Æ" label="Latin letter Æ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="1360" end="1365" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="1366" end="1372" title="Letter case" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9659" start="1373" end="1374" title="A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q911277" start="1380" end="1385" title="breve" label="breve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520269" start="1423" end="1453" title="Cyrillic characters in Unicode" label="Cyrillic characters in Unicode"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="748876" wikidata="Q21482757" url="?curid=748876" title="Horowitz">
<text>Horowitz (, ) is a Levitical Ashkenazi surname deriving from the Horowitz family, though it can also be a non-Jewish surname as well. The name is derived from the town of Hořovice, Bohemia. Other variants of the name include Harowitz, Harowicz, Harrwitz, Harwitz, Horovitz, Horvitz, Horwicz, Horwitz, Hourwitz, Hurewicz, Hurwicz, Hurwitz, Gerovich, Gurovich, Gurevich, Gurvich, Gourevitch, Gurewitsch, Gorovits, Gorovitz, Orowitz and Urwitz.

==List of people with the surname Horowitz==
===Rabbis===
*Aaron HaLevi ben Moses of Staroselye
*Abraham Horowitz, 16th-century rabbi
*Isaiah Horowitz (1555–1630), Prague-born rabbi of Germany, Austria, Prague and Palestine, Kabbalist, and author
*Levi Yitzchak Horowitz (1921–2009), Bostoner rabbi
*Mayer Alter Horowitz (born 1946), Bostoner rabbi in Har Nof
*Moses ha-Levi Hurwitz (d. 1820), Lithuanian rabbi
*Moshe Meshullam Halevy Horowitz (1832–1894), Galician rabbi
*Naftali Yehuda Horowitz, Bostoner rabbi of Boston
*Pinchas Horowitz (c.1731–1805), German rabbi and Talmudist
*Pinchas David Horowitz (1877–1931), First Bostoner rabbi, 1876–1941
*Shabbethai Horowitz (1590–1660), Volhynia-born Austrian rabbi and Talmudist, son of Isaiah Horowitz.
*Shabtai Sheftel Horowitz (1565–1619), rabbi and nephew of Isaiah Horowitz
*Shmelke of Nikolsburg (1726–1778), Galician-born Landesrabbiner of Moravia and kabbalist
*Shmuel Horowitz (1903–1973), compiler and publisher of Breslov books
*Yidele Horowitz (1905–1989), Hasidic rebbe of Dzikov
*Yosef Yoizel Hurwitz (1847-1919), Belarusian rosh yeshiva, Alter of Novardok

===Other people===
*Adam Horowitz (journalist), co-editor of Mondoweiss
*Adam Horowitz (born 1971), American TV show writer
*Alexandre Horowitz (1904–1982), Dutch technical engineer and inventor
*Andrew Horowitz (born 1983), American songwriter, producer and member of the band Tally Hall
*Anthony Horowitz (born 1955), British author and television scriptwriter
*Ariel Horowitz (born 1970), Israeli singer-songwriter
*Barry Horowitz (born 1959), American wrestler
*Ben Horowitz (born 1966), technology entrepreneur and investor
*Bernhard Horwitz (1807–1885), German and British chess master, one of the Berlin Pleiades
*Curly Howard (1903–1952), American comedian, birth name Jerome Horwitz
*Charles Horowitz (1905–1989), justice of the Washington Supreme Court
*Daniel Horowitz (born 1954), legal analyst and attorney
*David Horowitz (born 1939), writer and social activist
*David Horowitz (author) (1903–2002), founder of the United Israel World Union
*David Horowitz (consumer advocate) (1937–2019), American consumer advocate
*David Horowitz (economist) (1899–1979), first governor of the Bank of Israel
*Donald Horowitz (New Jersey lawyer) (born 1936), American lawyer
*Donald L. Horowitz (born 1939), American professor of law and political science
*Eugene Maurice Orowitz (1936–1991), American actor, better known by stage name Michael Landon
*Harry Horowitz (1889–1914), American underworld figure and a leader of the Lenox Avenue Gang in New York City
*Helen Lefkowitz Horowitz (born 1942), professor emerita of American studies and history at Smith College
*Isaac Horowitz (1920–2005), scientist in automatic control theory, developed quantitative feedback theory
*Israel Albert Horowitz (1907–1973), American chess master
*Jerome Horwitz (1919–2012), American scientist
*Jordan Horowitz (born 1980), American film producer
*Joseph Horowitz (born 1948), American musicologist and cultural historian
*Leah Horowitz (1933–56), Israeli hurdler
*Michael C. Horowitz (born 1978), American writer and political scientist
*Michael D. Horowitz, American author
*Michael E. Horowitz (born 1962), American lawyer and Inspector General of the US Department of Justice
*Michael J. Horowitz (born 1964), American electrical engineer
*Moses Horowitz (1844–1910), Yiddish playwright
*Moe Howard (1897–1975), American comedian, birth name Moses Harry Horwitz
*Nitzan Horowitz (born 1965), Israeli journalist and politician
*Norman Horowitz (1915–2005), American geneticist and space biologist
*Paul Horowitz (born 1942), American physicist and electrical engineer
*Risa Horowitz (born 1970), Canadian visual and media artist
*Ryszard Horowitz (born 1939), Polish photographer
*Scott J. Horowitz (born 1957), American astronaut
* (1881-1956), Israeli lawyer, former head of S. Horowitz &amp; Co., Israeli law firm
*Shemp Howard (1895–1955), American actor, birth name Samuel Horwitz
*Shmuel Hurwitz (1901–1999), Israeli agronomist
* Slawa Horowitz Duldig (1901–1975), Austrian-Australian inventor, artist, interior designer and teacher
*Tamara Horowitz (1950–2000), American philosopher
*Vladimir Horowitz (1903–1989), American classical pianist
*Wayne Horowitz, archeologist
*Winona Ryder (born 1971), American actress, birth name Winona Horowitz
*Jonty Hurwitz (born 1969), South African artist and entrepreneur 

== See also ==
* Horovitz
* Horvitz
* Gurvich

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21482757" start="0" end="8" title="Horowitz" label="Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386590" start="19" end="28" title="Levite" label="Levitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="29" end="38" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129691" start="65" end="80" title="Horowitz family" label="Horowitz family"/>
<link wikidata="Q978707" start="171" end="179" title="Hořovice" label="Hořovice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="181" end="188" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62035" start="245" end="253" title="Harrwitz" label="Harrwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628851" start="264" end="272" title="Horovitz" label="Horovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630278" start="274" end="281" title="Horvitz" label="Horvitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21454894" start="292" end="299" title="Horwitz" label="Horwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930684" start="311" end="319" title="Hurewicz" label="Hurewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21508720" start="321" end="328" title="Hurwicz" label="Hurwicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21489140" start="330" end="337" title="Hurwitz" label="Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555303" start="359" end="367" title="Gurevich" label="Gurevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555303" start="369" end="376" title="Gurvich" label="Gurvich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258496" start="502" end="538" title="Aaron HaLevi ben Moses of Staroselye" label="Aaron HaLevi ben Moses of Staroselye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599161" start="540" end="556" title="Abraham Horowitz" label="Abraham Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q473318" start="578" end="593" title="Isaiah Horowitz" label="Isaiah Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898944" start="691" end="713" title="Levi Yitzchak Horowitz" label="Levi Yitzchak Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729917" start="743" end="763" title="Mayer Alter Horowitz" label="Mayer Alter Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109826998" start="804" end="825" title="Moses ha-Levi Hurwitz" label="Moses ha-Levi Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16060045" start="855" end="886" title="Moshe Meshullam Horowitz Halevy" label="Moshe Meshullam Halevy Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958231" start="916" end="939" title="Naftali Yehuda Horowitz" label="Naftali Yehuda Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q477362" start="967" end="983" title="Pinchas Horowitz" label="Pinchas Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095437" start="1027" end="1049" title="Pinchas David Horowitz" label="Pinchas David Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276171" start="1096" end="1115" title="Shabbethai Horowitz" label="Shabbethai Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234158" start="1198" end="1222" title="Shabtai Sheftel Horowitz" label="Shabtai Sheftel Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351984" start="1273" end="1294" title="Shmelke of Nikolsburg" label="Shmelke of Nikolsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15690405" start="1418" end="1431" title="Chayey Moharan" label="Breslov books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218312" start="1433" end="1448" title="Yidele Horowitz" label="Yidele Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055909" start="1487" end="1507" title="Yosef Yozel Horwitz" label="Yosef Yoizel Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898809" start="1585" end="1611" title="Adam Horowitz (journalist)" label="Adam Horowitz (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395333" start="1638" end="1651" title="Adam Horowitz" label="Adam Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780731" start="1690" end="1708" title="Alexandre Horowitz" label="Alexandre Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q564968" start="1761" end="1776" title="Andrew Horowitz" label="Andrew Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q279305" start="1855" end="1871" title="Anthony Horowitz" label="Anthony Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790423" start="1929" end="1943" title="Ariel Horowitz" label="Ariel Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864319" start="1984" end="1998" title="Barry Horowitz" label="Barry Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885859" start="2031" end="2043" title="Ben Horowitz" label="Ben Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62031" start="2095" end="2111" title="Bernhard Horwitz" label="Bernhard Horwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q924567" start="2186" end="2198" title="Curly Howard" label="Curly Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q124340505" start="2258" end="2274" title="Charles Horowitz" label="Charles Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217520" start="2329" end="2344" title="Daniel Horowitz" label="Daniel Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q722462" start="2386" end="2400" title="David Horowitz" label="David Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235148" start="2442" end="2465" title="David Horowitz (author)" label="David Horowitz (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235149" start="2521" end="2555" title="David Horowitz (consumer advocate)" label="David Horowitz (consumer advocate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192465" start="2597" end="2623" title="David Horowitz (economist)" label="David Horowitz (economist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294524" start="2675" end="2710" title="Donald Horowitz (New Jersey lawyer)" label="Donald Horowitz (New Jersey lawyer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144804" start="2741" end="2759" title="Donald L. Horowitz" label="Donald L. Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q346411" start="2822" end="2844" title="Eugene Maurice Orowitz" label="Eugene Maurice Orowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q748731" start="2917" end="2931" title="Harry Horowitz" label="Harry Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702660" start="3028" end="3052" title="Helen Lefkowitz Horowitz" label="Helen Lefkowitz Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076520" start="3134" end="3148" title="Isaac Horowitz" label="Isaac Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q921736" start="3241" end="3263" title="Israel Albert Horowitz" label="Israel Albert Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q907680" start="3300" end="3314" title="Jerome Horwitz" label="Jerome Horwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28542755" start="3348" end="3363" title="Jordan Horowitz" label="Jordan Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144803" start="3401" end="3416" title="Joseph Horowitz" label="Joseph Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16133484" start="3476" end="3489" title="Leah Horowitz (runner)" label="Leah Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18630955" start="3518" end="3537" title="Michael C. Horowitz" label="Michael C. Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455553" start="3592" end="3611" title="Michael D. Horowitz" label="Michael D. Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28316793" start="3630" end="3649" title="Michael E. Horowitz" label="Michael E. Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831423" start="3734" end="3753" title="Michael J. Horowitz" label="Michael J. Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915820" start="3797" end="3811" title="Moses Horowitz" label="Moses Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281212" start="3845" end="3855" title="Moe Howard" label="Moe Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916662" start="3920" end="3935" title="Nitzan Horowitz" label="Nitzan Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052357" start="3984" end="3999" title="Norman Horowitz" label="Norman Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898086" start="4054" end="4067" title="Paul Horowitz" label="Paul Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045895" start="4125" end="4138" title="Risa Horowitz" label="Risa Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q481574" start="4186" end="4202" title="Ryszard Horowitz" label="Ryszard Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q703819" start="4237" end="4254" title="Scott J. Horowitz" label="Scott J. Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387532" start="4333" end="4354" title="S. Horowitz &amp;amp; Co." label="S. Horowitz &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1287517" start="4374" end="4386" title="Shemp Howard" label="Shemp Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499654" start="4443" end="4457" title="Shmuel Hurwitz" label="Shmuel Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290028" start="4492" end="4513" title="Slawa Duldig" label="Slawa Horowitz Duldig"/>
<link wikidata="Q26465853" start="4596" end="4611" title="Tamara Horowitz" label="Tamara Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q192506" start="4647" end="4664" title="Vladimir Horowitz" label="Vladimir Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976342" start="4706" end="4720" title="Wayne Horowitz" label="Wayne Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q101797" start="4736" end="4748" title="Winona Ryder" label="Winona Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19294817" start="4808" end="4821" title="Jonty Hurwitz" label="Jonty Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628851" start="4892" end="4900" title="Horovitz" label="Horovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630278" start="4903" end="4910" title="Horvitz" label="Horvitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555303" start="4913" end="4920" title="Gurvich" label="Gurvich"/>
</links>
</doc>
