<doc id="21649" wikidata="Q1522" url="?curid=21649" title="New Mexico">
<text>New Mexico is a state in the Southwestern region of the United States. It is one of the Mountain States of the southern Rocky Mountains, sharing the Four Corners region with Utah, Colorado, and Arizona. It also borders the state of Texas to the east and southeast, Oklahoma to the northeast, and shares an international border with the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora to the south. New Mexico&#x27;s largest city is Albuquerque, and its state capital is Santa Fe, the oldest state capital in the U.S., founded in 1610 as the government seat of Nuevo México in New Spain, as well as the highest at .

New Mexico is the fifth-largest of the fifty states by area, but with just over 2.1 million residents, ranks 36th in population and 45th in population density. Its climate and geography are highly varied, ranging from forested mountains to sparse deserts; the northern and eastern regions exhibit a colder alpine climate, while the west and south are warmer and more arid. The Rio Grande and its fertile valley runs from north-to-south, creating a riparian biome through the center of the state that supports a bosque habitat and distinct Albuquerque Basin climate. One-third of New Mexico&#x27;s land is federally owned, and the state hosts many protected wilderness areas and 15 national parks and monuments, including three UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the most of any U.S. state.

New Mexico&#x27;s economy is highly diversified, including cattle ranching, agriculture, lumber, scientific and technological research, tourism, and the arts; major sectors include mining, oil and gas, aerospace, media, and film. Its total real gross domestic product (GDP) in 2023 was over $105 billion, with a GDP per capita of $49,879. State tax policy is characterized by low to moderate taxation of resident personal income by national standards, with tax credits, exemptions, and special considerations for military personnel and favorable industries. New Mexico has a significant U.S. military presence, including White Sands Missile Range, KUMMSC, and strategically valuable federal research centers, such as the Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. The state hosted several key facilities of the Manhattan Project, which developed the world&#x27;s first atomic bomb, and was the site of the first nuclear test, Trinity.

In prehistoric times, New Mexico was home to Ancestral Puebloans, the Mogollon culture, and ancestral Ute. Navajos and Apaches arrived in the late 15th century and the Comanches in the early 18th century. The Pueblo peoples occupied several dozen villages, primarily in the Rio Grande valley of northern New Mexico. Spanish explorers and settlers arrived in the 16th century from present-day Mexico. Isolated by its rugged terrain, New Mexico was a peripheral part of the viceroyalty of New Spain dominated by Comancheria. Following Mexican independence in 1821, it became an autonomous region of Mexico, albeit increasingly threatened by the centralizing policies of the Mexican government, culminating in the Revolt of 1837; at the same time, New Mexico became more economically dependent on the U.S. Following the Mexican–American War in 1848, the U.S. annexed New Mexico as part of the larger New Mexico Territory. It played a central role in U.S. westward expansion and was admitted to the Union as the 47th state on January 6, 1912.

New Mexico&#x27;s history contributed to its unique culture. It is one of only seven majority-minority states, with the nation&#x27;s highest percentage of Hispanic and Latino Americans and second-highest percentage of Native Americans, after Alaska. The state is home to one–third of the Navajo Nation, 19 federally recognized Pueblo communities, and three federally recognized Apache tribes. Its large Latino population includes Hispanos descended from settlers during the Spanish era, and later groups of Mexican Americans since the 19th century. The New Mexican flag, which is among the most recognizable in the U.S., reflects the state&#x27;s eclectic origins, featuring the ancient sun symbol of the Zia, a Puebloan tribe, with the scarlet and gold coloration of the Spanish flag. The confluence of indigenous, Hispanic (Spanish and Mexican), and American influences is also evident in New Mexico&#x27;s unique cuisine, Spanish dialect, folk music, and Pueblo Revival and Territorial styles of architecture.
==Etymology==

New Mexico received its name long before the present-day country of Mexico won independence from Spain and adopted that name in 1821. The name &quot;Mexico&quot; derives from Nahuatl and originally referred to the heartland of the Mexica, the rulers of the Aztec Empire, in the Valley of Mexico. Following their conquest of the Aztecs in the early 16th century, the Spanish began exploring what is now the Southwestern United States calling it &quot;Nuevo México&quot;. In 1581, the Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition named the region north of the Rio Grande &quot;San Felipe del Nuevo México&quot;. The Spaniards had hoped to find wealthy indigenous cultures similar to the Mexica. The indigenous cultures of New Mexico, however, proved to be unrelated to the Mexica and lacking in riches, but the name persisted.

Before statehood in 1912, the name &quot;New Mexico&quot; loosely applied to various configurations of territories in the same general area, which evolved throughout the Spanish, Mexican, and U.S. periods, but typically encompassed most of present-day New Mexico along with sections of neighboring states.

==History==

===Prehistory===

The first known inhabitants of New Mexico were members of the Clovis culture of Paleo-Indians. Footprints discovered in 2017 suggest that humans may have been present in the region as long ago as 21,000–23,000 BC. Later inhabitants include the Mogollon and Ancestral Pueblo cultures, which are characterized by sophisticated pottery work and urban development; pueblos or their remnants, like those at Acoma, Taos, and Chaco Culture National Historical Park, indicate the scale of Ancestral Puebloan dwellings within the area. These cultures form part of the broader Oasisamerica region of pre-Columbian North America.

The vast trade networks of the Ancestral Puebloans led to legends throughout Mesoamerica and the Aztec Empire (Mexico) of an unseen northern empire that rivaled their own, which they called &quot;Yancuic Mexico&quot;, literally translated as &quot;a new Mexico&quot;.

===Nuevo México===
==== New Spain era ====

Aztec legends of a prosperous empire to their north became the primary basis for the mythical Seven Cities of Gold, which spurred exploration by Spanish conquistadors following their conquest of the Aztecs in the early 16th century; prominent explorers included Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca, Andrés Dorantes de Carranza, Alonso del Castillo Maldonado, Estevanico, and Marcos de Niza.

The settlement of &quot;La Villa Real de la Santa Fe de San Francisco de Asís&quot; — modern day Santa Fe – was established by Pedro de Peralta as a more permanent capital at the foot of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains in 1610. Towards the end of the 17th century, the Pueblo Revolt drove out the Spanish and occupied these early cities for over a decade. After the death of Pueblo leader Popé, Diego de Vargas restored the area to Spanish rule, with Puebloans offered greater cultural and religious liberties. Returning settlers founded &quot;La Villa de Alburquerque&quot; in 1706 at Old Town Albuquerque as a trading center for existing surrounding communities such as Barelas, Isleta, Los Ranchos, and Sandia; it was named for the viceroy of New Spain, Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, 10th Duke of Alburquerque. Governor Francisco Cuervo y Valdés established the villa in Tiguex to provide free trade access and facilitate cultural exchange in the region.

Beyond forging better relations with the Pueblos, governors were forbearing in their approach to the indigenous peoples, such as was with governor Tomás Vélez Cachupín; the comparatively large reservations in New Mexico and Arizona are partly a legacy of Spanish treaties recognizing indigenous land claims in Nuevo México. Nevertheless, relations between the various indigenous groups and Spanish settlers remained nebulous and complex, varying from trade and commerce to cultural assimilation and intermarriage to total warfare. During most of the 18th century, raids by Navajo, Apache, and especially Comanche inhibited the growth and prosperity of the New Mexico. The region&#x27;s harsh environment and remoteness, surrounded by hostile Native Americans, fostered a greater degree of self-reliance, as well as pragmatic cooperation, between the Pueblo peoples and colonists. Many indigenous communities enjoyed a large measure of autonomy well into the late 19th century due to the improved governance.

To encourage settlement in its vulnerable periphery, Spain awarded land grants to European settlers in Nuevo México; due to the scarcity of water throughout the region, the vast majority of colonists resided in the central valley of the Rio Grande and its tributaries. Most communities were walled enclaves consisting of adobe houses that opened onto a plaza, from which four streets ran outward to small, private agricultural plots and orchards; these were watered by &quot;acequias,&quot; community owned and operated irrigation canals. Just beyond the wall was the &quot;ejido&quot;, communal land for grazing, firewood, or recreation. By 1800, the population of New Mexico had reached 25,000 (not including indigenous inhabitants), far exceeding the territories of California and Texas.

==== Mexico era ====
As part of New Spain, the province of New Mexico became part of the First Mexican Empire in 1821 following the Mexican War of Independence. Upon its secession from Mexico in 1836, the Republic of Texas claimed the portion east of the Rio Grande, based on the erroneous assumption that the older Hispanic settlements of the upper Rio Grande were the same as the newly established Mexican settlements of Texas. The Texan Santa Fe Expedition was launched to seize the contested territory but failed with the capture and imprisonment of the entire army by the Hispanic New Mexico militia.

During the turn of the 19th century, the extreme northeastern part of New Mexico, north of the Canadian River and east of the spine of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, was still claimed by France, which sold it in 1803 as part of the Louisiana Purchase. In 1812, the U.S. reclassified the land as part of the Missouri Territory. This region of New Mexico (along with territory comprising present-day southeastern Colorado, the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles, and southwestern Kansas) was ceded to Spain under the Adams-Onis Treaty in 1819.

When the First Mexican Republic began to transition into the Centralist Republic of Mexico, they began to centralize power ignoring the sovereignty of Santa Fe and disregarding Pueblo land rights. This led to the Chimayó Rebellion in 1837, led by &quot;genízaro&quot; José Gonzales. The death of then governor Albino Pérez during the revolt, was met with further hostility. Though José Gonzales was executed due to his involvement in the governor&#x27;s death, subsequent governors Manuel Armijo and Juan Bautista Vigil y Alarid agreed with some of the underlying sentiment. This led to New Mexico becoming financially and politically tied to the U.S., and preferring trade along the Santa Fe Trail.

===Territorial phase===

Following the victory of the United States in the Mexican–American War (1846–48), Mexico ceded its northern territories to the U.S., including California, Texas, and New Mexico. The Americans were initially heavy-handed in their treatment of former Mexican citizens, triggering the Taos Revolt in 1847 by Hispanos and their Pueblo allies; the insurrection led to the death of territorial governor Charles Bent and the collapse of the civilian government established by Stephen W. Kearny. In response, the U.S. government appointed local Donaciano Vigil as governor to better represent New Mexico, and also vowed to accept the land rights of Nuevomexicans and grant them citizenship. In 1864, President Abraham Lincoln symbolized the recognition of Native land rights with the Lincoln Canes, sceptres of office gifted to each of the Pueblos, a tradition dating back to Spanish and Mexican eras.

After the Republic of Texas was admitted as a state in 1846, it attempted to claim the eastern portion of New Mexico east of the Rio Grande, while the California Republic and State of Deseret each claimed parts of western New Mexico. Under the Compromise of 1850, these regions were forced by the U.S. government to drop their claims, Texas received $10million in federal funds, California was granted statehood, and officially establishing the Utah Territory; therein recognizing most of New Mexico&#x27;s historically established land claims. Pursuant to the compromise, Congress established the New Mexico Territory in September of that year; it included most of present-day Arizona and New Mexico, along with the Las Vegas Valley and what would later become Clark County in Nevada.

In 1853 the U.S. acquired the mostly desert southwestern bootheel of the state, along with Arizona&#x27;s land south of the Gila River, in the Gadsden Purchase, which was needed for the right-of-way to encourage construction of a transcontinental railroad.

==== U.S. Civil War, American Indian Wars, and American frontier ====
When the U.S. Civil War broke out in 1861, both Confederate and Union governments claimed ownership and territorial rights over New Mexico Territory. The Confederacy claimed the southern tract as its own Arizona Territory, and as part of the Trans-Mississippi Theater of the war, waged the ambitious New Mexico Campaign to control the American Southwest and open up access to Union California. Confederate power in the New Mexico Territory was effectively broken after the Battle of Glorieta Pass in 1862, though the Confederate territorial government continued to operate out of Texas. More than 8,000 soldiers from New Mexico Territory served in the Union Army.
The end of the war saw rapid economic development and settlement in New Mexico, which attracted homesteaders, ranchers, cowboys, businessmen, and outlaws; many of the folklore characters of the Western genre had their origins in New Mexico, most notably businesswoman Maria Gertrudis Barceló, outlaw Billy the Kid, and lawmen Pat Garrett and Elfego Baca. The influx of &quot;Anglo Americans&quot; from the eastern U.S. (which include African Americans and recent European immigrants) reshaped the state&#x27;s economy, culture, and politics. Into the late 19th century, the majority of New Mexicans remained ethnic mestizos of mixed Spanish and Native American ancestry (primarily Pueblo, Navajo, Apache, Genízaro, and Comanche), many of whom had roots going back to Spanish settlement in the 16th century; this distinctly New Mexican ethnic group became known as Hispanos and developed a more pronounced identity vis-a-vis the newer Anglo arrivals. Politically, they still controlled most town and county offices through local elections, and wealthy ranching families commanded considerable influence, preferring business, legislative, and judicial relations with fellow indigenous New Mexican groups. By contrast, Anglo Americans, who were &quot;outnumbered, but well-organized and growing&quot; tended to have more ties to the territorial government, whose officials were appointed by the U.S. federal government; subsequently, newer residents of New Mexico generally favored maintaining territorial status, which they saw as a check on Native and Hispano influence.

A consequence of the civil war was intensifying conflict with indigenous peoples, which was part of the broader American Indian Wars along the frontier. The withdrawal of troops and material for the war effort had prompted raids by hostile tribes, and the federal government moved to subdue the many native communities that had been effectively autonomous throughout the colonial period. Following the elimination of the Confederate threat, Brigadier General James Carleton, who had assumed command of the Military Department of New Mexico in 1862, led what he described as a &quot;merciless war against all hostile tribes&quot; that aimed to &quot;force them to their knees, and then confine them to reservations where they could be Christianized and instructed in agriculture.&quot; With famed frontiersman Kit Carson placed in charge of troops in the field, powerful indigenous groups such as the Navajo, Mescalero Apache, Kiowa, and Comanche were brutally pacified through a scorched earth policy, and thereafter forced into barren and remote reservations. Sporadic conflicts continued into the late 1880s, most notably the guerilla campaigns led by Apache chiefs Victorio and his son-in-law Nana.

The political and cultural clashes between these competing ethnic groups sometimes culminated in mob violence, including lynchings of Native, Hispanic, and Mexican peoples, as was attempted at the Frisco shootout in 1884. Nevertheless, prominent figures from across these communities, and from both the Democratic and Republican parties, attempted to fight this prejudice and forge a more cohesive, multiethnic New Mexican identity; they include lawmen Baca and Garrett, and governors Curry, Hagerman, and Otero. Indeed, some territorial governors, like Lew Wallace, had served in both the Mexican and American militaries.

===Statehood===

The United States Congress admitted New Mexico as the 47th state on January 6, 1912. It had been eligible for statehood 60 years earlier, but was delayed due to the perception that its majority Hispanic population was &quot;alien&quot; to U.S. culture and political values. When the U.S. entered the First World War roughly five years later, New Mexicans volunteered in significant numbers, in part to prove their loyalty as full-fledged citizens of the U.S. The state ranked fifth in the nation for military service, enlisting more than 17,000 recruits from all 33 counties; over 500 New Mexicans were killed in the war.

Indigenous-Hispanic families had long been established since the Spanish and Mexican era, but most American settlers in the state had an uneasy relationship with the large Native American tribes. Most indigenous New Mexicans lived on reservations and near old &quot;placitas&quot; and &quot;villas&quot;. In 1924, Congress passed a law granting all Native Americans U.S. citizenship and the right to vote in federal and state elections. However, Anglo-American arrivals into New Mexico enacted Jim Crow laws against Hispanos, Hispanic Americans, and those who did not pay taxes, targeting indigenous affiliated individuals; because Hispanics often had interpersonal relationships with indigenous peoples, they were often subject to segregation, social inequality, and employment discrimination.

During the fight for women&#x27;s suffrage in the United States, New Mexico&#x27;s Hispano and Mexican women at the forefront included Trinidad Cabeza de Baca, Dolores &quot;Lola&quot; Armijo, Mrs. James Chavez, Aurora Lucero, Anita &quot;Mrs. Secundino&quot; Romero, Arabella &quot;Mrs. Cleofas&quot; Romero and her daughter, Marie.

A major oil discovery in 1928 near the town of Hobbs brought greater wealth to the state, especially in surrounding Lea County. The New Mexico Bureau of Mines and Mineral Resources called it &quot;the most important single discovery of oil in New Mexico&#x27;s history&quot;. Nevertheless, agriculture and cattle ranching remained the primary economic activities.

New Mexico was greatly transformed by the U.S. entry into the Second World War in December 1941. As in the First World War, patriotism ran high among New Mexicans, including among marginalized Hispanic and indigenous communities; on a per capita basis, New Mexico produced more volunteers, and suffered more casualties, than any other state. The war also spurred economic development, particularly in extractive industries, with the state becoming a leading supplier of several strategic resources. New Mexico&#x27;s rough terrain and geographic isolation made it an attractive location for several sensitive military and scientific installations; the most famous was Los Alamos, one of the central facilities of the Manhattan Project, where the first atomic bombs were designed and manufactured. The first bomb was tested at Trinity site in the desert between Socorro and Alamogordo, which is today part of the White Sands Missile Range.

As a legacy of the Second World War, New Mexico continues to receive large amounts of federal government spending on major military and research institutions. In addition to the White Sands Missile Range, the state hosts three U.S. Air Force bases that were established or expanded during the war. While the high military presence brought considerable investment, it has also been the center of controversy; on May 22, 1957, a B-36 accidentally dropped a nuclear bomb 4.5 miles from the control tower while landing at Kirtland Air Force Base in Albuquerque; only its conventional &quot;trigger&quot; detonated. The Los Alamos National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories, two of the nation&#x27;s leading federal scientific research facilities, originated from the Manhattan Project. The focus on high technology is still a top priority of the state, to the extent that it became a center for unidentified flying objects, especially following the 1947 Roswell incident.

New Mexico saw its population nearly double from roughly 532,000 in 1940 to over 954,000 by 1960. In addition to federal personnel and agencies, many residents and businesses moved to the state, particularly from the northeast, often drawn by its warm climate and low taxes. The pattern continues into the 21st century, with New Mexico adding over 400,000 residents between 2000 and 2020.

Native Americans from New Mexico fought for the United States in both world wars. Returning veterans were disappointed to find their civil rights limited by state discrimination. In Arizona and New Mexico, veterans challenged state laws or practices prohibiting them from voting. In 1948, after veteran Miguel Trujillo Sr. of Isleta Pueblo was told by the county registrar that he could not register to vote, he filed suit against the county in federal district court. A three-judge panel overturned as unconstitutional New Mexico&#x27;s provisions that Native Americans who did not pay taxes (and could not document if they had paid taxes) could not vote.

In the early to mid-20th century, the art presence in Santa Fe grew, and it became known as one of the world&#x27;s great art centers. The presence of artists such as Georgia O&#x27;Keeffe attracted many others, including those along Canyon Road. In the late 20th century, Native Americans were authorized by federal law to establish gaming casinos on their reservations under certain conditions, in states which had authorized such gaming. Such facilities have helped tribes close to population centers generate revenues for reinvestment in the economic development and welfare of their peoples. The Albuquerque metropolitan area is home to several casinos as a result.

In the 21st century, employment growth areas in New Mexico include electronic circuitry, scientific research, information technology, casinos, art of the American Southwest, food, film, and media, particularly in Albuquerque. The state was the founding location of Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems, which led to the founding of Microsoft in Albuquerque. Intel maintains their F11X in Rio Rancho, which also hosts an IT center for HP Inc. New Mexico&#x27;s culinary scene became recognized and is now a source of revenue for the state. Albuquerque Studios has become a filming hub for Netflix, and it was brought international media production companies to the state like NBCUniversal.

The COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed to have reached the U.S. state of New Mexico on March 11, 2020. On December 23, 2020, the New Mexico Department of Health reported 1,174 new COVID-19 cases and 40 deaths, bringing the cumulative statewide totals to 133,242 cases and 2,243 deaths since the start of the pandemic.

==Geography==


With a total area of , New Mexico is the fifth-largest state, after Alaska, Texas, California, and Montana. Its eastern border lies along 103°W longitude with the state of Oklahoma, and west of 103°W longitude with Texas due to a 19th-century surveying error. On the southern border, Texas makes up the eastern two-thirds, while the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora make up the western third, with Chihuahua making up about 90% of that. The western border with Arizona runs along the 109° 03&#x27;W longitude. The southwestern corner of the state is known as the Bootheel. The 37°N parallel forms the northern boundary with Colorado. The states of New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona, and Utah come together at the Four Corners in New Mexico&#x27;s northwestern corner. Its surface water area is about .

Despite its popular depiction as mostly arid desert, New Mexico has one of the most diverse landscapes of any U.S. state, ranging from wide, auburn-colored deserts and verdant grasslands, to broken mesas and high, snow-capped peaks. Close to a third of the state is covered in timberland, with heavily forested mountain wildernesses dominating the north. The Sangre de Cristo Mountains, the southernmost part of the Rocky Mountains, run roughly north–south along the east side of the Rio Grande, in the rugged, pastoral north. The Great Plains extend into the eastern third of the state, most notably the Llano Estacado (&quot;Staked Plain&quot;), whose westernmost boundary is marked by the Mescalero Ridge escarpment. The northwestern quadrant of New Mexico is dominated by the Colorado Plateau, characterized by unique volcanic formations, dry grasslands and shrublands, open pinyon-juniper woodland, and mountain forests. The Chihuahuan Desert, which is the largest in North America, extends through the south.

Over four–fifths of New Mexico is higher than above sea level. The average elevation ranges from up to above sea level in the northwest, to less than 4,000 feet in the southeast. The highest point is Wheeler Peak at over in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, while the lowest is the Red Bluff Reservoir at around , in the southeastern corner of the state.

In addition to the Rio Grande, which is tied for the fourth-longest river in the U.S., New Mexico has four other major river systems: the Pecos, Canadian, San Juan, and Gila. Nearly bisecting New Mexico from north to south, the Rio Grande has played an influential role in the region&#x27;s history; its fertile floodplain has supported human habitation since prehistoric times, and European settlers initially lived exclusively in its valleys and along its tributaries. The Pecos, which flows roughly parallel to the Rio Grande at its east, was a popular route for explorers, as was the Canadian River, which rises in the mountainous north and flows east across the arid plains. The San Juan and Gila lie west of the Continental Divide, in the northwest and southwest, respectively. With the exception of the Gila, all major rivers are dammed in New Mexico and provide a major water source for irrigation and flood control.

===Climate===
New Mexico has long been known for its dry, temperate climate. Overall, the state is semi-arid to arid, with areas of continental and alpine climates at higher elevations. New Mexico&#x27;s statewide average precipitation is a year, with average monthly amounts peaking in the summer, particularly in the more rugged north-central area around Albuquerque and in the south. Generally, the eastern third of the state receives the most rainfall, while the western third receives the least. Higher altitudes receive around , while the lowest elevations see as little as .
Annual temperatures can range from in the southeast to below in the northern mountains, with the average being the mid-50s °F (12 °C). During the summer, daytime temperatures can often exceed at elevations below ; the average high temperature in July ranges from at the lower elevations down to 78°F (26°C) at the higher elevations. In the colder months of November to March, many cities in New Mexico can have nighttime temperature lows in the teens above zero, or lower. The highest temperature recorded in New Mexico was at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) near Loving on June 27, 1994; the lowest recorded temperature is at Ciniza (near Jamestown) on January 13, 1963.

New Mexico&#x27;s stable climate and sparse population provides for clearer skies and less light pollution, making it a popular site for several major astronomical observatories, including the Apache Point Observatory, the Very Large Array, and the Magdalena Ridge Observatory, among others.

===Flora and fauna===

Owing to its varied topography, New Mexico has six distinct vegetation zones that provide diverse sets of habitats for many plants and animals. The Upper Sonoran Zone is by far the most prominent, constituting about three-fourths of the state; it includes most of the plains, foothills, and valleys above 4,500 feet, and is defined by prairie grasses, low piñon pines, and juniper shrubs. The Llano Estacado in the east features Shortgrass Prairie with blue grama, which sustain bison. The Chihuahuan Desert in the south is characterized by shrubby creosote. The Colorado Plateau in the northwest corner of New Mexico is high desert with cold winters, featuring sagebrush, shadescale, greasewood, and other plants adapted to the saline and seleniferous soil.

The mountainous north hosts a wide array of vegetation types corresponding to elevation gradients, such as piñon-juniper woodlands near the base, through evergreen conifers, spruce-fir and aspen forests in the transitionary zone, and Krummholz, and alpine tundra at the very top. The Apachian zone tucked into the southwestern bootheel of the state has high-calcium soil, oak woodlands, Arizona cypress, and other plants that are not found in other parts of the state. The southern sections of the Rio Grande and Pecos valleys have of New Mexico&#x27;s best grazing land and irrigated farmland.

New Mexico&#x27;s varied climate and vegetation zones consequently support diverse wildlife. Black bears, bighorn sheep, bobcats, cougars, deer, and elk live in habitats above 7,000 feet, while coyotes, jackrabbits, kangaroo rats, javelina, porcupines, pronghorn antelope, western diamondbacks, and wild turkeys live in less mountainous and elevated regions. The iconic roadrunner, which is the state bird, is abundant in the southeast. Endangered species include the Mexican gray wolf, which is being gradually reintroduced in the world, and Rio Grande silvery minnow. Over 500 species of birds live or migrate through New Mexico, third only to California and Mexico.

=== Conservation ===
New Mexico and 12 other western states together account for 93% of all federally owned land in the U.S. Roughly one–third of the state, or 24.7 million of 77.8 million acres, is held by the U.S. government, the tenth-highest percentage in the country. More than half this land is under the Bureau of Land Management as either public domain land or National Conservation Lands, while another third is managed by the U.S. Forest Service as national forests.

New Mexico was central to the early–20th century conservation movement, with Gila Wilderness being designated the world&#x27;s first wilderness area in 1924. The state also hosts nine of the country&#x27;s 84 national monuments, the most of any state after Arizona; these include the second oldest monument, El Morro, which was created in 1906, and the Gila Cliff Dwellings, proclaimed in 1907.

====National forests in New Mexico====
====National parks in New Mexico====
New Mexico&#x27;s national parks, together with national monuments and trails managed by the National Park Service, are listed as follows:

====National conservation lands in New Mexico====
New Mexico&#x27;s national monuments, conservation areas, and other units of the National Landscape Conservation System are managed by the Bureau of Land Management. Units include but are not limited to:
* Bisti/De-Na-Zin Wilderness near Farmington
* El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail
* El Malpais National Conservation Area near Grants
* Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks National Monument in Cochiti Pueblo
* Prehistoric Trackways National Monument near Las Cruces
* Old Spanish National Historic Trail
* Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks National Monument near Las Cruces
* Rio Grande del Norte National Monument near Taos
* Rio Chama Wild and Scenic River near Abiquiu
* Rio Grande and Red River Wild and Scenic Rivers near Questa

====National wildlife refuges in New Mexico====
New Mexico&#x27;s National Wildlife Refuges are managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Units include:
* Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge
* Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge
* Grulla National Wildlife Refuge
* Las Vegas National Wildlife Refuge
* Maxwell National Wildlife Refuge
* San Andres National Wildlife Refuge
* Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge
* Valle de Oro National Wildlife Refuge

====State parks in New Mexico====
Areas managed by the New Mexico State Parks Division:
====Other nature reserves in New Mexico====
Examples of locally administered nature reserves include:
* Whitfield Wildlife Conservation Area in Valencia County
* Albuquerque Open Space, see Open Space Visitor Center

===Environmental issues===

In January 2016, New Mexico sued the United States Environmental Protection Agency over negligence after the 2015 Gold King Mine waste water spill. The spill had caused heavy metals such as cadmium and lead and toxins such as arsenic to flow into the Animas River, polluting water basins of several states. The state has since implemented or considered stricter regulations and harsher penalties for spills associated with resource extraction.

New Mexico is a major producer of greenhouse gases. A study by Colorado State University showed that the state&#x27;s oil and gas industry generated 60 million metric tons of greenhouse gases in 2018, over four times greater than previously estimated. The fossil fuels sector accounted for over half the state&#x27;s overall emissions, which totaled 113.6 million metric tons, about 1.8% of the country&#x27;s total and more than twice the national average per capita. The New Mexico government has responded with efforts to regulate industrial emissions, promote renewable energy, and incentivize the use of electric vehicles.

=== Settlements ===

With just , New Mexico is one of the least densely populated states, ranking 45th out of 50; by contrast, the overall population density of the U.S. is . The state is divided into 33 counties and 106 municipalities, which include cities, towns, villages, and a consolidated city-county, Los Alamos. Only three cities have at least 100,000 residents: Albuquerque, Rio Rancho, and Las Cruces, whose respective metropolitan areas together account for the majority of New Mexico&#x27;s population.

Residents are concentrated in the north-central region of New Mexico, anchored by the state&#x27;s largest city, Albuquerque. Centered in Bernalillo County, the Albuquerque metropolitan area includes New Mexico&#x27;s third-largest city, Rio Rancho, and has a population of over 918,000, accounting for one-third of all New Mexicans. It is adjacent to Santa Fe, the capital and fourth-largest city. Altogether, the Albuquerque–Santa Fe–Los Alamos combined statistical area includes more than 1.17 million people, or nearly 60% of the state population.

New Mexico&#x27;s other major center of population is in south-central area around Las Cruces, its second-largest city and the largest city in the southern region of the state. The Las Cruces metropolitan area includes roughly 214,000 residents, but with neighboring El Paso, Texas forms a combined statistical area numbering over 1 million.

New Mexico hosts 23 federally recognized tribal reservations, including part of the Navajo Nation, the largest and most populous tribe; of these, 11 hold off-reservation trust lands elsewhere in the state. The vast majority of federally recognized tribes are concentrated in the northwest, followed by the north-central region.

Like several other southwestern states, New Mexico hosts numerous &quot;colonias&quot;, unincorporated, low-income slums characterized by abject poverty, the absence of basic services (such as water and sewage), and scarce housing and infrastructure. The University of New Mexico estimates there are 118 colonias in the state, though the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development identifies roughly 150. The majority are located along the Mexico-U.S. border.

==Demographics==
===Population===
The 2020 census recorded a population of 2,117,522, an increase of 2.8% from 2,059,179 in the 2010 census. This was the lowest rate of growth in the western U.S. after Wyoming, and among the slowest nationwide. By comparison, between 2000 and 2010, New Mexico&#x27;s population increased by 11.7% from 1,819,046—among the fastest growth rates in the country. A report commissioned in 2021 by the New Mexico Legislature attributed the state&#x27;s slow growth to a negative net migration rate, particularly among those 18 or younger, and to a 19% decline in the birth rate. However, growth among Hispanics and Native Americans remained healthy.

The U.S. Census Bureau estimated a slight decrease in population, with 3,333 fewer people from July 2021 to July 2022. This was attributed to deaths exceeding births by roughly 5,000, with net migration mitigating the loss by 1,389.

More than half of New Mexicans (51.4%) were born in the state; 37.9% were born in another state; 1.1% were born in either Puerto Rico, an island territory, or abroad to at least one American parent; and 9.4% were foreign born (compared to a national average of roughly 12%). Almost a quarter of the population (22.7%) was under the age of 18, and the state&#x27;s median age of 38.4 is slightly above the national average of 38.2. New Mexico&#x27;s somewhat older population is partly reflective of its popularity among retirees: It ranked as the most popular retirement destination in 2018, with an estimated 42% of new residents being retired.

Hispanics and Latinos constitute nearly half of all residents (49.3%), giving New Mexico the highest proportion of Hispanic ancestry among the fifty states. This broad classification includes descendants of Spanish colonists who settled between the 16th and 18th centuries as well as recent immigrants from Latin America (particularly Mexico and Central America).

From 2000 to 2010, the number of persons in poverty increased to 400,779, or approximately one-fifth of the population. The 2020 census recorded a slightly reduced poverty rate of 18.2%, albeit the third highest among U.S. states, compared to a national average of 10.5%. Poverty disproportionately affects minorities, with about one-third of African Americans and Native Americans living in poverty, compared with less than a fifth of whites and roughly a tenth of Asians; likewise, New Mexico ranks 49th among states for education equality by race and 32nd for its racial gap in income.

New Mexico&#x27;s population is among the most difficult to count, according to the Center for Urban Research at the City University of New York, due to the state&#x27;s size, sparse population, and numerous isolated communities. Likewise, the Census Bureau estimated that roughly 43% of the state&#x27;s population (about 900,000 people) live in such &quot;hard-to-count&quot; areas. In response, the New Mexico government invested heavily in public outreach to increase census participation, resulting in a final tally that exceeded earlier estimates and outperformed several neighboring states.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,560 homeless people in New Mexico.

===Race and ethnicity===

New Mexico is one of seven &quot;majority-minority&quot; states where non-Hispanic whites constitute less than half the population. As early as 1940, roughly half the population was estimated to be nonwhite. Before becoming a state in 1912, New Mexico was among the few U.S. territories that was predominately nonwhite, which contributed to its delayed admission into the Union.

The largest ethnic group is Hispanic and Latino Americans; according to the 2020 census they account for nearly half the state&#x27;s population, at 47.7%; they include Hispanos descended from pre-United States settlers and more recent successions of Mexican Americans.

Some 200,000 residents, about one-tenth of the population, are of Indigenous descent, ranking third in size, and second proportionally, nationwide. There are 23 federally recognized tribal nations, each with its distinct culture, history, and identity. Both the Navajo and Apache share Athabaskan origin, with the latter living on three federal reservations in the state. The Navajo Nation, which spans over 16 million acres (6.5 millionha), mostly in neighboring Arizona, is the largest reservation in the U.S., with one-third of its members living in New Mexico. Pueblo Indians, who share a similar lifestyle but are culturally and linguistically distinct, live in 19 pueblos scattered throughout the state, which collectively span over 2 million acres (800,000 ha). Many indigenous New Mexicans have moved to urban areas throughout the state, and some cities such as Gallup are major hubs of Native American culture. New Mexico is also a hub for indigenous communities beyond its borders: the annual Gathering of Nations, which began in 1983, has been described as the largest &quot;pow wow&quot; in the U.S., drawing hundreds of native tribes from across North America.

Almost half of New Mexicans claim Hispanic origin; many are descendants of colonial settlers called &quot;Hispanos&quot; or &quot;Neomexicanos&quot;, who settled mostly in the north of the state between the 16th and 18th centuries; by contrast, the majority of Mexican immigrants reside in the south. Some Hispanos claim Jewish ancestry through descendance from &quot;conversos&quot; or Crypto-Jews among early Spanish colonists. Many New Mexicans speak a unique dialect known as New Mexican Spanish, which was shaped by the region&#x27;s historical isolation and various cultural influences; New Mexican Spanish lacks certain vocabulary from other Spanish dialects and uses numerous Native American words for local features, as well as anglicized words that express American concepts and modern inventions.

New Mexico has the fourth largest Native American community in the U.S., at over 200,000; comprising roughly one-tenth of all residents, this is the second largest population by percentage after Alaska. New Mexico is also the only state besides Alaska where indigenous people have maintained a stable proportion of the population for over a century: In 1890, Native Americans made up 9.4% of New Mexico&#x27;s population, almost the same percentage as in 2020. By contrast, during that same period, neighboring Arizona went from one-third indigenous to less than 5%.

New Mexico&#x27;s population consists of many mestizo Indo-Hispano groups, including Hispanos of Oasisamerican descent and Indigenous Mexican American with Mesoamerican ancestry.

According to the 2022 American Community Survey, the most commonly claimed ancestry groups in New Mexico were:
* Mexican (32.8%)
* Other Hispanic (Hispano/Spanish) (15.3%)
* English (8.0%)
* German (7.9%)
* Irish (6.4%)
* Navajo (6.3%)
* Pueblo (2.4%)
Census data from 2020 found that 19.9% of the population identifies as multiracial/mixed-race, a population larger than the Native American, Black, Asian and NHPI population groups. Almost 90% of the multiracial population in New Mexico identifies as Hispanic or Latino.

===Immigration===
A little over 9% of New Mexican residents are foreign-born, and an additional 6.0% of U.S.-born residents live with at least one immigrant parent. The proportion of foreign-born residents is below the national average of 13.7%, and New Mexico was the only state to see a decline in its immigrant population between 2012 and 2022.

In 2018, the top countries of origin for New Mexico&#x27;s immigrants were Mexico, the Philippines, India, Germany and Cuba. As of 2021, the vast majority of immigrants in the state came from Mexico (67.6%), followed by the Philippines (3.1%) and Germany (2.4%).

Notwithstanding their relatively small population, immigrants play a disproportionately large role in New Mexico&#x27;s economy, accounting for almost one-eighth (12.5%) of the labor force,15% of entrepreneurs, and 19.1% of personal care aides, as well as 9.1% of workers in STEM fields.

===Languages===

New Mexico ranks third after California and Texas in the number of multilingual residents. According to the 2010 U.S. census, 28.5% of the population age5 and older speak Spanish at home, while 3.5% speak Navajo. Some speakers of New Mexican Spanish are descendants of pre-18th century Spanish settlers. Contrary to popular belief, New Mexican Spanish is not an archaic form of 17th-century Castilian Spanish; though some archaic elements exist, linguistic research has determined that the dialect &quot;is neither more Iberian nor more archaic&quot; than other varieties spoken in the Americas. Nevertheless, centuries of isolation during the colonial period insulated the New Mexican dialect from &quot;standard&quot; Spanish, leading to the preservation of older vocabulary as well as its own innovations.

Besides Navajo, which is also spoken in Arizona, several other Native American languages are spoken by smaller groups in New Mexico, most of which are endemic to the state. Native New Mexican languages include Mescalero Apache, Jicarilla Apache, Tewa, Southern Tiwa, Northern Tiwa, Towa, Keres (Eastern and Western), and Zuni. Mescalero and Jicarilla Apache are closely related Southern Athabaskan languages, and both are also related to Navajo. Tewa, the Tiwa languages, and Towa belong to the Kiowa-Tanoan language family, and thus all descend from a common ancestor. Keres and Zuni are language isolates with no relatives outside of New Mexico.

====Official language====
New Mexico&#x27;s original state constitution of 1911 required all laws be published in both English and Spanish for twenty years after ratification; this requirement was renewed in 1931 and 1943, with some sources stating the state was officially bilingual until 1953. Nonetheless, the current constitution does not declare any language &quot;official&quot;. While Spanish was permitted in the legislature until 1935, all state officials are required to have a good knowledge of English; consequently, some analysts argue that New Mexico cannot be considered a bilingual state, since not all laws are published in both languages.

However, the state legislature remains constitutionally empowered to publish laws in English and Spanish and to appropriate funds for translation. Whenever a referendum to approve an amendment to the New Mexican constitution is held, the ballots must be printed in both English and Spanish. Certain legal notices must be published in both English and Spanish as well, and the state maintains a list of newspapers for Spanish publication.

With regard to the judiciary, witnesses and defendants have the right to testify in either of the two languages, and monolingual speakers of Spanish have the same right to be considered for jury duty as do speakers of English. In public education, the state has the constitutional obligation to provide bilingual education and Spanish-speaking instructors in school districts where the majority of students are Hispanophone. The constitution also provides that all state citizens who speak neither English nor Spanish have a right to vote, hold public office, and serve on juries.

In 1989, New Mexico became the first of only four states to officially adopt the English Plus resolution, which supports acceptance of non-English languages. In 1995, the state adopted an official bilingual song, &quot;New Mexico – Mi Lindo Nuevo México&quot;. In 2008, New Mexico was the first state to officially adopt a Navajo textbook for use in public schools.

===Religion===

Like most U.S. states, New Mexico is predominantly Christian, with Roman Catholicism and Protestantism each constituting roughly a third of the population. According to Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), the largest denominations in 2010 were the Catholic Church (684,941 members); the Southern Baptist Convention (113,452); The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (67,637), and the United Methodist Church (36,424). Approximately one-fifth of residents are unaffiliated with any religion, which includes atheists, agnostics, deists. A 2020 study by the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI) determined 67% of the population were Christian, with Roman Catholics constituting the largest denominational group. In 2022, the PRRI estimated 63% of the population were Christian.Roman Catholicism is deeply rooted in New Mexico&#x27;s history and culture, going back to its settlement by the Spanish in the early 17th century. The oldest Christian church in the continental U.S., and the third oldest in any U.S. state or territory, is the San Miguel Mission in Santa Fe, which was built in 1610. Within the hierarchy of the Catholic Church, New Mexico belongs to the ecclesiastical province of Santa Fe. The state has three ecclesiastical districts: the Archdiocese of Santa Fe, the Diocese of Gallup, and the Diocese of Las Cruces. Evangelicalism and nondenominational Christianity have seen growth in the state since the late 20th century: The Billy Graham Evangelistic Association has hosted numerous events in New Mexico, and Albuquerque has several megachurches, which have numerous satellite locations in the state, including Calvary of Albuquerque, Legacy Church, and Sagebrush Church.

New Mexico has been a leading center of the New Age movement since at least the 1960s, attracting adherents from across the country. The state&#x27;s &quot;thriving New Age network&quot; encompasses various schools of alternative medicine, Holistic Health, psychic healing, and new religions, as well as festivals, pilgrimage sites, spiritual retreats, and communes. New Mexico&#x27;s Japanese American community has influenced the state&#x27;s religious heritage, with Shinto and Zen represented by Kagyu Shenpen Kunchab, Kōbun Chino Otogawa, Upaya Institute and Zen Center. Likewise, Holism is represented in New Mexico, as are associated faiths such as Buddhism and Seventh-day Adventism; a Tibetan Buddhist temple is located at Zuni Mountain Stupa in Grants.

Religious education, art, broadcasting, media exist across religions and faiths in New Mexico, including KHAC, KXXQ, Dar al-Islam, and &quot;Intermountain Jewish News&quot;. Christian schools in New Mexico are encouraged to receive educational accreditation, and among them are the University of the Southwest, St. Pius High School, Hope Christian, Sandia View Academy, St. Michael&#x27;s High School, Las Cruces Catholic School, St. Bonaventure Indian School, and Rehoboth Christian School. Albuquerque&#x27;s growing media sector has made it a popular hub for several national Christian media institutions, such as Trinity Broadcasting Network&#x27;s KNAT-TV. Christian artistic expression includes the gospel tradition within New Mexico music, and contemporary Christian music such as KLYT radio station. Several indigenous and Christian religious sites are registered and protected as part of regional and global cultural heritage.

Reflecting centuries of successive migrations and settlements, New Mexico has developed a distinct syncretic folk religion that is centered on Puebloan traditions and Hispano folk Catholicism, with some elements of Diné Bahaneʼ, Apache, Protestant, and Evangelical faiths. This unique religious tradition is sometimes referred to as &quot;Pueblo Christianity&quot; or &quot;Placita Christianity&quot;, referring to both the Pueblos and Hispanic town squares. Customs and practices include the maintenance of acequias, Pueblo and Territorial Style churches, ceremonial dances such as the &quot;matachines,&quot; religious artistic expression of kachinas and santos, religious holidays celebrating saints such as Pueblo Feast Days, Christmas traditions of bizcochitos and farolitos or luminarias, and pilgrimages like that of El Santuario de Chimayo. The luminaria tradition is a cultural hallmark of the Pueblos and Hispanos of New Mexico and a part of the state&#x27;s distinct heritage. The luminaria custom has spread nationwide, both as a Christmas tradition as well as for other events. New Mexico&#x27;s distinctive faith tradition is believed to reflect the religious naturalism of the state&#x27;s indigenous and Hispano peoples, who constitute a pseudo ethnoreligious group.

New Mexico&#x27;s leadership within otherwise disparate traditions such as Christianity, the Native American Church, and New Age movements has been linked to its remote and ancient indigenous spirituality, which emphasized sacred connections to nature, and its over 300 years of syncretized Pueblo and Hispano religious and folk customs. The state&#x27;s remoteness has likewise been cited as attracting and fostering communities seeking the freedom to practice or cultivate new beliefs. Global spiritual leaders including Billy Graham and Dalai Lama, along with community leaders of Hispanic and Latino Americans and indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest, have remarked on New Mexico being a sacred space.

According to a 2017 survey by the Pew Research Center, New Mexico ranks 18th among the 50 U.S. states in religiosity, 63% of respondents stating they believe in God with certainty, with an additional 20% being fairly certain of the existence of God, while 59% considering religion to be important in their lives and another 20% believe it to be somewhat important. Among its population in 2022, 31% were unaffiliated.

==Economy==


Oil and gas production, the entertainment industry, high tech scientific research, tourism, and government spending are important drivers of the state economy. The state government has an elaborate system of tax credits and technical assistance to promote job growth and business investment, especially in new technologies.

As of 2021, New Mexico&#x27;s gross domestic product was over $95 billion, compared to roughly $80 billion in 2010. State GDP peaked in 2019 at nearly $99 billion but declined in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, the per capita personal income was slightly over $45,800, compared to $31,474 in 2007; it was the third lowest in the country after West Virginia and Mississippi. The percentage of persons below the poverty level has largely plateaued in the 21st century, from 18.4% in 2005 to 18.2% in 2021.

Traditionally dependent on resource extraction, ranching, and railroad transportation, New Mexico has increasingly shifted towards services, high-end manufacturing, and tourism. Since 2017, the state has seen a steady rise in the number of annual visitors, culminating in a record-breaking 39.2 million tourists in 2021, which had a total economic income of $10 billion. New Mexico has also seen greater investment in media and scientific research.

=== Oil and gas ===
New Mexico is the second largest crude oil and ninth largest natural gas producer in the United States; it overtook North Dakota in oil production in July 2021 and is expected to continue expanding. The Permian and San Juan Basins, which are located partly in New Mexico, account for some of these natural resources. In 2000 the value of oil and gas produced was $8.2 billion, and in 2006, New Mexico accounted for 3.4% of the crude oil, 8.5% of the dry natural gas, and 10.2% of the natural gas liquids produced in the United States. However, the boom in hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling since the mid-2010s led to a large increase in the production of crude oil from the Permian Basin and other U.S. sources; these developments allowed the United States to again become the world&#x27;s largest producer of crude oil by 2018. New Mexico&#x27;s oil and gas operations contribute to the state&#x27;s above-average release of the greenhouse gas methane, including from a national methane hot spot in the Four Corners area.

In common with other states in the Western U.S., New Mexico receives royalties from the sale of federally owned land to oil and gas companies. It has the highest proportion of federal land with oil and gas, as well as the most lucrative: since the last amendment to the U.S. Mineral Leasing Act in 1987, New Mexico had by far the lowest percent of land sold for the minimum statutory amount of $2 per acre, at just 3%; by contrast, all of Arizona&#x27;s federal land was sold at the lowest rate, followed by Oregon at 98% and Nevada at 84%. The state had the fourth-highest total acreage sold to the oil and gas industry, at about 1.1 million acres, and the second-highest number of acres currently leased fossil fuel production, at 4.3 million acres, after Wyoming&#x27;s 9.2 million acres; only 11 percent of these lands, or 474,121 acres, are idle, which is the lowest among Western states. Nevertheless, New Mexico has had recurring disputes and discussions with the U.S. government concerning management and revenue rights over federal land.

=== Arts and entertainment ===
Reflecting the artistic traditions of the American Southwest, New Mexican art has its origins in the folk arts of the indigenous and Hispanic peoples in the region. Pueblo pottery, Navajo rugs, and Hispano religious icons like &quot;kachinas&quot; and &quot;santos&quot; are recognized in the global art world. Georgia O&#x27;Keeffe&#x27;s presence brought international attention to the Santa Fe art scene, and today the city has several notable art establishments and many commercial art galleries along Canyon Road. As the birthplace of William Hanna, and the residence of Chuck Jones, the state also connections to the animation industry.

New Mexico provides financial incentives for film production, including tax credits valued at 25–40% of eligible in-state spending. A program enacted in 2019 provides benefits to media companies that commit to investing in the state for at least a decade and that use local talent, crew, and businesses. According to the New Mexico Film Office, in 2022, film and television expenditures reached the highest recorded level at over $855 million, compared to $624 million the previous year. During fiscal years 2020–2023, the total direct economic impact from the film tax credit was $2.36 million. In 2018, Netflix chose New Mexico for its first U.S. production hub, pledging to spend over $1 billion over the next decade to create one of the largest film studios in North America at Albuquerque Studios. NBCUniversal followed suit in 2021 with the opening of its own television film studio in the city, committing to spend $500 million in direct production and employ 330 full-time equivalent local jobs over the next decade. Albuquerque is consistently recognized by &quot;MovieMaker&quot; magazine as one of the top &quot;big cities&quot; in North America to live and work as a filmmaker, and the only city to earn No. 1 for four consecutive years (2019–2022); in 2024, it placed second, after Toronto.

Country music record labels have a presence in the state, following the former success of Warner Western. During the 1950s to 1960s, Glen Campbell, The Champs, Johnny Duncan, Carolyn Hester, Al Hurricane, Waylon Jennings, Eddie Reeves, and JD Souther recorded on equipment by Norman Petty at Clovis. Norman Petty&#x27;s recording studio was a part of the rock and roll and rockabilly movement of the 1950s, with the distinctive &quot;Route 66 Rockabilly&quot; stylings of Buddy Holly and The Fireballs. Albuquerque has been referred to as the &quot;Chicano Nashville&quot; due to the popularity of regional Mexican and Western music artists from the region. A heritage style of country music, called New Mexico music, is widely popular throughout the southwestern U.S.; outlets for these artists include the radio station KANW, &quot;Los 15 Grandes de Nuevo México&quot; music awards, and Al Hurricane Jr. hosts &quot;Hurricane Fest&quot; to honor his father&#x27;s music legacy.

=== Technology ===
New Mexico is part of the larger Rio Grande Technology Corridor, an emerging alternative to Silicon Valley consisting of clusters of science and technology institutions stretching from southwestern Colorado to the Gulf of Mexico. The constituent New Mexico Technology Corridor, centered primarily around Albuquerque, hosts a constellation of high technology and scientific research entities, which include federal facilities such as Sandia National Laboratories, Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Very Large Array; private companies such as Intel, HP, and Facebook; and academic institutions such as the University of New Mexico (UNM), New Mexico State University (NMSU), and New Mexico Tech. Most of these entities form part of an &quot;ecosystem&quot; that links their researchers and resources with private capital, often through initiatives of local, state, and federal governments.

New Mexico has been a science and technology hub since at least the mid-20th century, following heavy federal government investment during the Second World War. Los Alamos was the site of Project Y, the laboratory responsible for designing and developing the world&#x27;s first atomic bomb for the Manhattan Project. Horticulturist Fabián García developed several new varieties of peppers and other crops at what is now NMSU, which is also a leading space grant college. Robert H. Goddard, credited with ushering the space age, conducted many of his early rocketry tests in Roswell. Astronomer Clyde Tombaugh of Las Cruces discovered Pluto in neighboring Arizona. Personal computer company MITS, which was founded in Albuquerque in 1969, brought about the &quot;microcomputer revolution&quot; with the development of the first commercially successful microcomputer, the Altair 8800; two of its employees, Paul Allen and Bill Gates, later founded Microsoft in the city in 1975. Multinational technology company Intel, which has had operations in Rio Rancho since 1980, opened its Fab 9 factory in the city in January 2024, part of its commitment to invest $3.5 billion in expanding its operations in the state; it is the company&#x27;s first high-volume semiconductor operation and the only U.S. factory producing the world&#x27;s most advanced packaging solutions at scale.

The New Mexican government has aimed to develop the state into a major center for technology startups, namely through financial incentives and public-private partnerships. The bioscience sector has experienced particularly robust growth, beginning with the 2013 opening of a BioScience Center in Albuquerque, the state&#x27;s first private incubator for biotechnology startups; New Mexicans have since founded roughly 150 bioscience companies, which have received more patents than any other sector. In 2017, New Mexico established the Bioscience Authority to foster local industry development; the following year, pharmaceutical company Curia built two large facilities in Albuquerque, and in 2022 announced plans to invest $100 million to expand local operations. The state is also positioning itself to play a leading role in developing quantum computing, quantum dot, and clean energy technologies.

New Mexico&#x27;s high altitude, generally clear skies, and sparse population have long fostered astronomical and aerospace activities, beginning with the ancient observatories of the Chaco Canyon culture; the &quot;Space Triangle&quot; between Roswell, Alamogordo, and Las Cruces has seen the highest concentration rocket tests and launches. New Mexico is sometimes considered the birthplace of the U.S. space program, beginning with Goddard&#x27;s design of the first liquid fuel rocket in Roswell in the 1930s. The first rocket to reach space flew from White Sands Missile Range in 1948, and both NASA and the Department of Defense continue to develop and test rockets there and at the adjacent Holloman Air Force Base. New Mexico has also become a major center for private space flight, hosting the world&#x27;s first purpose-built commercial spaceport, Spaceport America, which anchors several major aerospace companies and associated contractors, most notably Branson&#x27;s Virgin Galactic.

In November 2022, the New Mexico State Investment Council, which manages that state&#x27;s $38 billion sovereign wealth fund, announced it would commit $100 million towards America&#x27;s Frontier Fund (AFF), a new venture capital firm that will focus on advanced technologies such as microelectronics and semiconductors, advanced manufacturing, artificial intelligence, new energy sources, synthetic biology and quantum sciences.

=== Agriculture and food production ===
Although much of its land is arid, New Mexico has hosted a variety of agricultural activities for at least 2,500 years, centered mostly on the Rio Grande and its tributaries. This is helped by its long history of acequias, along with other farming and ranching methods within New Mexico. It is regulated by the New Mexico Department of Agriculture, specialty areas include various cash crops, cattle ranching, farming, game and fish.

Agriculture contributes $40 billion to New Mexico&#x27;s economy and employs nearly 260,000 people. As of 2023, the state exports $275 million in agricultural goods and ranks first nationwide in the production of chile peppers, second in pecans, and fifth in onions.

The state vegetables are New Mexico chile peppers and pinto beans, with the former being the most famous and valuable crop. According to the 2017 Census of Agriculture, New Mexico ranked first in the nation for chile pepper acreage, with Doña Ana and Luna counties placing first and second among U.S. counties in this regard. New Mexico chile sold close to $40 million in 2021, while dry beans accounted for $7.6 million that year. New Mexico is one of the few states commercially producing pistachios, and its piñon harvest (pine nut) is a protected commodity.

Dairy is the state&#x27;s largest commodity, with sales of milk alone totaling $1.3 billion. Dean Foods owns the Creamland brand in New Mexico, the brand was originally founded in 1937 to expand a cooperative dairy venture known as the Albuquerque Dairy Association. Southwest Cheese Company in Clovis is among the largest cheese production facilities in the United States.

Caballero history among the indigenous and Hispano communities in New Mexico have resulted in large-scale ranch lands throughout the state, most of which are within historically Apache, Navajo, Pueblo, and Spanish land grants. Wild game and fish found in the state include Rio Grande cutthroat trout, rainbow trout, crawdads, and venison.

Restaurant chains originating in the state include Blake&#x27;s Lotaburger, Boba Tea Company, Dion&#x27;s Pizza, Little Anita&#x27;s, Mac&#x27;s Steak in the Rough, and Twisters; many specialize in New Mexican cuisine. Some companies like Allsup&#x27;s gas stations have consumer foods, like chimichangas.

=== Tourism ===
New Mexico&#x27;s distinctive culture, rich artistic scene, favorable climate, and diverse geography have long been major drivers of tourism. As early as 1880, the state was a major destination for travelers suffering from respiratory illnesses (particularly tuberculosis), with its altitude and aridity believed to be beneficial to the lungs. Since the mid aughts, New Mexico has seen a steady rise in annual visitors, welcoming a record-breaking 39.2 million tourists in 2021.

New Mexico&#x27;s unique culinary scene has garnered increasing national attention, including numerous James Beard Foundation Awards. The state has been featured in major travel television shows such as &quot;Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives&quot;, &quot;Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown&quot;, &quot;Man v. Food Nation&quot;, and others. Outdoor recreation in the area is fueled by a variety of internationally recognized nature reserves, public parks, ski resorts, hiking trails, and hunting and fishing areas.

New Mexico&#x27;s government is actively involved in promoting tourism, launching the nation&#x27;s first state publication, &quot;New Mexico Magazine,&quot; in 1923. The New Mexico Tourism Department administers the magazine and is also responsible for the &quot;New Mexico True&quot; campaign.

===Government===

Federal government spending is a major driver of the New Mexico economy. In 2021, the federal government spent $2.48 on New Mexico for every dollar of tax revenue collected from the state, higher than every state except Kentucky. The same year, New Mexico received $9,624 per resident in federal services, or roughly $20 billion more than what the state pays in federal taxes. The state governor&#x27;s office estimated that the federal government spends roughly $7.8 billion annually in services such as healthcare, infrastructure development, and public welfare.

Federal employees make up 3.4% of New Mexico&#x27;s labor force. Many federal jobs in the state relate to the military: the state hosts three air force bases (Kirtland Air Force Base, Holloman Air Force Base, and Cannon Air Force Base); a testing range (White Sands Missile Range); and an army proving ground (Fort Bliss&#x27;s McGregor Range). A 2005 study by New Mexico State University estimated that 11.7% of the state&#x27;s total employment arises directly or indirectly from military spending. New Mexico is also home to two major federal research institutions: the Los Alamos National Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories. The former alone accounts for 24,000 direct and indirect jobs and over $3 billion in annual federal investment as of 2019.

====Economic incentives====
New Mexico provides a number of economic incentives to businesses operating in the state, including various types of tax credits and tax exemptions. Most incentives are based on job creation: state and local governments are permitted to provide land, buildings, and infrastructure to businesses that will generate employment. Several municipalities impose an Economic Development Gross receipts tax (a form of Municipal Infrastructure GRT) to pay for these infrastructure improvements and for marketing their areas.

The New Mexico Finance Authority operates the New Market Tax Credits (NMTC) to provide greater access to financing for new, expanding, or relocating businesses in &quot;highly distressed&quot; areas (defined by metrics such as poverty above 30% and median family income below 60% of the statewide median).

====Taxation====

New Mexico is one of the largest tax havens in the U.S., offering numerous economic incentives and tax breaks on personal and corporate income. It does not levy taxes on inheritance, estate, or sales. Personal income tax rates range from 1.7% to 5.9% within five income brackets; the top marginal rate was increased from 4.9% in 2021 per a 2019 law. Active-duty military salaries are exempt from state income tax, as is income earned by Native American members of federally recognized tribes on tribal land.

New Mexico imposes a Gross Receipts Tax (GRT) on many transactions, which may even include some governmental receipts. This resembles a sales tax but, unlike the sales taxes in many states, it applies to services as well as tangible goods. Normally, the provider or seller passes the tax on to the purchaser; however, legal incidence and burden apply to the business, as an excise tax. GRT is imposed by the state and by some counties and municipalities. As of 2021, the combined tax rate ranged from 5.125% to 9.063%.

Property tax is imposed on real property by the state, by counties, and by school districts. In general, personal use personal property is not subject to property taxation. On the other hand, property tax is levied on most business-use personal property. The taxable value of property is one-third the assessed value. A tax rate of about 30 mills is applied to the taxable value, resulting in an effective tax rate of about 1%. In the 2005 tax year, the average millage was about 26.47 for residential property, and 29.80 for non-residential property. Assessed values of residences cannot be increased by more than 3% per year unless the residence is remodeled or sold. Property tax deductions are available for military veterans and heads of household.

A 2021 analysis by the nonprofit Tax Foundation placed New Mexico 23rd in business tax climate; its property taxes were found to be the least burdensome in the U.S., while taxation for unemployment insurance and on corporations each ranked as the ninth least burdensome.

=== Wealth and poverty ===
New Mexico is one of the poorest states in the U.S. and has long struggled with poverty. Its poverty rate of roughly 18% is among the highest in the country, exceeded only by Louisiana and Mississippi. In 2017, nearly 30% of New Mexico&#x27;s children were in poverty, which is 40% higher than the national average. The majority of births (54%) were financed by Medicaid, a federal healthcare program for the poor, the third highest of any state. As of May 2021, around 44% of residents were enrolled in Medicaid.

New Mexico ranks 39th in the share of households with more than $1 million in wealth (5%), and among fourteen states without a Fortune 500 company. The state has a relatively high level of income disparity, with a Gini coefficient of 0.4769, albeit below the national average of 0.486. Household income is slightly less than $47,000, which is the fourth lowest in the U.S. The unemployment rate for June 2021 is 7.9%, tied with Connecticut as the highest in the country, and close to the peak of 8.0% for June–October 2010, following the 2007–2008 financial crisis.

The New Mexico government has enacted several policies to address chronic poverty, including approving a minimum wage increase in January 2021 and requiring paid sick leave. The state&#x27;s minimum wage of $10.50 is higher than that of the federal government and 34 other states; it is set to increase to $11.50 on January 1, 2022, and $12.00 on January 1, 2023. Additionally, counties and municipalities have set their own minimum wages; Santa Fe County enacted a &quot;Living Wage Ordinance&quot; on March 1, 2021, mandating $12.32.

The New Mexico Legislature is considering implementing a statewide guaranteed basic income program targeting poorer residents; if enacted, it would be only the second U.S. state after California with such a policy. In August 2021, Santa Fe announced a one-year pilot program that would provide a &quot;stability stipend&quot; of $400 monthly to 100 parents under the age of 30 who attend Santa Fe Community College; the results of the program will determine whether the state government follows suit with its own basic income proposals. Las Cruces, the state&#x27;s second largest city, is officially discussing the enactment of a similar program.

==Transportation==
New Mexico has long been an important corridor for trade and migration. The builders of the ruins at Chaco Canyon also created a radiating network of roads from the mysterious settlement. Chaco Canyon&#x27;s trade function shifted to Casas Grandes in the present-day Mexican state of Chihuahua; however, north–south trade continued. The pre-Columbian trade with Mesoamerican cultures included northbound exotic birds, seashells and copper. Turquoise, pottery, and salt were some of the goods transported south along the Rio Grande. Present-day New Mexico&#x27;s pre-Columbian trade is especially remarkable for being undertaken on foot. The north–south trade route later became a path for horse-drawn colonists arriving from New Spain as well as trade and communication; later called &quot;El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro,&quot; it was among the four &quot;royal roads&quot; that were crucial lifelines to Spanish colonial possessions in North America.
The Santa Fe Trail was the 19th-century territory&#x27;s vital commercial and military highway link to the Eastern United States. Several trails that terminated in northern New Mexico, including the Camino Real, the Santa Fe Trail and the Old Spanish Trail are recognized as National Historic Trails. New Mexico&#x27;s latitude and low passes made it an attractive east–west transportation corridor. As a territory, the Gadsden Purchase increased New Mexico&#x27;s land area for the purpose of constructing a southern transcontinental railroad, that of the Southern Pacific Railroad. Another transcontinental railroad was completed by the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway. The railroads essentially replaced the earlier trails but prompted a population boom. Early transcontinental auto trails later crossed the state, bringing more migrants. Railroads were later supplemented or replaced by a system of highways and airports. Today, New Mexico&#x27;s Interstate Highways approximate the earlier land routes of the Camino Real, the Santa Fe Trail and the transcontinental railroads.

===Road===


Personal automobiles remain the primary means of transportation for most New Mexicans, especially in rural areas. The state had 59,927 route miles of highway , of which 7,037 receive federal aid. In that same year there were of freeways, of which a thousand were the route miles of Interstate Highways 10, 25 and 40. The former number has increased with the upgrading of roads near Pojoaque, Santa Fe and Las Cruces to freeways. Notable bridges include the Rio Grande Gorge Bridge near Taos. Larger cities in New Mexico typically have some form of public transportation by road; ABQ RIDE is the largest such system in the state. Rural and intercity public transportation by road is provided by Americanos USA, LLC, Greyhound Lines and several government operators.

New Mexico is plagued by poor road conditions, with roughly a third of its roadways suffering from &quot;inadequate state and local funding&quot;. , 703 highway bridges, or one percent, were declared &quot;structurally deficient&quot; or &quot;structurally obsolete&quot;. Data from 2019 found 207 bridges and more than 3,822 miles of highway in less than subpar condition, resulting in greater commute times and higher costs in vehicles maintenance.

New Mexico has historically had a problem with drunk driving, though this has lessened: According to the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, the state once had the nation&#x27;s highest alcohol-related crash rates but ranked 25th in this regard by July 2009. The highway traffic fatality rate was 1.9 per million miles traveled in 2000, the 13th highest rate among U.S. states. A 2022 report cited poor road as a major factor in New Mexico&#x27;s continually high traffic fatalities; between 2015 and 2019, close 1,900 people were killed in automotive crashes in the state.

===Highways===

New Mexico has only three Interstate Highways: Interstate 10 travels southwest from the Arizona state line near Lordsburg to the area between Las Cruces and Anthony, near El Paso, Texas; Interstate 25 is a major north–south interstate highway starting from Las Cruces to the Colorado state line near Raton; and Interstate 40 is a major east–west interstate highway starting from the Arizona state line west of Gallup to the Texas state line east from Tucumcari. In Albuquerque, I-25 and I-40 meet at a stack interchange called The BigI. The state is tied with Delaware, North Dakota, Puerto Rico, and Rhode Island in having the fewest primary interstate routes, which is partly a reflection of its rugged geography and sparse population.

New Mexico currently has 15 United States Highways, which account for over of its highway system. All but seven of its 33 counties are served by U.S. routes, with most of the remainder connected by Interstate Highways. Most routes were built in 1926 by the state government and are still managed and maintained by state or local authorities. The longest is U.S. 70, which spans over across southern New Mexico, making up roughly 15% of the state&#x27;s total U.S. Highway length; the shortest is U.S. 160, which runs just across the northwestern corner of the state, between the Arizona and Colorado borders.

The most famous route in New Mexico, if not the United States, was U.S. 66, colloquially known as the nation&#x27;s &quot;Mother Road&quot; for its scenic beauty and importance to migrants fleeing West from the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. The road crossed through northern New Mexico, connecting the cities of Albuquerque and Gallup, before being replaced by I-40 in 1985. Much of U.S. 66 remains in use for tourism and has been preserved for historical significance. Another famous route was U.S. 666, which ran south to north along the western portion of the state, serving the Four Corners area. It was known as the &quot;Devil&#x27;s Highway&quot; due to the number 666 denoting the &quot;Number of the beast&quot; in Christianity; this numerical designation, as well as its high fatality rate was subject to controversy, superstition, and numerous cultural references. U.S. 666 was subsequently renamed U.S. Route 491 in 2003.
Many existing and former highways in New Mexico are recognized for their aesthetic, cultural, or historical significance, particularly for tourism purposes. The state hosts ten out of 184 &quot;America&#x27;s Byways&quot;, which are federally designated for preservation due to their scenic beauty or national importance.

=== Rail ===

There were 2,354 route miles of railroads in the year 2000; this number increased by a few miles with the opening of the Rail Runner&#x27;s extension to Santa Fe in 2006. In addition to local railroads and other tourist lines, the state jointly owns and operates a heritage narrow-gauge steam railroad, the Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railway, with the state of Colorado since 1970. Narrow-gauge railroads once connected many communities in the northern part of the state, from Farmington to Santa Fe. No fewer than 100 railroads of various names and lineage have operated in the state at some point. New Mexico&#x27;s rail transportation system reached its height in terms of length following admission as a state; in 1914, eleven railroads operated 3124 route miles.

Railroad surveyors arrived in New Mexico in the 1850s shortly after it became a U.S. territory. The first railroads incorporated in 1869, and the first railway became operational in 1878 with the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway (ATSF), which entered via the lucrative and contested Raton Pass. The ATSF eventually reached El Paso, Texas in 1881, and with the entry of the Southern Pacific Railroad from the Arizona Territory in 1880, created the nation&#x27;s second transcontinental railroad, with a junction at Deming. The Denver &amp; Rio Grande Railway, which generally used narrow gauge equipment in New Mexico, entered the territory from Colorado, beginning service to Española in December 1880. These first railroads were built as long-distance corridors; later railroad construction also targeted resource extraction. 

The rise of rail transportation was a major source of demographic and economic growth in the state, with many settlements expanding or being established shortly thereafter. As early as 1878, the ATSF promoted tourism in the region with an emphasis on Native American imagery. Named trains often reflected the territory they traveled: &quot;Super Chief&quot;, the streamlined successor to the &quot;Chief&quot;; &quot;Navajo&quot;, an early transcontinental tourist train; and &quot;Cavern&quot;, a through car operation connecting Clovis and Carlsbad (by the early 1950s as train 23–24), were some of the named passenger trains of the ATSF that connoted New Mexico, The &quot;Super Chief&quot; became a favorite of early Hollywood stars and among the most famous named trains in the U.S.; it was known for its luxury and exoticness, with cars bearing the name of regional Native American tribes and outfitted with the artwork of many local artistsbut also for its speed: as brief as 39 hours 45 minutes westbound from Chicago to Los Angeles.At its height, passenger train service once connected nine of New Mexico&#x27;s present ten most populous cities (the sole exception is Rio Rancho); currently, only Albuquerque and Santa Fe are connected by a rail network. With the decline of most intercity rail service in the U.S. in the late 1960s, New Mexico was left with minimal services; no less than six daily long-distance roundtrip trains, supplemented by many branch-line and local trains, served New Mexico in the early 1960s. Declines in passenger revenue, but not necessarily ridership, prompted many railroads to turn over their passenger services in truncated form to Amtrak, a state-owned enterprise. Amtrak, also known as the National Passenger Railroad Corporation, began operating the two extant long-distance routes on May 1, 1971.

Resurrection of passenger rail service from Denver to El Paso, a route once plied in part by the ATSF&#x27;s &quot;El Pasoan&quot;, has been proposed; in the 1980s, then–Governor Toney Anaya suggested building a high-speed rail line connecting the two cities with New Mexico&#x27;s major cities. In 2004, the Colorado-based nonprofit Front Range Commuter Rail was established with the goal of connecting Wyoming and New Mexico with high-speed rail; however, it became inactive in 2011.Since 2006, a state owned, privately run commuter railway, the New Mexico Rail Runner Express, has served the Albuquerque metropolitan area, connecting the city proper with Santa Fe and other communities. The system expanded in 2008 with the adding of the BNSF Railway&#x27;s line from Belen to a few miles south of Lamy. Phase II of Rail Runner extended the line northward to Santa Fe from the Sandoval County station, the northernmost station under Phase I service; the service now connects Santa Fe, Sandoval, Bernalillo, and Valencia counties. Rail Runner operates scheduled service seven days per week, connecting Albuquerque&#x27;s population base and central business district to downtown Santa Fe with up to eight roundtrips in a day; the section of the line running south to Belen is served less frequently.

Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Southwest Chief&quot; passes through daily at stations in Gallup, Albuquerque, Lamy, Las Vegas, and Raton, offering connections to Los Angeles, Chicago and intermediate points. A successor to the &quot;Super Chief&quot; and &quot;El Capitan,&quot; the &quot;Southwest Chief&quot; is permitted a maximum speed of in various places on the tracks of the BNSF Railway; it also operates on New Mexico Rail Runner Express trackage. The &quot;Sunset Limited&quot; makes stops three times a week in both directions at Lordsburg, and Deming, serving Los Angeles, New Orleans and intermediate points. The &quot;Sunset Limited&quot; is the successor to the Southern Pacific Railroad&#x27;s train of the same name and operates exclusively on Union Pacific trackage in New Mexico.

New Mexico is served by two of the nation&#x27;s ten class I railroads, which denote the highest revenue railways for freight: the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railroad. Together they operate 2,200 route miles of railway in the state.

===Aerospace===
New Mexico has four primary commercial airports that are served by most major domestic and international airliners. Albuquerque International Sunport is the state&#x27;s main aerial port of entry and by far the largest airport: It is the only one designated a medium-sized hub by the Federal Aviation Administration, serving millions of passengers annually.

The only other comparatively large airports are Lea County Regional Airport, Roswell International Air Center, and Santa Fe Regional Airport, which have varying degrees of service by major airlines. Most airports in New Mexico are small, general aviation hubs operated by municipal and county governments, and usually served solely by local and regional commuter airlines.

Due to its sparse population and many isolated, rural communities, New Mexico ranks among the states most reliant on Essential Air Service, a federal program that maintains a minimal level of scheduled air service to communities that are otherwise unprofitable for commercial airlines.

==== Spaceport America ====
New Mexico hosts the world&#x27;s first operational and purpose-built commercial spaceport, Spaceport America, located in Upham, near Truth or Consequences. It is operated by the state-backed New Mexico Spaceport Authority (NMSA). Rocket launches began in April 2007, with the spaceport officially opening in 2011. Tenants include HAPSMobile, UP Aerospace, SpinLaunch, and Virgin Galactic.

Over 300 suborbital flights have been successfully launched from Spaceport America since 2006, with the most notable being Virgin Galactic&#x27;s VSS &quot;Unity&quot; on May 22, 2021, which made New Mexico the third U.S. state to launch humans into space, after California and Florida.

On October 22, 2021, Spaceport America was the site of the first successfully tested vacuum-sealed &quot;suborbital accelerator&quot;, which aims to offer a significantly more economical alternative to launching satellites via rockets. Conducted by Spaceport tenant SpinLaunch, the test is the first of roughly 30 demonstrations being planned.

==Government and politics==

The Constitution of New Mexico was adopted by popular referendum in 1911. It establishes a republican form of government based on popular sovereignty and a separation of powers. New Mexico has a bill of rights modeled on its federal counterpart, but with more expansive rights and freedoms; for example, victims of certain serious crimes, such as aggravated battery and sexual assault, have explicit rights to privacy, dignity, and the timely adjudication of their case. Major state issues may be decided by popular vote, and the constitution may be amended by a majority vote of both lawmakers and the electorate.

=== Governmental structure ===
Mirroring the federal system, the New Mexico government consists of executive, legislative, and judicial departments. The executive is led by the governor and other popularly elected officials, including the lieutenant governor (elected on the same ticket as the governor), attorney general, secretary of state, state auditor, state treasurer, and commissioner of public lands. New Mexico&#x27;s governor is granted more authority than those of other states, with the power to appoint most high-ranking officials in the cabinet and other state agencies.

The legislative branch consists of the bicameral New Mexico Legislature, comprising the 70-member House of Representatives and the 42-member Senate. Members of the House are elected to two-year terms, while those of the Senate are elected every four years. New Mexican legislators are unique in the U.S. for being volunteers, receiving only a daily stipend while in session; this &quot;citizen legislature&quot; dates back to New Mexico&#x27;s admission as a state, and is considered a source of civic pride.

The judiciary is headed by the New Mexico Supreme Court, the state&#x27;s highest court, which primarily adjudicates appeals from lower courts or government agencies. It is made up of five judges popularly elected every eight years with overlapping terms. Below the state supreme court is the New Mexico Court of Appeals, which has intermediate appellate jurisdiction statewide. New Mexico has 13 judicial districts with circuit courts of general jurisdiction, as well as various municipal, magistrate, and probate courts of limited jurisdiction.

New Mexico is organized into a number of local governments consisting of counties, municipalities, and special districts.

===Politics===
Since 2018, New Mexico has been led by Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham and Lieutenant Governor Howie Morales, both of the Democratic Party. All constitutional officers are currently Democrats, including Secretary of State Maggie Toulouse Oliver, Attorney General Raúl Torrez, State Auditor Joseph Maestas, State Land Commissioner Stephanie Garcia Richard, and State Treasurer Laura Montaya.

Both chambers of the New Mexico Legislature have Democratic majorities: 27 Democrats and 15 Republicans in the Senate, and 45 Democrats and 25 Republicans in the House of Representatives. Likewise, the state is represented in the U.S. Senate by Democrats Martin Heinrich and Ben Ray Luján. The state&#x27;s three delegates to the U.S. House of Representatives are Democrats Melanie Stansbury, Gabe Vasquez, and Teresa Leger Fernandez, representing the first, second, and third districts, respectively.

Since achieving statehood in 1912, New Mexico has been carried by the national popular vote winner in every presidential election except in 1976 and 2024. Until 2008, New Mexico was traditionally a swing state in presidential elections. The 1992 election of Bill Clinton marked the first time the state was won by a Democrat since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964. Al Gore narrowly carried the state in 2000 by 366 votes, and George W. Bush won in 2004 by less than 6,000 votes. The election of Barack Obama in 2008 marked the state&#x27;s transition into a Democratic stronghold; Obama was also the first Democrat to win a majority of New Mexico votes since Johnson. Obama won New Mexico again in 2012, followed by Hillary Clinton in 2016, Joe Biden in 2020, and Kamala Harris in 2024.

Although state politics are decidedly Democratic leaning, New Mexico&#x27;s political culture is relatively moderate and bipartisan by national standards. While registered Democrats outnumber registered Republicans by nearly 200,000, New Mexico voters have historically favored moderate to conservative candidates of both parties at the state and federal levels: According to Pew Research, the largest political ideology among New Mexicans is political moderate at 36%, while 34% are conservatives, 23% are liberal, and 7% stated they did not know. Likewise, New Mexico&#x27;s demographics are atypical of most traditional liberal states with &quot;political ideology [being] less important&quot; than the profile or outreach efforts of the individual candidate. Due to their historically positive connections to the state&#x27;s heritage, the Republican and Democratic parties of New Mexico are each relatively robust, and New Mexico is considered a bellwether state. The state&#x27;s Republican Party was the first to incorporate Hispanics and Natives into leadership roles, such as territorial governor Miguel Antonio Otero and state governor Octaviano Ambrosio Larrazolo, who was later the first Mexican American and first Hispanic member of the U.S. Senate. Republican president Theodore Roosevelt had much respect for the Hispanos, Mexican Americans, and indigenous communities of New Mexico, many of whom had been a part of his Rough Riders.

Lujan Grisham succeeded two-term Republican governor Susana Martinez on January 1, 2019. Gary Johnson was governor from 1995 to 2003 as a Republican, but in 2012 and 2016 ran for president from the Libertarian Party. New Mexico&#x27;s Second Congressional District is among the most competitive in the country: Republican Herrell narrowly lost to Democrat Xochitl Torres Small in 2018 but retook her seat in 2020, subsequently losing to Democrat Gabe Vasquez in 2022. Recent election cycles within the past decade have seen moderate incumbents replaced by progressive Democrats in cities like Albuquerque, Santa Fe, and Las Cruces, with conservative Republicans being elected in rural areas. Democrats in the state are usually strongest in the Santa Fe area, parts of the Albuquerque metro area (such as the southeast and central areas, including the affluent Nob Hill neighborhood and the vicinity of the University of New Mexico), Northern and West Central New Mexico, and most Native American reservations, particularly the Navajo Nation. Republicans have traditionally had their strongholds in the eastern and southern parts of the state, the Farmington area, Rio Rancho, and the newly developed areas in the northwest mesa. Albuquerque&#x27;s Northeast Heights have historically leaned Republican but have become a key swing area for Democrats in recent election cycles.

A 2020 study ranked New Mexico as the 20th hardest state for citizens to vote, due mostly to the inaccessibility of polling stations among many isolated communities.

==== Female minority representation ====
New Mexico has elected more women of color to public office than any other U.S. state. While the trend is partly reflective of the state&#x27;s disproportionately high Hispanic and indigenous populations, it also reflects longstanding cultural and political trends: In 1922, Soledad Chávez Chacón was the first woman elected secretary of state of New Mexico, and the first Hispanic woman elected to statewide office in the United States. Republican governor Susana Martinez was the first Hispanic female governor in the United States, and Democrat congresswoman Deb Haaland was among the first Native American women elected to the U.S. Congress.

Research by the Center for American Women and Politics at Rutgers University found that two-thirds of all nonwhite women who have ever been elected governor in the U.S. are from New Mexico, including the current governor, Lujan Grisham. The state also accounts for nearly one-third of the women of color who have served in any statewide executive office, such as lieutenant governor and secretary of state, a distinction shared by only ten other states. New Mexico also has a relatively high percentage of state legislators who are women of color, which at 16% is the sixth highest in the nation.

New Mexico is described as a &quot;national leader in electing female legislators&quot;. As of January 2023, it ranked sixth in the number of female state legislators (43.8%), with women comprising a majority of the New Mexico House of Representatives (53%) and over a quarter of the Senate (29%). Women also hold a majority of seats on the state Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals. At the federal level, two out of three congressional districts are represented by women.

=== Local government ===

Local government in New Mexico consists primarily of counties and municipalities. There are 33 counties, of which the most populous is Bernalillo, which contains the state&#x27;s largest city, Albuquerque. Counties are usually governed by an elected five-member county commission, sheriff, assessor, clerk and treasurer. A municipality may call itself a village, town, or city, with no distinction in law and no correlation to any particular form of government. Municipal elections are non-partisan. In addition, limited local authority can be vested in special districts and landowners&#x27; associations.

=== Law ===
New Mexico is one of 23 states without the death penalty, becoming the 15th state to abolish capital punishment in 2009.











The state has among the most permissive firearms laws in the country. Its constitution explicitly enshrines the right to bear arms and prevents local governments from regulating gun ownership. Residents may purchase any firearm deemed legal under federal law without a permit. There is a 7-day waiting period under state law for picking up a firearm after it has been purchased (holders of concealed handgun licenses are exempt from the 7-day waiting period), nor any restrictions on magazine capacity. Additionally, New Mexico is a &quot;shall-issue&quot; state for concealed carry permits, thus giving applicants a presumptive right to receive a license without giving a compelling reason.

Before December 2013, New Mexico law was silent on the issue of same-sex marriage. The issuance of marriage licenses to same-sex couples was determined at the county level, with some county clerks issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples and others not. In December 2013, the New Mexico Supreme Court issued a unanimous ruling directing all county clerks to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, thereby making New Mexico the 17th state to recognize same-sex marriage statewide.

Based on 2008 data, New Mexico had 146 law enforcement agencies across the state, county, and municipal levels. State law enforcement is statutorily administered by the Department of Public Safety (DPS). The New Mexico State Police is a division of the DPS with jurisdiction over all crimes in the state. As of 2008, New Mexico had over 5,000 sworn police officers, a ratio of 252 per 100,000 residents, which is roughly the same as the nation. The state struggles with one of the nation&#x27;s highest rates of officer-involved killings, which has prompted political and legal reforms at local and state levels.

In April 2021, New Mexico became the 18th state to legalize cannabis for recreational use; possession, personal cultivation, and retail sales are permitted under certain conditions, while relevant marijuana-related arrests and convictions are expunged. New Mexico has long pioneered loosening cannabis restrictions: In 1978, it was the first state to pass legislation allowing the medical use of marijuana in some form, albeit restricted to a federal research program. In 1999, Republican Governor Gary Johnson became the highest-ranking elected official in the U.S. to publicly endorse drug legalization. Medicinal marijuana was fully legalized in 2007, making New Mexico the 12th state to do so, and the fourth via legislative action. In 2019, it was the first U.S. state to decriminalize possession of drug paraphernalia.

As of June 2022, New Mexico has one of the nation&#x27;s most permissive abortion laws: Elective abortion care is legal at all stages of pregnancy, without restrictions such as long waiting periods and mandated parental consent. In 2021, the state repealed a 1969 &quot;trigger law&quot; that had banned most abortion procedures, which would have come into effect following the U.S. Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Dobbs v. Jackson Women&#x27;s Health Organization&quot;. In response to the &quot;Dobbs&quot; decision, which held that abortion was not a constitutional right, New Mexico&#x27;s governor issued an executive order protecting abortion providers from out-of-state litigation, in anticipation of the influx of nonresidents seeking abortions.

=== Fiscal policy ===
On a per capita basis, New Mexico&#x27;s government has one of the largest state budgets, at $9,101 per resident. As of 2017, the state had an S&amp;P Global Rating of AA+, denoting a very strong capacity to meet financial commitments alongside a very low credit risk.

New Mexico has two constitutionally mandated permanent funds: The Land Grant Permanent Fund (LGPF), which was established upon statehood in 1912, and the Severance Tax Permanent Fund (STPF), which was created in 1973 during the oil boom. Both funds derive revenue from rents, royalties, and bonuses related to the state&#x27;s extensive oil, gas, and mining operations; the vast majority of the LGPF&#x27;s distributions are earmarked for &quot;common (public) schools&quot;, while all distributions from the STPF are allocated to the LGPF. As of 2020, the Land Grant Permanent Fund was valued at $21.6 billion, while the Severance Tax Permanent Fund was worth $5.8 billion.

==Education==

Due to its relatively low population and numerous federally funded research facilities, New Mexico had the highest concentration of PhD holders of any state in 2000. Los Alamos County, which hosts the eponymous national laboratory, leads the state in the most post-secondary degree holders, at 38.7% of residents, or 4,899 of 17,950. However, New Mexico routinely ranks near the bottom in studies measuring the quality of primary and secondary school education.

By national standards, New Mexico has one of the highest concentrations of persons who did not finish high school or have some college education, albeit by a low margin: Slightly more than 14% of residents did not have a high school diploma, compared to the national rate of 11.4%, the fifth lowest out of 52 U.S. states and territories. Almost a quarter of people over 25 (23.9%) did not complete college, compared with 21% nationally. New Mexico ranks among the bottom ten states in the proportion of residents with a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher (27.7%), but 21st in PhD earners (12.2%); the national average is 33.1% and 12.8%, respectively. In 2020, the number of doctorate recipients was 300, placing the state 34th in the nation.

In 2018, a state judge issued a landmark ruling that &quot;New Mexico is violating the constitutional rights of at-risk students by failing to provide them with sufficient education&quot;, in particularly those with indigenous, non-English-speaking, and low-income backgrounds. The court ordered the governor and legislature to provide an adequate system by April 2019; in response, New Mexico increased teacher salaries, funded an extended school year, expanded prekindergarten childhood education programs, and developed a budget formula for delivering more funding to schools that serve at-risk and low-income students. Nevertheless, many activists and public officials contend that these efforts continue to fall short, particularly with respect to Native American schools and students.

===Primary and secondary education===

The New Mexico Public Education Department oversees the operation of primary and secondary schools; individual school districts directly operate and staff said schools.

In January 2022, New Mexico became the first state in the U.S. to recruit national guardsmen and state workers to serve as substitute teachers due to staffing shortages caused by COVID-19. Partly in response to pandemic-related shortages, on March 1, 2022, Governor Grisham signed into law four bills to increase the salaries and benefits of teachers and other school staff, particularly in entry-level positions.

===Postsecondary education===
New Mexico has 41 accredited, degree-granting institutions; twelve are private and 29 are state-funded, including four tribal colleges. Additionally, select students can attend certain institutions in Colorado, at in-state tuition rates, pursuant to a reciprocity program between the two states.

Graduates of four-year colleges in New Mexico have some of the lowest student debt burdens in the U.S.; the class of 2017 owed an average of $21,237 compared with a national average of $28,650, according to the Institute for College Access &amp; Success.

New Mexico ranked 13th in the 2022 Social Mobility Index (SMI), which measures the extent to which economically disadvantaged students (with family incomes below the national median) have access to colleges and universities with lower tuition and indebtedness and higher job prospects.

==== Major flagship (R1) universities ====
* University of New Mexico at Albuquerque
* New Mexico State University at Las Cruces

====Regional state universities====
* New Mexico Institute of Mining &amp; Technology at Socorro 
Eastern New Mexico University at Portales
* New Mexico Highlands University at Las Vegas
* Western New Mexico University at Silver City

====Lottery scholarship====

New Mexico is one of eight states that fund college scholarships through the state lottery. The state requires that the lottery put 30% of its gross sales into the scholarship fund.
The scholarship is available to residents who graduated from a state high school, and attend a state university full-time while maintaining a 2.5 GPA or higher. It covered 100% of tuition when it was first instated in 1996, decreased to 90%, then dropped to 60% in 2017. The value slightly increased in 2018, and new legislation was passed to outline what funds are available per type of institution.

==== Opportunity scholarship ====
In September 2019, New Mexico announced a plan to make tuition at its public colleges and universities free for all state residents, regardless of family income. The proposal was described as going further than any other existing state or federal plan or program at the time. In March 2022, New Mexico became the first state to offer free college tuition for all residents, after the legislature passed a bipartisan bill allocating almost 1 percent of the state budget toward covering tuition and fees at all 29 public colleges, universities, community colleges, and tribal colleges. The program, which takes effect July 1, 2022, is described as among the most ambitious and generous in the country, as it is available to all residents regardless of income, work status, or legal status, and is provided without taking into account other scholarships and sources of financial aid.

==Culture==


New Mexican culture is a unique fusion of indigenous, Spanish, Hispanic, and American influences. The intermingling of these diverse groups is reflected in New Mexico&#x27;s demographics, toponyms, cuisine, dialect, and identity. Compared to other Western states, New Mexico&#x27;s Spanish and Mexican heritage remain more visible and enduring, due to it having been the oldest, most populous, and most important province in New Spain&#x27;s northern periphery. However, some historians allege that this history has been understated or marginalized by persistent American biases and misconceptions towards Spanish colonial history, reflected in part by the fact that many Americans do not know it is part of the U.S.; this misconception variably elicits frustration, amusement, or even pride among New Mexicans as evidence of their unique heritage.

Like other states in the American Southwest, New Mexico bears the legacy of the &quot;Old West&quot; period of American westward expansion, characterized by cattle ranching, cowboys, pioneers, the Santa Fe Trail, and conflicts among and between settlers and Native Americans. The state&#x27;s vast and diverse geography, sparse population, and abundance of ghost towns have contributed to its enduring frontier image and atmosphere. Many fictional works of the Western genre are set or produced in New Mexico.

===Architecture===

Examples of New Mexico&#x27;s architectural history date back to the Ancestral Puebloans within Oasisamerica. The Hispanos of New Mexico adapted the Pueblo architecture style within their own buildings, and following the establishment of Albuquerque in 1706, the Territorial Style of architecture blended the styles. Rural communities incorporated both building types into a New Mexico vernacular style, further exemplifying the indigenous roots of New Mexico. After statehood, the modern Pueblo Revival and Territorial Revival architectural styles became more prevalent, with these revival architectures becoming officially encouraged since the 1930s. These styles have been blended with other modern styles, as happened with Pueblo Deco architecture, within modern contemporary New Mexican architecture.

===Art, literature, and media===
The earliest New Mexico artists whose work survives today are the Mimbres Indians, whose black and white pottery could be mistaken for modern art, except for the fact that it was produced before 1130 CE. Many examples of this work can be seen at the Deming Luna Mimbres Museum and at the Western New Mexico University Museum.

Santa Fe has long hosted a thriving artistic community, which has included such prominent figures as Bruce Nauman, Richard Tuttle, John Connell, Steina Vasulka and Ned Bittinger. The capital city has several art museums, including the New Mexico Museum of Art, Museum of Spanish Colonial Art, Museum of International Folk Art, Museum of Indian Arts and Culture, Museum of Contemporary Native Arts, SITE Santa Fe and others. Colonies for artists and writers thrive, and the small city teems with art galleries. In August, the city hosts the annual Santa Fe Indian Market, which is the oldest and largest juried Native American art showcase in the world. Performing arts include the Santa Fe Opera, which presents five operas in repertory each July to August; the Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival held each summer; and the restored Lensic Theater, a principal venue for many kinds of performances. The weekend after Labor Day boasts the burning of Zozobra, a fifty-foot (15m) marionette, during Fiestas de Santa Fe.
As New Mexico&#x27;s largest city, Albuquerque hosts many of the state&#x27;s leading cultural events and institutions, including the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, the National Hispanic Cultural Center, the National Museum of Nuclear Science &amp; History, and the famed annual Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta. The National Hispanic Cultural Center has held hundreds of performing arts events, art showcases, and other events related to Spanish culture in New Mexico and worldwide in the centerpiece Roy E Disney Center for the Performing Arts or in other venues at the 53-acre facility. New Mexico residents and visitors alike can enjoy performing art from around the world at Popejoy Hall on the campus of the University of New Mexico. Popejoy Hall hosts singers, dancers, Broadway shows, other types of acts, and Shakespeare. Albuquerque also has the unique and iconic KiMo Theater built in 1927 in the Pueblo Revival Style architecture. The KiMo presents live theater and concerts as well as movies and simulcast operas. In addition to other general interest theaters, Albuquerque also has the African American Performing Arts Center and Exhibit Hall which showcases achievements by people of African descent and the Indian Pueblo Cultural Center which highlights the cultural heritage of the First Nations people of New Mexico.
New Mexico holds strong to its Spanish heritage. Old Spanish traditions such zarzuelas and flamenco are popular; the University of New Mexico is the only institute of higher education in the world with a program dedicated to flamenco. Flamenco dancer and native New Mexican María Benítez founded the Maria Benítez Institute for Spanish Arts &quot;to present programs of the highest quality of the rich artistic heritage of Spain, as expressed through music, dance, visual arts, and other art forms&quot;. There is also the annual Festival Flamenco Internacional de Alburquerque, where native Spanish and New Mexican flamenco dancers perform at the University of New Mexico; it is the largest and oldest flamenco event outside of Spain.

In the mid-20th century, there was a thriving Hispano school of literature and scholarship being produced in both English and Spanish. Among the more notable authors were: Angélico Chávez, Nina Otero-Warren, Fabiola Cabeza de Baca, Aurelio Espinosa, Cleofas Jaramillo, Juan Bautista Rael, and Aurora Lucero-White Lea. As well, writer D. H. Lawrence lived near Taos in the 1920s, at the D. H. Lawrence Ranch, where there is a shrine said to contain his ashes.

New Mexico&#x27;s strong Spanish, Anglo, and Wild West frontier motifs have contributed to a unique body of literature, represented by internationally recognized authors such as Rudolfo Anaya, Tony Hillerman, and Daniel Abraham. Western fiction folk heroes Billy the Kid, Elfego Baca, Geronimo, and Pat Garrett originate in New Mexico. These same Hispanic, indigenous, and frontier histories have given New Mexico a place in the history of country and Western music, with its own New Mexico music genre, including the careers of Al Hurricane, Robert Mirabal, and Michael Martin Murphey.

Silver City, originally a mining town, is now a major hub and exhibition center for large numbers of artists, visual and otherwise. Another former mining town turned art haven is Madrid, New Mexico, which was brought to national fame as the filming location for the 2007 movie &quot;Wild Hogs&quot;. Las Cruces, in southern New Mexico, has a museum system affiliated with the Smithsonian Institution Affiliations Program, and hosts a variety of cultural and artistic opportunities for residents and visitors.

The Western genre immortalized the varied mountainous, riparian, and desert environment into film. Owing to a combination of financial incentives, low cost, and geographic diversity, New Mexico has long been a popular setting or filming location for various films and television series. In addition to &quot;Wild Hogs&quot;, other movies filmed in New Mexico include &quot;Sunshine Cleaning&quot; and &quot;Vampires&quot;. Various seasons of the A&amp;E/Netflix series &quot;Longmire&quot; were filmed in several New Mexico locations, including Las Vegas, Santa Fe, Eagle Nest, and Red River. The widely acclaimed &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; franchise was set and filmed in and around Albuquerque, a product of the ongoing success of media in the city in large part helped by Albuquerque Studios, and the presence of production studios like Netflix and NBCUniversal.

=== Cuisine ===

New Mexico is known for its unique and eclectic culinary scene, which fuses various indigenous cuisines with those of Spanish and Mexican Hispanos originating in Nuevo México. Like other aspects of the state&#x27;s culture, New Mexican cuisine has been shaped by a variety of influences from throughout its history; consequently, it is unlike Latin food originating elsewhere in the contiguous United States. Distinguishing characteristics include the use of local spices, herbs, flavors, and vegetables, particularly red and green New Mexico chile peppers, anise (used in &quot;bizcochitos&quot;), and &quot;piñon&quot; (pine nuts).

Among the dishes unique to New Mexico are frybread-style &quot;sopapillas&quot;, breakfast burritos, &quot;enchilada montada&quot; (stacked enchiladas), green chile stew, &quot;carne seca&quot; (a thinly sliced variant of jerky), green chile burgers, &quot;posole&quot; (a hominy dish), slow-cooked &quot;frijoles&quot; (beans, typically pinto beans), &quot;calabacitas&quot; (sautéed zucchini and summer squash), and &quot;carne adovada&quot; (pork marinated in red chile). The state is also the epicenter of a burgeoning Native American culinary movement, in which chefs of indigenous descent serve traditional cuisine through food trucks.

===Sports===

No major league professional sports teams are based in New Mexico, but the Albuquerque Isotopes are the Pacific Coast League baseball affiliate of the MLB Colorado Rockies. The state hosts several baseball teams of the Pecos League: the Roswell Invaders, Ruidoso Osos, Santa Fe Fuego and the White Sands Pupfish. The Duke City Gladiators of the Indoor Football League (IFL) plays their home games at Tingley Coliseum in Albuquerque; the city also hosts two soccer teams: New Mexico United, which began playing in the second tier USL Championship in 2019, and the associated New Mexico United U23, which plays in the fourth tier USL League Two.

Collegiate athletics are the center of spectator sports in New Mexico, namely the rivalry between various teams of the University of New Mexico Lobos and the New Mexico State Aggies. The intense competition between the two teams is often referred to as the &quot;Rio Grande Rivalry&quot; or the &quot;Battle of I-25&quot; (in reference to both campuses being located along that highway). NMSU also has a rivalry with the University of Texas at El Paso called &quot;The Battle of I-10&quot;. The winner of the NMSU-UTEP football game receives the Silver Spade trophy.

Olympic gold medalist Tom Jager, an advocate of controversial high-altitude training for swimming, has conducted training camps in Albuquerque at 5,312 feet (1,619m) and Los Alamos at 7,320 feet (2,231m).

New Mexico is a major hub for various shooting sports, mainly concentrated in the NRA Whittington Center in Raton, which is largest and most comprehensive competitive shooting range and training facility in the U.S.

=== Historic heritage ===
Owing to its millennia of habitation and over two centuries of Spanish colonial rule, New Mexico features a significant number of sites with historical and cultural significance. Forty-six locations across the state are listed by the U.S. National Register of Historic Places, the 18th highest of any state.

New Mexico has nine of the country&#x27;s 84 national monuments, which are sites federally protected by presidential proclamation; this is the second-highest number after Arizona. The monuments include some of the earliest to have been created: El Morro and Gila Cliff Dwellings, proclaimed in 1906 and 1907, respectively; both preserve the state&#x27;s ancient indigenous heritage.

New Mexico is one of 20 states with a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and among only eight with more than one. Excluding sites shared between states, New Mexico has the most World Heritage Sites in the country, with three exclusively within its territory.

=== Other ===
Since 1970, &quot;New Mexico Magazine&quot; has had a standing feature, &quot;One of Our 50 Is Missing ,&quot; which relates often humorous anecdotes about instances in which people elsewhere do not realize New Mexico is a state, confuse it with the nation of Mexico, or otherwise mistake it as being a foreign country. The state&#x27;s license plates say &quot;New Mexico USA&quot;, so as to avoid confusion with Mexico, which it borders to the southwest. New Mexico is the only state that specifies &quot;USA&quot; on its license plates.

==See also==

* Climate change in New Mexico
* Economy of New Mexico
* Geology of New Mexico
* Government of New Mexico
** Governor of New Mexico
** List of counties in New Mexico
** List of municipalities in New Mexico
* History of New Mexico
** Timeline of New Mexico history
* Index of New Mexico-related articles
* List of mountain peaks of New Mexico
* List of rivers of New Mexico
* Outline of New Mexico
* Paleontology in New Mexico
== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==

* Beck, Warren and Haase, Ynez. &quot;Historical Atlas of New Mexico&quot; 1969.
* Carleton, William, R. &quot;Fruit, Fiber and Fire: A history of Modern Agriculture in New Mexico. Lincoln, University of Nebraska, 2021, 
* Chavez, Thomas E. &quot;An Illustrated History of New Mexico&quot;, 267 pages, University of New Mexico Press 2002, 
* Bullis, Don. &quot;New Mexico: A Biographical Dictionary, 1540–1980&quot;, 2 vol, (Los Ranchos de Albuquerque: Rio Grande, 2008) 393 pp. 
* Gonzales-Berry, Erlinda, David R. Maciel, eds. &quot;The Contested Homeland: A Chicano History of New Mexico&quot;, University of New Mexico Press 2000, , 314 pp.
* Gutiérrez, Ramón A. &quot;New Mexico&#x27;s Spanish Catholic Past.&quot; &quot;American Catholic Studies&quot; 133, no. 4 (2022): 61–68.
* Gutiérrez, Ramón A. &quot;When Jesus Came, the Corn Mothers Went Away: Marriage, Sexuality, and Power in New Mexico, 1500–1846&quot; (1991)
* Hain, Paul L., F. Chris Garcia, Gilbert K. St. Clair; &quot;New Mexico Government&quot; 3rd ed. (1994)
* Horgan, Paul, &quot;Great River, The Rio Grande in North American History&quot;, 1038 pages, Wesleyan University Press 1991, 4th Reprint, , Pulitzer Prize 1955
* Larson, Robert W. &quot;New Mexico&#x27;s Quest for Statehood, 1846–1912&quot; (1968)
* Nieto-Phillips, John M. &quot;The Language of Blood: The Making of Spanish-American Identity in New Mexico, 1880s–1930s&quot;, University of New Mexico Press 2004, 
* Simmons, Marc. &quot;New Mexico: An Interpretive History&quot;, University of New Mexico Press 1988, , 221 pp, good introduction
* Szasz, Ferenc M., and Richard W. Etulain, eds. &quot;Religion in Modern New Mexico&quot; (1997)
* Trujillo, Michael L. &quot;Land of Disenchantment: Latina/o Identities and Transformations in Northern New Mexico&quot; (2010) 265 pp; an experimental ethnography that contrasts life in the Espanola Valley with the state&#x27;s commercial image as the &quot;land of enchantment&quot;.
* Weber; David J. &quot;Foreigners in Their Native Land: Historical Roots of the Mexican Americans&quot; (1973), primary sources to 1912
===Primary sources===

* Ellis, Richard, ed. &quot;New Mexico Past and Present: A Historical Reader&quot;. 1971. primary sources
* Tony Hillerman, &quot;The Great Taos Bank Robbery and other Indian Country Affairs&quot;, University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, 1973, trade paperback, 147 pages, (), fiction
==External links==
===State government===
* New Mexico Government 
* New Mexico State Databases: annotated list of searchable databases produced by New Mexico state agencies and compiled by the Government Documents Roundtable of the American Library Association
* Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER) at the University of New Mexico: credible and objective data and research to inform economic development and public policy

===Federal government===
* New Mexico State Guide from the Library of Congress 
* Energy Profile for New Mexico: economic, environmental, and energy data
* New Mexico &quot;Science in Your Backyard&quot;, from the U.S. Geological Society
* &quot;American Southwest&quot; &quot;Discover Our Shared Heritage&quot;: travel itinerary from the National Park Service
* New Mexico state facts economic research service, U.S. Department of Agriculture

===Tourism===
* Flora of the Gila National Forest in New Mexico </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="0" end="10" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="29" end="41" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="56" end="69" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="88" end="103" title="Mountain States" label="Mountain States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="120" end="135" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15672" start="149" end="161" title="Four Corners" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="174" end="178" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="180" end="188" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="194" end="201" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="232" end="237" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="265" end="273" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="303" end="326" title="Mexico-United States border" label="an international border"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912963" start="336" end="350" title="Mexican states" label="Mexican states"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="354" end="363" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="368" end="374" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="423" end="434" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="444" end="457" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="461" end="469" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="551" end="563" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="567" end="576" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="625" end="658" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="fifth-largest of the fifty states"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="716" end="734" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="36th in population"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="739" end="765" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population density" label="45th in population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058786" start="867" end="875" title="Northern New Mexico" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330331" start="880" end="895" title="eastern New Mexico" label="eastern regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="913" end="927" title="alpine climate" label="alpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="969" end="978" title="Desert climate" label="more arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="984" end="994" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q107028150" start="999" end="1017" title="Rio Grande Valley (New Mexico)" label="its fertile valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="1055" end="1063" title="riparian zone" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061505" start="1082" end="1101" title="central New Mexico" label="center of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947463" start="1118" end="1124" title="bosque" label="bosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712806" start="1146" end="1163" title="Albuquerque Basin" label="Albuquerque Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267198" start="1288" end="1302" title="List_of_areas_in_the_United_States_National_Park_System" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623809" start="1328" end="1361" title="List of World Heritage Sites in the United States" label="three UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333729" start="1392" end="1417" title="economy of New Mexico" label="New Mexico&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="1451" end="1466" title="Ranch" label="cattle ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805630" start="1605" end="1610" title="media in Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348715" start="1616" end="1621" title="List of films shot in New Mexico" label="film."/>
<link wikidata="Q7301159" start="1632" end="1659" title="real gross domestic product" label="real gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689548" start="1731" end="1747" title="Taxation in New Mexico" label="State tax policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="1979" end="1992" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="2013" end="2038" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q119518061" start="2040" end="2046" title="KUMMSC" label="KUMMSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="2113" end="2119" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="2124" end="2156" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="2183" end="2197" title="Project Y" label="key facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="2205" end="2222" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2263" end="2274" title="Nuclear weapon" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="2320" end="2327" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2333" end="2350" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric times"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="2375" end="2394" title="Ancestral Puebloans" label="Ancestral Puebloans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500702" start="2400" end="2408" title="Mogollon culture" label="Mogollon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2422" end="2435" title="Ute people#Ute ancestral lands and culture" label="ancestral Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="2437" end="2443" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q659307" start="2449" end="2456" title="Jicarilla Apache" label="Apaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="2498" end="2506" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="2539" end="2553" title="Pueblo peoples" label="Pueblo peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="2646" end="2676" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish explorers and settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500085" start="2779" end="2789" title="Periphery countries" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="2802" end="2809" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="2817" end="2826" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q648279" start="2840" end="2851" title="Comancheria" label="Comancheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="2863" end="2883" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="2906" end="2923" title="Autonomous administrative division" label="autonomous region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318587" start="3041" end="3055" title="Revolt of 1837 (New Mexico)" label="Revolt of 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="3147" end="3167" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="3186" end="3204" title="Mexican Cession" label="annexed New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="3227" end="3247" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="3277" end="3300" title="American frontier" label="U.S. westward expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="3309" end="3330" title="Admission to the Union" label="admitted to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q132180982" start="3415" end="3429" title="culture of New Mexico" label="unique culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526752" start="3455" end="3479" title="Majority minority in the United States" label="majority-minority states"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="3526" end="3555" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="3613" end="3619" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="3659" end="3672" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="3677" end="3697" title="List of federally recognized tribes in the United States" label="federally recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="3698" end="3716" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="3749" end="3755" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="3801" end="3809" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="3845" end="3856" title="New Spain" label="Spanish era"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="3878" end="3895" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q642998" start="3924" end="3940" title="flag of New Mexico" label="New Mexican flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645717" start="4076" end="4079" title="Zia people (New Mexico)" label="Zia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121688" start="4143" end="4155" title="Flag of Spain" label="Spanish flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="4223" end="4231" title="American frontier" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="4280" end="4294" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="unique cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="4296" end="4311" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="Spanish dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="4313" end="4323" title="New Mexico music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258468" start="4329" end="4343" title="Pueblo Revival architecture" label="Pueblo Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703756" start="4348" end="4382" title="Territorial Style" label="Territorial styles of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="4574" end="4581" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="4630" end="4636" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="4656" end="4668" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="4677" end="4693" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="4711" end="4733" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="conquest of the Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25533" start="4882" end="4917" title="Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition" label="Chamuscado and Rodríguez Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703774" start="5363" end="5420" title="Territorial evolution of New Mexico" label="evolved throughout the Spanish, Mexican, and U.S. periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="5616" end="5630" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="5634" end="5647" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500702" start="5798" end="5806" title="Mogollon culture" label="Mogollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="5811" end="5827" title="Ancestral Puebloans" label="Ancestral Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="5915" end="5921" title="pueblo" label="pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q342057" start="5956" end="5961" title="Acoma Pueblo" label="Acoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q252814" start="5963" end="5967" title="Taos Pueblo" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q732463" start="5973" end="6011" title="Chaco Culture National Historical Park" label="Chaco Culture National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752952" start="6035" end="6063" title="Ancestral Puebloan dwellings" label="Ancestral Puebloan dwellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885121" start="6121" end="6133" title="Oasisamerica" label="Oasisamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="6251" end="6262" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="6271" end="6283" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="6285" end="6291" title="Mexica" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567934" start="6581" end="6601" title="Seven Cities of Gold" label="Seven Cities of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="6640" end="6652" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="6670" end="6692" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="conquest of the Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q250763" start="6749" end="6775" title="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca" label="Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q354615" start="6777" end="6804" title="Andrés Dorantes de Carranza" label="Andrés Dorantes de Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839280" start="6806" end="6835" title="Alonso del Castillo Maldonado" label="Alonso del Castillo Maldonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370004" start="6837" end="6847" title="Estevanico" label="Estevanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q690830" start="6853" end="6867" title="Marcos de Niza" label="Marcos de Niza"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="6894" end="6947" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="La Villa Real de la Santa Fe de San Francisco de Asís"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160043" start="6997" end="7013" title="Pedro de Peralta" label="Pedro de Peralta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328749" start="7061" end="7087" title="Sangre de Cristo Mountains" label="Sangre de Cristo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547791" start="7138" end="7151" title="Pueblo Revolt" label="Pueblo Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479984" start="7258" end="7262" title="Popé" label="Popé"/>
<link wikidata="Q972422" start="7264" end="7279" title="Diego de Vargas" label="Diego de Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="7413" end="7437" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="La Villa de Alburquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085263" start="7455" end="7475" title="Old Town Albuquerque" label="Old Town Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860406" start="7541" end="7548" title="Barelas" label="Barelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493034" start="7550" end="7556" title="Pueblo of Isleta" label="Isleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933179" start="7558" end="7569" title="Los Ranchos de Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Los Ranchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245540" start="7575" end="7581" title="Sandia Pueblo" label="Sandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q618547" start="7626" end="7684" title="Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, 10th Duke of Alburquerque" label="Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, 10th Duke of Alburquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483293" start="7695" end="7720" title="Francisco Cuervo y Valdés" label="Francisco Cuervo y Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="7746" end="7752" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Tiguex"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="7764" end="7774" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820525" start="7978" end="7998" title="Tomás Vélez Cachupín" label="Tomás Vélez Cachupín"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="8055" end="8062" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="8404" end="8410" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="8412" end="8418" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="8435" end="8443" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="8681" end="8694" title="Pueblo people" label="Pueblo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385463" start="9315" end="9322" title="acequia" label="acequia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321919" start="9414" end="9419" title="ejido" label="ejido"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="9721" end="9741" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="9764" end="9791" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="9837" end="9854" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="9887" end="9897" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488819" start="10066" end="10091" title="Texan Santa Fe Expedition" label="Texan Santa Fe Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="10472" end="10490" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="10547" end="10565" title="Missouri Territory" label="Missouri Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297417" start="10665" end="10670" title="Texas Panhandle" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414375" start="10675" end="10693" title="Oklahoma Panhandle" label="Oklahoma Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="10713" end="10719" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="10750" end="10767" title="Adams-Onis Treaty" label="Adams-Onis Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109279" start="10787" end="10809" title="First Mexican Republic" label="First Mexican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062192" start="10839" end="10868" title="Centralist Republic of Mexico" label="Centralist Republic of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318587" start="10991" end="11008" title="Revolt of 1837 (New Mexico)" label="Chimayó Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533878" start="11031" end="11039" title="genízaro" label="genízaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712428" start="11088" end="11100" title="Albino Pérez" label="Albino Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752423" start="11260" end="11273" title="Manuel Armijo" label="Manuel Armijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299010" start="11278" end="11306" title="Juan Bautista Vigil y Alarid" label="Juan Bautista Vigil y Alarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="11462" end="11476" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="11593" end="11623" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="ceded its northern territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684314" start="11786" end="11797" title="Taos Revolt" label="Taos Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q375010" start="11901" end="11913" title="Charles Bent" label="Charles Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q518351" start="11973" end="11990" title="Stephen W. Kearny" label="Stephen W. Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239615" start="12041" end="12056" title="Donaciano Vigil" label="Donaciano Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="12145" end="12158" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Nuevomexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="12206" end="12221" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="12295" end="12302" title="sceptre" label="sceptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596573" start="12304" end="12313" title="staff of office" label="of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="12409" end="12426" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17557" start="12550" end="12569" title="California Republic" label="California Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150921" start="12574" end="12590" title="State of Deseret" label="State of Deseret"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="12643" end="12661" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="12844" end="12858" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="12997" end="13017" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="13116" end="13125" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="13126" end="13132" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="13161" end="13173" title="Clark County, Nevada" label="Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="13177" end="13183" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q827212" start="13329" end="13345" title="Gadsden Purchase" label="Gadsden Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="13416" end="13441" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="13523" end="13537" title="American Civil War" label="U.S. Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="13562" end="13573" title="the Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="13578" end="13583" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364118" start="13718" end="13735" title="Arizona Territory (Confederate States of America)" label="Arizona Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496537" start="13756" end="13781" title="Trans-Mississippi Theater of the American Civil War" label="Trans-Mississippi Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739881" start="13814" end="13833" title="New Mexico Campaign" label="New Mexico Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="13849" end="13867" title="American Southwest" label="American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q580651" start="13987" end="14010" title="Battle of Glorieta Pass" label="Battle of Glorieta Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="14166" end="14176" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="14201" end="14242" title="American frontier" label="rapid economic development and settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="14345" end="14353" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="14372" end="14385" title="Western (genre)" label="Western genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066339" start="14446" end="14469" title="Maria Gertrudis Barceló" label="Maria Gertrudis Barceló"/>
<link wikidata="Q44200" start="14478" end="14491" title="Billy the Kid" label="Billy the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q450746" start="14504" end="14515" title="Pat Garrett" label="Pat Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q979842" start="14520" end="14531" title="Elfego Baca" label="Elfego Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="15042" end="15050" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="15302" end="15313" title="legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="15319" end="15327" title="judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="15870" end="15881" title="American Indian Wars" label="Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q128221" start="16208" end="16222" title="James Henry Carleton" label="James Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q379673" start="16558" end="16568" title="Kit Carson" label="Kit Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="16649" end="16655" title="Navajo people" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56585" start="16657" end="16666" title="Mescalero" label="Mescalero"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="16675" end="16680" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="16686" end="16694" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122567" start="16873" end="16895" title="Victorio&amp;#x27;s War" label="the guerilla campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q249278" start="16910" end="16925" title="Victorio" label="chiefs Victorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q539663" start="16945" end="16949" title="Nana (chief)" label="Nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504688" start="17149" end="17164" title="Frisco shootout" label="Frisco shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255720" start="17255" end="17265" title="Democratic Party of New Mexico" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314661" start="17270" end="17288" title="Republican Party of New Mexico" label="Republican parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q979842" start="17405" end="17409" title="Elfego Baca" label="Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q450746" start="17414" end="17421" title="Pat Garrett" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q889532" start="17437" end="17442" title="George Curry (politician)" label="Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306411" start="17444" end="17452" title="Herbert James Hagerman" label="Hagerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727149" start="17458" end="17463" title="Miguel Antonio Otero (born 1859)" label="Otero"/>
<link wikidata="Q357102" start="17506" end="17517" title="Lew Wallace" label="Lew Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="17597" end="17619" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q906228" start="17647" end="17657" title="List of U.S. states by date of admission to the Union" label="47th state"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="17787" end="17795" title="Mexican American" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="18450" end="18462" title="Indian reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="18710" end="18723" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="18868" end="18894" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="18948" end="18959" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279585" start="18961" end="18978" title="Racial inequality in the United States" label="social inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606784" start="18984" end="19009" title="employment discrimination" label="employment discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="19033" end="19075" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010782" start="19394" end="19399" title="Hobbs, New Mexico" label="Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q489616" start="19463" end="19473" title="Lea County, New Mexico" label="Lea County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010319" start="19727" end="19746" title="New Mexico during World War II" label="greatly transformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19774" end="19790" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614115" start="19836" end="19846" title="Patriotism in the United States" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q318637" start="20380" end="20390" title="Los Alamos, New Mexico" label="Los Alamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="20429" end="20446" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="20464" end="20475" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="20538" end="20550" title="Trinity site" label="Trinity site"/>
<link wikidata="Q503818" start="20573" end="20580" title="Socorro, New Mexico" label="Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q467617" start="20585" end="20595" title="Alamogordo, New Mexico" label="Alamogordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="20624" end="20649" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21084" end="21104" title="Mark 17 nuclear bomb#1957 incident" label="accidentally dropped"/>
<link wikidata="Q577946" start="21170" end="21193" title="Kirtland Air Force Base" label="Kirtland Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="21267" end="21297" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="21302" end="21330" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="21365" end="21403" title="United States Department of Energy National Laboratories" label="federal scientific research facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="21553" end="21579" title="unidentified flying object" label="unidentified flying object"/>
<link wikidata="Q219355" start="21612" end="21628" title="Roswell incident" label="Roswell incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493034" start="22347" end="22360" title="Isleta Pueblo" label="Isleta Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46408" start="22846" end="22867" title="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034237" start="22913" end="22924" title="Canyon Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Canyon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="23280" end="23309" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Albuquerque metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="23418" end="23436" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="23440" end="23459" title="scientific research" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608906" start="23485" end="23492" title="List of casinos in New Mexico" label="casinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797256" start="23494" end="23523" title="art of the American Southwest" label="art of the American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348715" start="23531" end="23535" title="List of films shot in New Mexico" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805630" start="23541" end="23575" title="Media in Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="media, particularly in Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029222" start="23616" end="23659" title="Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems" label="Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="23690" end="23699" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="23716" end="23721" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33555" start="23746" end="23756" title="Rio Rancho, New Mexico" label="Rio Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q21404084" start="23792" end="23799" title="HP Inc." label="HP Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="23800" end="23832" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexico&amp;#x27;s culinary scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740583" start="23897" end="23916" title="Albuquerque Studios" label="Albuquerque Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="23946" end="23953" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="24033" end="24045" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBCUniversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24052" end="24069" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="24421" end="24440" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="fifth-largest state"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="24524" end="24533" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="24552" end="24560" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="24595" end="24600" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="24731" end="24740" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="24745" end="24751" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="24847" end="24854" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972575" start="24870" end="24884" title="32nd meridian west from Washington" label="109° 03&amp;#x27;W"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010154" start="24949" end="24957" title="New Mexico Bootheel" label="Bootheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="24963" end="24967" title="37th parallel north" label="37°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="25277" end="25286" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="25353" end="25371" title="Prairie" label="verdant grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q623319" start="25383" end="25387" title="mesa" label="mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469144" start="25429" end="25472" title="Forest cover by state and territory in the United States" label="third of the state is covered in timberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328749" start="25544" end="25570" title="Sangre de Cristo Mountains" label="Sangre de Cristo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="25601" end="25616" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="25669" end="25679" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="25716" end="25728" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052758" start="25790" end="25804" title="Llano Estacado" label="Llano Estacado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821156" start="25877" end="25892" title="Mescalero Ridge" label="Mescalero Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q939487" start="25893" end="25903" title="Caprock Escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="25965" end="25981" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196583" start="26064" end="26087" title="pinyon-juniper woodland" label="pinyon-juniper woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q855658" start="26115" end="26132" title="Chihuahuan Desert" label="Chihuahuan Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505965" start="26401" end="26413" title="Wheeler Peak (New Mexico)" label="Wheeler Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303773" start="26481" end="26500" title="Red Bluff Reservoir" label="Red Bluff Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863493" start="26608" end="26640" title="List of rivers of the United States" label="fourth-longest river in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1356561" start="26693" end="26698" title="Pecos River" label="Pecos"/>
<link wikidata="Q597753" start="26700" end="26708" title="Canadian River" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542874" start="26710" end="26718" title="San Juan River (Colorado River)" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q838143" start="26724" end="26728" title="Gila River" label="Gila"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="27273" end="27291" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="27450" end="27460" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930556" start="28594" end="28628" title="Waste Isolation Pilot Plant" label="Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998727" start="28634" end="28640" title="Loving, New Mexico" label="Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705996" start="28697" end="28703" title="Jamestown, New Mexico" label="Ciniza"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705996" start="28710" end="28719" title="Jamestown, New Mexico" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="28834" end="28849" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28894" end="28920" title=":Category:Astronomical observatories in New Mexico" label="astronomical observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q616529" start="28936" end="28960" title="Apache Point Observatory" label="Apache Point Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="28966" end="28982" title="Very Large Array" label="Very Large Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883774" start="28992" end="29019" title="Magdalena Ridge Observatory" label="Magdalena Ridge Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="29079" end="29089" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q126285699" start="29119" end="29135" title="Vegetation zone (latitude)" label="vegetation zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052758" start="29452" end="29466" title="Llano Estacado" label="Llano Estacado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502172" start="29488" end="29506" title="Shortgrass Prairie" label="Shortgrass Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922605" start="29512" end="29522" title="Bouteloua gracilis" label="blue grama"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="29538" end="29543" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q855658" start="29549" end="29566" title="Chihuahuan Desert" label="Chihuahuan Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q965954" start="29608" end="29616" title="Larrea tridentata" label="creosote"/>
<link wikidata="Q925906" start="29622" end="29638" title="Colorado Plateau" label="Colorado Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117903" start="29721" end="29730" title="Artemisia tridentata" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716742" start="29732" end="29742" title="Atriplex confertifolia" label="shadescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q131616" start="29744" end="29754" title="Sarcobatus" label="greasewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="29788" end="29794" title="Soil salinity" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="29799" end="29811" title="Selenium" label="seleniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196583" start="29926" end="29949" title="Pinyon-juniper woodland" label="piñon-juniper woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="29973" end="29982" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="29983" end="29991" title="Pinophyta" label="conifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="29993" end="29999" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="30000" end="30003" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087592" start="30008" end="30013" title="aspen" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518409" start="30053" end="30062" title="Krummholz" label="Krummholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149452" start="30068" end="30081" title="alpine tundra" label="alpine tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728592" start="30103" end="30116" title="Madrean Region" label="Apachian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139818" start="30191" end="30204" title="Madrean pine-oak woodlands" label="oak woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q670040" start="30206" end="30221" title="Cupressus arizonica" label="Arizona cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="30508" end="30519" title="American black bear" label="Black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="30521" end="30534" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="30536" end="30542" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="30545" end="30551" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="30554" end="30558" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="30564" end="30567" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="30609" end="30615" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="30618" end="30628" title="jackrabbit" label="jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q120094" start="30631" end="30643" title="kangaroo rat" label="kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="30646" end="30654" title="Peccary" label="javelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="30656" end="30665" title="porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="30668" end="30686" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q222287" start="30688" end="30708" title="Crotalus atrox" label="western diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="30714" end="30725" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q634804" start="30785" end="30795" title="greater roadrunner" label="roadrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q531300" start="30883" end="30900" title="Mexican wolf" label="Mexican gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q307782" start="30958" end="30983" title="Rio Grande silvery minnow" label="Rio Grande silvery minnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="31396" end="31421" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871222" start="31432" end="31450" title="Public domain (land)" label="public domain land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974012" start="31454" end="31481" title="National Conservation Lands" label="National Conservation Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="31521" end="31540" title="United States Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="31544" end="31560" title="National forest (United States)" label="national forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="31612" end="31633" title="conservation movement" label="conservation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560677" start="31640" end="31655" title="Gila Wilderness" label="Gila Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="31696" end="31711" title="wilderness area" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="31772" end="31790" title="National monument (United States)" label="national monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324397" start="31871" end="31879" title="El Morro National Monument" label="El Morro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313033" start="31916" end="31936" title="Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument" label="Gila Cliff Dwellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="32053" end="32067" title="U.S. national parks" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="32083" end="32101" title="National monument (United States)" label="national monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810722" start="32106" end="32112" title="National Trail System" label="trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="32128" end="32149" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974012" start="32306" end="32344" title="National Landscape Conservation System" label="National Landscape Conservation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="32364" end="32389" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918506" start="32431" end="32457" title="Bisti/De-Na-Zin Wilderness" label="Bisti/De-Na-Zin Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012695" start="32463" end="32473" title="Farmington, New Mexico" label="Farmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="32476" end="32532" title="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail" label="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351544" start="32535" end="32572" title="El Malpais National Conservation Area" label="El Malpais National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q545727" start="32578" end="32584" title="Grants, New Mexico" label="Grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q666664" start="32587" end="32628" title="Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks National Monument" label="Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105155" start="32632" end="32646" title="Cochiti Pueblo" label="Cochiti Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239949" start="32649" end="32688" title="Prehistoric Trackways National Monument" label="Prehistoric Trackways National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="32694" end="32704" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="32707" end="32742" title="Old Spanish National Historic Trail" label="Old Spanish National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17060316" start="32745" end="32791" title="Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks National Monument" label="Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="32797" end="32807" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706093" start="32810" end="32848" title="Rio Grande del Norte National Monument" label="Rio Grande del Norte National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="32854" end="32858" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335176" start="32861" end="32892" title="Rio Chama" label="Rio Chama Wild and Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q321422" start="32898" end="32905" title="Abiquiu" label="Abiquiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217704" start="32908" end="32955" title="Wild Rivers Recreation Area" label="Rio Grande and Red River Wild and Scenic Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736026" start="32961" end="32967" title="Questa, New Mexico" label="Questa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410668" start="33035" end="33059" title="National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="33080" end="33110" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919014" start="33129" end="33165" title="Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge" label="Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423287" start="33168" end="33210" title="Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge" label="Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612027" start="33213" end="33244" title="Grulla National Wildlife Refuge" label="Grulla National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492604" start="33247" end="33281" title="Las Vegas National Wildlife Refuge" label="Las Vegas National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796137" start="33284" end="33316" title="Maxwell National Wildlife Refuge" label="Maxwell National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413234" start="33319" end="33354" title="San Andres National Wildlife Refuge" label="San Andres National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458078" start="33357" end="33391" title="Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge" label="Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108098" start="33394" end="33431" title="Valle de Oro National Wildlife Refuge" label="Valle de Oro National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="33803" end="33848" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819188" start="33875" end="33912" title="2015 Gold King Mine waste water spill" label="2015 Gold King Mine waste water spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615286" start="34017" end="34029" title="Animas River" label="Animas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="34245" end="34259" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="34898" end="34928" title="List of states and territories of the United States by population density" label="least densely populated states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="35122" end="35146" title="City-County" label="consolidated city-county"/>
<link wikidata="Q484296" start="35148" end="35158" title="Los Alamos County, New Mexico" label="Los Alamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q156297" start="35494" end="35511" title="Bernalillo County, New Mexico" label="Bernalillo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="35517" end="35546" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Albuquerque metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q33555" start="35594" end="35604" title="Rio Rancho, New Mexico" label="Rio Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="35708" end="35716" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960685" start="35771" end="35828" title="Albuquerque–Santa Fe–Los Alamos combined statistical area" label="Albuquerque–Santa Fe–Los Alamos combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="35992" end="36002" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="36176" end="36190" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823389" start="36199" end="36224" title="El Paso–Las Cruces, Texas–New Mexico, combined statistical area" label="combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858175" start="36406" end="36432" title="off-reservation trust land" label="off-reservation trust land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148199" start="36647" end="36667" title="Colonia (United States)" label="&amp;quot;colonias&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="36669" end="36683" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="36696" end="36700" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="36919" end="36967" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="37027" end="37046" title="U.S.-Mexico border" label="Mexico-U.S. border."/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="37086" end="37097" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="37176" end="37187" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="37316" end="37320" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="37546" end="37573" title="Net migration rate" label="negative net migration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932516" start="37916" end="37929" title="Net migration rate" label="net migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="38099" end="38115" title="Territories of the United States" label="island territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044936" start="38347" end="38382" title="List of U.S. states and territories by median age" label="slightly above the national average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041917" start="38800" end="38811" title="Spanish American" label="descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="38823" end="38831" title="colonist" label="colonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601004" start="39171" end="39184" title="List of U.S. states and territories by poverty rate" label="third highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="39680" end="39707" title="City University of New York" label="City University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="40175" end="40178" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="40191" end="40224" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="40256" end="40264" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526752" start="40341" end="40370" title="Majority minority in the United States" label="&amp;quot;majority-minority&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="40384" end="40403" title="non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="40722" end="40751" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="40770" end="40781" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="40863" end="40871" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="40945" end="40962" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="41031" end="41041" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="41227" end="41233" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="41238" end="41244" title="Apache Tribe" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="41251" end="41261" title="Athabaskan" label="Athabaskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="41310" end="41322" title="Native American reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="41341" end="41354" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="41402" end="41404" title="hectare" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="41429" end="41436" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="41530" end="41544" title="Pueblo Indians" label="Pueblo Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="41635" end="41642" title="Puebloans" label="pueblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527370" start="41968" end="41988" title="Gathering of Nations" label="Gathering of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="42051" end="42058" title="pow wow" label="pow wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="42240" end="42288" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="&amp;quot;Hispanos&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;Neomexicanos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42461" end="42476" title="Who is a Jew?#New Mexico&amp;#x27;s Crypto-Jews" label="Jewish ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="42508" end="42516" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468229" start="42527" end="42538" title="Crypto-Judaism" label="Crypto-Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="42620" end="42639" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="New Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="43563" end="43570" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885121" start="43614" end="43626" title="Oasisamerica" label="Oasisamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151010" start="43640" end="43667" title="Indigenous Mexican Americans" label="Indigenous Mexican American"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="43673" end="43684" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="43719" end="43744" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="43810" end="43817" title="Mexican American" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="43844" end="43851" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041917" start="43852" end="43859" title="Spanish Americans" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="43871" end="43878" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="43888" end="43894" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="43904" end="43909" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="43919" end="43925" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="43935" end="43941" title="Puebloans" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="44657" end="44668" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="44689" end="44693" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="45248" end="45264" title="2010 U.S. census" label="2010 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="45345" end="45351" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982357" start="45370" end="45389" title="New Mexican Spanish" label="New Mexican Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="45434" end="45441" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631909" start="45531" end="45548" title="Castilian Spanish" label="Castilian Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="46013" end="46038" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Native American languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368" start="46160" end="46176" title="Mescalero-Chiricahua language" label="Mescalero Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q28277" start="46178" end="46194" title="Jicarilla language" label="Jicarilla Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q56492" start="46196" end="46200" title="Tewa language" label="Tewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570552" start="46202" end="46215" title="Southern Tiwa language" label="Southern Tiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684320" start="46217" end="46230" title="Northern Tiwa" label="Northern Tiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912876" start="46232" end="46236" title="Jemez language" label="Towa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35878" start="46238" end="46243" title="Keres language" label="Keres"/>
<link wikidata="Q10188" start="46271" end="46275" title="Zuni language" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q27758" start="46328" end="46357" title="Southern Athabaskan languages" label="Southern Athabaskan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q386288" start="46445" end="46457" title="Tanoan languages" label="Kiowa-Tanoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="46503" end="46518" title="Language family" label="common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="46539" end="46555" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="47415" end="47425" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="48107" end="48119" title="Hispanophone" label="Hispanophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378347" start="48359" end="48371" title="English Plus" label="English Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010142" start="48497" end="48531" title="New Mexico – Mi Lindo Nuevo México" label="New Mexico – Mi Lindo Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="48601" end="48607" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="48712" end="48721" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="48728" end="48745" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="48750" end="48763" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="48830" end="48867" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="48919" end="48934" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="48958" end="48985" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="48997" end="49044" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="49063" end="49086" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="49138" end="49168" title="Irreligion" label="unaffiliated with any religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="49234" end="49268" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985568" start="49719" end="49737" title="San Miguel Mission" label="San Miguel Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q625160" start="49847" end="49870" title="ecclesiastical province" label="ecclesiastical province"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="49904" end="49927" title="diocese" label="ecclesiastical district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365503" start="49934" end="49957" title="Archdiocese of Santa Fe" label="Archdiocese of Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q869028" start="49963" end="49980" title="Diocese of Gallup" label="Diocese of Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q871071" start="49990" end="50011" title="Diocese of Las Cruces" label="Diocese of Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="50013" end="50027" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="50032" end="50062" title="nondenominational Christianity" label="nondenominational Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307630" start="50126" end="50163" title="Billy Graham Evangelistic Association" label="Billy Graham Evangelistic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q781549" start="50234" end="50244" title="megachurch" label="megachurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="50418" end="50434" title="New Age" label="New Age movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="50592" end="50612" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="50614" end="50629" title="Holistic Health" label="Holistic Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035814" start="50631" end="50646" title="Energy medicine" label="psychic healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="50652" end="50665" title="New religious movement" label="new religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="50759" end="50776" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="50844" end="50850" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="50855" end="50858" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881133" start="50874" end="50895" title="Kagyu Shenpen Kunchab" label="Kagyu Shenpen Kunchab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964204" start="50897" end="50916" title="Kōbun Chino Otogawa" label="Kōbun Chino Otogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898192" start="50918" end="50948" title="Upaya Institute and Zen Center" label="Upaya Institute and Zen Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="50960" end="50966" title="Holism" label="Holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="51030" end="51038" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="51043" end="51064" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="51068" end="51084" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867530" start="51106" end="51125" title="Zuni Mountain Stupa" label="Zuni Mountain Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q545727" start="51129" end="51135" title="Grants, New Mexico" label="Grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311336" start="51164" end="51176" title="religious broadcasting" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906286" start="51178" end="51183" title="Faith-based organization" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329972" start="51243" end="51247" title="KHAC" label="KHAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706039" start="51249" end="51253" title="KXXQ" label="KXXQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221944" start="51255" end="51267" title="Dar al-Islam (organization)" label="Dar al-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997135" start="51279" end="51304" title="Intermountain Jewish News" label="Intermountain Jewish News"/>
<link wikidata="Q419911" start="51370" end="51395" title="educational accreditation" label="educational accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896772" start="51420" end="51447" title="University of the Southwest" label="University of the Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591559" start="51449" end="51469" title="St. Pius X High School (Albuquerque)" label="St. Pius High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899207" start="51471" end="51485" title="Hope Christian School" label="Hope Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416330" start="51487" end="51506" title="Sandia View Academy" label="Sandia View Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590697" start="51508" end="51538" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s High School" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951144" start="51540" end="51566" title="Las Cruces Catholic School" label="Las Cruces Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612763" start="51568" end="51597" title="St. Bonaventure Indian School" label="St. Bonaventure Indian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354873" start="51603" end="51628" title="Rehoboth Christian School" label="Rehoboth Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805630" start="51630" end="51669" title="Media in Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque&amp;#x27;s growing media sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110339" start="51717" end="51732" title="Christian media" label="Christian media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="51755" end="51783" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="Trinity Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706021" start="51791" end="51798" title="KNAT-TV" label="KNAT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q645717" start="51800" end="51813" title="Christian art" label="Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="51843" end="51849" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="51867" end="51883" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379958" start="51889" end="51917" title="contemporary Christian music" label="contemporary Christian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706014" start="51926" end="51930" title="KLYT" label="KLYT"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="52174" end="52183" title="syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068640" start="52184" end="52197" title="folk religion" label="folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="52218" end="52226" title="Puebloans" label="Puebloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="52242" end="52249" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464420" start="52250" end="52266" title="folk Catholicism" label="folk Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278771" start="52290" end="52302" title="Diné Bahaneʼ" label="Diné Bahaneʼ"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="52304" end="52310" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="52312" end="52322" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="52328" end="52339" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="52499" end="52505" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="52520" end="52531" title="town square" label="town square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385463" start="52583" end="52590" title="acequia" label="acequia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400431" start="52593" end="52599" title="Pueblo architecture" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703756" start="52604" end="52621" title="Territorial Style" label="Territorial Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785934" start="52668" end="52678" title="matachines" label="matachines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864737" start="52686" end="52699" title="religious art" label="religious art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570159" start="52719" end="52726" title="kachina" label="kachina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420459" start="52732" end="52737" title="Santo (art)" label="santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="52771" end="52776" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905014" start="52829" end="52839" title="bizcochito" label="bizcochito"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051001" start="52845" end="52868" title="luminaria" label="farolitos or luminarias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352121" start="52899" end="52922" title="El Santuario de Chimayo" label="El Santuario de Chimayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="52978" end="52985" title="Puebloans" label="Pueblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="52990" end="53012" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53095" end="53105" title="Luminaria#Elsewhere" label="nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873351" start="53239" end="53259" title="religious naturalism" label="religious naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="53336" end="53356" title="ethnoreligious group" label="ethnoreligious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="53452" end="53474" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="53882" end="53894" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="53899" end="53909" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="53943" end="53972" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081865" start="53977" end="54027" title="indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest" label="indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829193" start="54065" end="54077" title="sacred space" label="sacred space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="54114" end="54133" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553701" start="54185" end="54196" title="religiosity" label="religiosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="54565" end="54574" title="high technology" label="high tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="55033" end="55050" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="55065" end="55091" title="per capita income" label="per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="55260" end="55273" title="poverty level" label="poverty level"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="55858" end="55867" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887576" start="56028" end="56035" title="Permian Basin (North America)" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887494" start="56040" end="56048" title="San Juan Basin" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328318" start="56309" end="56328" title="natural gas liquids" label="natural gas liquids"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="56381" end="56401" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422489" start="56406" end="56425" title="directional drilling" label="horizontal drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="56781" end="56788" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004837" start="56816" end="56832" title="Four Corners Methane Hot Spot" label="methane hot spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15672" start="56840" end="56852" title="Four Corners" label="Four Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="56881" end="56907" title="Western United States" label="states in the Western U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q6864291" start="57130" end="57154" title="Mineral Leasing Act of 1920" label="U.S. Mineral Leasing Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797256" start="57954" end="57999" title="Art of the American Southwest" label="artistic traditions of the American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q46408" start="58250" end="58271" title="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034237" start="58445" end="58456" title="Canyon Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Canyon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q263324" start="58479" end="58492" title="William Hanna" label="William Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="58515" end="58526" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="59188" end="59195" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740583" start="59365" end="59384" title="Albuquerque Studios" label="Albuquerque Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="59386" end="59398" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBCUniversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926817" start="59656" end="59666" title="MovieMaker" label="MovieMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="59888" end="59901" title="Country music" label="Country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="59978" end="59992" title="Warner Western" label="Warner Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q162667" start="60021" end="60034" title="Glen Campbell" label="Glen Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065615" start="60036" end="60046" title="The Champs" label="The Champs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702316" start="60048" end="60061" title="Johnny Duncan (country singer)" label="Johnny Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660612" start="60063" end="60077" title="Carolyn Hester" label="Carolyn Hester"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="60079" end="60091" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q251287" start="60093" end="60108" title="Waylon Jennings" label="Waylon Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336442" start="60110" end="60122" title="Eddie Reeves" label="Eddie Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q346374" start="60128" end="60138" title="JD Souther" label="JD Souther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432130" start="60164" end="60176" title="Norman Petty" label="Norman Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q985559" start="60180" end="60186" title="Clovis, New Mexico" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="60243" end="60256" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="60261" end="60271" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="60360" end="60371" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689359" start="60376" end="60389" title="The Fireballs" label="The Fireballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="60437" end="60444" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="60445" end="60454" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309098" start="60486" end="60502" title="regional Mexican" label="regional Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="60507" end="60520" title="Western music (North America)" label="Western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="60534" end="60544" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="60588" end="60604" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="60639" end="60656" title="Southwestern United States" label="southwestern U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q6325174" start="60710" end="60714" title="KANW" label="KANW"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153301" start="60777" end="60793" title="Al Hurricane Jr." label="Al Hurricane Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="60980" end="60994" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165526" start="61073" end="61085" title="San Juan Mountains" label="southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="61250" end="61269" title="scientific research" label="scientific research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="61321" end="61349" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="61351" end="61381" title="Los Alamos National Laboratories" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461382" start="61391" end="61407" title="Very Large Array" label="Very Large Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="61435" end="61440" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21404084" start="61442" end="61444" title="HP Inc." label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="61498" end="61522" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="61530" end="61557" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052208" start="61570" end="61585" title="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology" label="New Mexico Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="61970" end="61979" title="Project Y" label="Project Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="62080" end="62097" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q74320562" start="62114" end="62127" title="Fabián García" label="Fabián García"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="62232" end="62251" title="National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program" label="space grant college"/>
<link wikidata="Q182546" start="62253" end="62270" title="Robert H. Goddard" label="Robert H. Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62332" end="62363" title="Robert H. Goddard#Roswell, New Mexico" label="early rocketry tests in Roswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190232" start="62376" end="62390" title="Clyde Tombaugh" label="Clyde Tombaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029222" start="62472" end="62476" title="Micro Instrumentation and Telemetry Systems" label="MITS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359420" start="62544" end="62568" title="microcomputer revolution" label="microcomputer revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="62633" end="62646" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223493" start="62652" end="62663" title="Altair 8800" label="Altair 8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="62728" end="62737" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q759494" start="63126" end="63145" title="Integrated circuit packaging" label="packaging solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q864928" start="63333" end="63350" title="Bioscience" label="bioscience sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="63997" end="64014" title="quantum computing" label="quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133068" start="64016" end="64027" title="quantum dot" label="quantum dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q732463" start="64245" end="64265" title="Chaco Culture National Historical Park" label="Chaco Canyon culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572617" start="64461" end="64479" title="U.S. space program" label="U.S. space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="64617" end="64642" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q681505" start="64759" end="64782" title="Holloman Air Force Base" label="Holloman Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q44906" start="64830" end="64850" title="Private spaceflight" label="private space flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="64908" end="64917" title="spaceport" label="spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352314" start="64919" end="64936" title="Spaceport America" label="Spaceport America"/>
<link wikidata="Q373225" start="65042" end="65057" title="Virgin Galactic" label="Virgin Galactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219409" start="65275" end="65290" title="venture capital" label="venture capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385463" start="65745" end="65752" title="acequia" label="acequia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104905159" start="65843" end="65879" title="New Mexico Department of Agriculture" label="New Mexico Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="65913" end="65922" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="65925" end="65940" title="cattle ranching" label="cattle ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010174" start="65951" end="65964" title="New Mexico Department of Game and Fish" label="game and fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750898" start="66260" end="66276" title="New Mexico chile" label="New Mexico chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q323635" start="66289" end="66299" title="pinto bean" label="pinto bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="66726" end="66735" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="66761" end="66769" title="pine nut" label="pine nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q645072" start="66891" end="66901" title="Dean Foods" label="Dean Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q985559" start="67093" end="67099" title="Clovis, New Mexico" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67173" end="67182" title="Vaquero#American Southwest" label="Caballero"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="67279" end="67284" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q61612369" start="67446" end="67472" title="Rio Grande cutthroat trout" label="Rio Grande cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="67474" end="67487" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="67489" end="67497" title="crayfish" label="crawdads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296872" start="67503" end="67510" title="venison" label="venison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924308" start="67564" end="67587" title="Blake&amp;#x27;s Lotaburger" label="Blake&amp;#x27;s Lotaburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985997" start="67589" end="67605" title="Boba Tea Company" label="Boba Tea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279259" start="67607" end="67624" title="Dion&amp;#x27;s" label="Dion&amp;#x27;s Pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443078" start="67626" end="67645" title="Little Anita&amp;#x27;s" label="Little Anita&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153916" start="67647" end="67676" title="Mac&amp;#x27;s Steak in the Rough" label="Mac&amp;#x27;s Steak in the Rough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18062004" start="67682" end="67690" title="Twisters (restaurant)" label="Twisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="67711" end="67730" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733292" start="67752" end="67765" title="Allsup&amp;#x27;s" label="Allsup&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129536" start="68419" end="68447" title="James Beard Foundation Award" label="James Beard Foundation Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028299" start="68525" end="68552" title="Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives" label="Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives"/>
<link wikidata="" start="68566" end="68597" title="Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown" label="Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746464" start="68611" end="68629" title="Man v. Food Nation" label="Man v. Food Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q968907" start="68649" end="68667" title="Outdoor recreation" label="Outdoor recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010208" start="68955" end="68974" title="New Mexico Magazine" label="New Mexico Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943647" start="68995" end="69024" title="New Mexico Tourism Department" label="New Mexico Tourism Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391981" start="69088" end="69103" title="New Mexico True" label="New Mexico True"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="69139" end="69157" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q577946" start="69864" end="69887" title="Kirtland Air Force Base" label="Kirtland Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q681505" start="69889" end="69912" title="Holloman Air Force Base" label="Holloman Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187683" start="69918" end="69939" title="Cannon Air Force Base" label="Cannon Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="69959" end="69984" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q707110" start="70015" end="70025" title="Fort Bliss" label="Fort Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="70066" end="70093" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="70278" end="70308" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="70313" end="70341" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="70612" end="70623" title="tax credits" label="tax credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="70628" end="70642" title="tax exemptions" label="tax exemptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610520" start="70875" end="70893" title="Gross receipts tax" label="Gross receipts tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="71370" end="71379" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689411" start="71436" end="71445" title="tax break" label="tax break"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170592" start="71450" end="71458" title="Personal income in the United States" label="personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149559" start="71463" end="71479" title="Corporate tax in the United States" label="corporate income"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="71507" end="71518" title="inheritance tax" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400691" start="71520" end="71526" title="Estate tax in the United States" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="71531" end="71534" title="sales tax" label="sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="71547" end="71557" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677555" start="71687" end="71707" title="Active duty" label="Active-duty military"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610520" start="71867" end="71885" title="Gross Receipts Tax" label="Gross Receipts Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="71982" end="71991" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q159579" start="72220" end="72230" title="excise tax" label="excise tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108062" start="72250" end="72259" title="New Mexico Taxation and Revenue Department" label="the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="72366" end="72378" title="Property tax" label="Property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="72393" end="72406" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q499094" start="72484" end="72501" title="personal property" label="personal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q183019" start="72707" end="72712" title="mill (currency)" label="mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601004" start="73445" end="73471" title="List of U.S. states and territories by poverty rate" label="poorest states in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="73500" end="73507" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="73782" end="73790" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920173" start="73964" end="73983" title="List of U.S. states by the number of millionaire households" label="share of households"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="74062" end="74073" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600990" start="74124" end="74140" title="List of U.S. states by Gini coefficient" label="income disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q162455" start="74149" end="74165" title="Gini coefficient" label="Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="74473" end="74499" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865497" start="74607" end="74619" title="Minimum wage in the United States" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74719" end="74730" title="Minimum wage in the United States#State laws" label="higher than"/>
<link wikidata="Q678522" start="75106" end="75129" title="Universal basic income" label="guaranteed basic income"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419513" start="75427" end="75453" title="Santa Fe Community College" label="Santa Fe Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="75768" end="75777" title="human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q732463" start="75808" end="75820" title="Chaco Canyon" label="Chaco Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q853265" start="75941" end="75954" title="Casas Grandes" label="Casas Grandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="75982" end="76000" title="state of Chihuahua" label="state of Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="76048" end="76057" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821484" start="76069" end="76090" title="Mesoamerican cultures" label="Mesoamerican cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="76227" end="76237" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="76432" end="76441" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q911953" start="76497" end="76529" title="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro" label="El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="76665" end="76679" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="76900" end="76917" title="Old Spanish Trail (trade route)" label="Old Spanish Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810722" start="76936" end="76959" title="National Historic Trail" label="National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q827212" start="77081" end="77097" title="Gadsden Purchase" label="Gadsden Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="77179" end="77204" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="77218" end="77243" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="77300" end="77337" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q818837" start="77448" end="77458" title="auto trail" label="auto trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="77618" end="77636" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q981632" start="78065" end="78067" title="Interstate 10 in New Mexico" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q981638" start="78069" end="78071" title="Interstate 25 in New Mexico" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q981645" start="78076" end="78078" title="Interstate 40 in New Mexico" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475079" start="78145" end="78153" title="Pojoaque, New Mexico" label="Pojoaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="78155" end="78163" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="78168" end="78178" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335215" start="78220" end="78243" title="Rio Grande Gorge Bridge" label="Rio Grande Gorge Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="78249" end="78253" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q580832" start="78342" end="78350" title="ABQ RIDE" label="ABQ RIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608424" start="78457" end="78476" title="Americanos USA, LLC" label="Americanos USA, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="78478" end="78493" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="79092" end="79109" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27676197" start="79593" end="79612" title="List of Interstate Highways in New Mexico" label="Interstate Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q981632" start="79614" end="79627" title="Interstate 10 in New Mexico" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="79651" end="79662" title="Arizona" label="the Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018231" start="79679" end="79688" title="Lordsburg, New Mexico" label="Lordsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33264" start="79709" end="79719" title="Las Cruces, New Mexico" label="Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056427" start="79724" end="79731" title="Anthony, New Mexico" label="Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="79738" end="79752" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q981638" start="79754" end="79767" title="Interstate 25 in New Mexico" label="Interstate 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="79842" end="79850" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q990990" start="79867" end="79872" title="Raton, New Mexico" label="Raton"/>
<link wikidata="Q981645" start="79878" end="79891" title="Interstate 40 in New Mexico" label="Interstate 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q577981" start="79977" end="79983" title="Gallup, New Mexico" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q986001" start="80018" end="80027" title="Tucumcari, New Mexico" label="Tucumcari"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="80032" end="80043" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250967" start="80094" end="80102" title="Big I" label="The BigI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250936" start="80331" end="80356" title="List of U.S. Routes in New Mexico" label="15 United States Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q29903148" start="80663" end="80670" title="U.S. Route 70 in New Mexico" label="U.S. 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933034" start="80802" end="80810" title="U.S. Route 160 in New Mexico" label="U.S. 160"/>
<link wikidata="Q15672" start="80839" end="80851" title="Four Corners" label="northwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="80885" end="80892" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="80897" end="80905" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="80983" end="80990" title="U.S. Route 66" label="U.S. 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="81127" end="81136" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058786" start="81176" end="81195" title="northern New Mexico" label="northern New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="81222" end="81233" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q577981" start="81238" end="81244" title="Gallup, New Mexico" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q452804" start="81405" end="81413" title="US 666" label="U.S. 666"/>
<link wikidata="Q213058" start="81582" end="81585" title="666 (number)" label="666"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="81605" end="81624" title="Number of the beast" label="Number of the beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324955" start="82302" end="82313" title="New Mexico Rail Runner Express" label="Rail Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="82455" end="82467" title="narrow gauge" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143763" start="82488" end="82521" title="Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railway" label="Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="82541" end="82549" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012695" start="82657" end="82667" title="Farmington, New Mexico" label="Farmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="83145" end="83184" title="Atchison, Topeka &amp;amp; Santa Fe Railway" label="Atchison, Topeka &amp;amp; Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q569988" start="83239" end="83249" title="Raton Pass" label="Raton Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="83279" end="83293" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="83329" end="83354" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q670002" start="83364" end="83381" title="Territory of Arizona" label="Arizona Territory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83417" end="83449" title="Transcontinental railroad#United States" label="second transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q988813" start="83470" end="83476" title="Deming, New Mexico" label="Deming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190006" start="83482" end="83513" title="Denver &amp;amp; Rio Grande Railway" label="Denver &amp;amp; Rio Grande Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="83536" end="83548" title="narrow gauge" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="83601" end="83609" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018839" start="83632" end="83640" title="Española, New Mexico" label="Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="83797" end="83816" title="rail transportation" label="rail transportation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83994" end="84015" title="#Tourism" label="tourism in the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250577" start="84061" end="84072" title="Named train" label="Named train"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144178" start="84125" end="84136" title="Super Chief" label="Super Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981620" start="84202" end="84208" title="Navajo (passenger train)" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84267" end="84273" title="Cavern (passenger train)" label="Cavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q985559" start="84316" end="84322" title="Clovis, New Mexico" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852577" start="84327" end="84335" title="Carlsbad, New Mexico" label="Carlsbad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84396" end="84424" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway#Passenger service" label="passenger trains of the ATSF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84914" end="84938" title="#Settlements" label="ten most populous cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q33555" start="84962" end="84972" title="Rio Rancho, New Mexico" label="Rio Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="84991" end="85002" title="Albuquerque" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="85007" end="85015" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022147" start="85074" end="85088" title="intercity rail" label="intercity rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="85460" end="85466" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="85674" end="85680" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="85684" end="85691" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q375446" start="85809" end="85820" title="Toney Anaya" label="Toney Anaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="85842" end="85857" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505818" start="85964" end="85989" title="Front Range Commuter Rail" label="Front Range Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="86034" end="86041" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="86156" end="86169" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324955" start="86178" end="86208" title="New Mexico Rail Runner Express" label="New Mexico Rail Runner Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="86225" end="86254" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Albuquerque metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="86371" end="86383" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q815390" start="86401" end="86406" title="Belen, New Mexico" label="Belen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="86492" end="86500" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416479" start="86510" end="86525" title="Sandoval County/US 550 (Rail Runner station)" label="Sandoval County"/>
<link wikidata="Q496511" start="86608" end="86616" title="Santa Fe County" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q493255" start="86618" end="86626" title="Sandoval County" label="Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q156297" start="86628" end="86638" title="Bernalillo County" label="Bernalillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q487283" start="86644" end="86652" title="Valencia County" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815390" start="86899" end="86904" title="Belen, New Mexico" label="Belen"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="86953" end="86968" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q577981" start="87011" end="87017" title="Gallup, New Mexico" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801743" start="87032" end="87036" title="Lamy, New Mexico" label="Lamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q676171" start="87038" end="87047" title="Las Vegas, New Mexico" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q990990" start="87053" end="87058" title="Raton, New Mexico" label="Raton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350926" start="87183" end="87193" title="El Capitan (passenger train)" label="El Capitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="87304" end="87316" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324955" start="87338" end="87368" title="New Mexico Rail Runner Express" label="New Mexico Rail Runner Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="87389" end="87403" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018231" start="87463" end="87472" title="Lordsburg, New Mexico" label="Lordsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q988813" start="87478" end="87484" title="Deming, New Mexico" label="Deming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="87599" end="87624" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="87683" end="87696" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="87775" end="87791" title="class I railroad" label="class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="87853" end="87865" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="87874" end="87896" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432615" start="88000" end="88027" title="List of airports in New Mexico" label="primary commercial airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578972" start="88096" end="88129" title="Albuquerque International Sunport" label="Albuquerque International Sunport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075664" start="88155" end="88175" title="Port of entry" label="aerial port of entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="88264" end="88295" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508188" start="88387" end="88414" title="Lea County Regional Airport" label="Lea County Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536484" start="88416" end="88448" title="Roswell International Air Center" label="Roswell International Air Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545563" start="88454" end="88479" title="Santa Fe Regional Airport" label="Santa Fe Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="88577" end="88593" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q473625" start="88693" end="88710" title="Regional airliner" label="commuter airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368759" start="88830" end="88851" title="Essential Air Service" label="Essential Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="89109" end="89118" title="spaceport" label="spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352314" start="89120" end="89137" title="Spaceport America" label="Spaceport America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652858" start="89150" end="89155" title="Upham, New Mexico" label="Upham"/>
<link wikidata="Q431932" start="89162" end="89183" title="Truth or Consequences, New Mexico" label="Truth or Consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010235" start="89220" end="89257" title="New Mexico Spaceport Authority" label="New Mexico Spaceport Authority (NMSA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="89259" end="89272" title="Rocket launch" label="Rocket launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765115" start="89359" end="89369" title="HAPSMobile" label="HAPSMobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q964073" start="89371" end="89383" title="UP Aerospace" label="UP Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633698" start="89385" end="89395" title="SpinLaunch" label="SpinLaunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q373225" start="89401" end="89416" title="Virgin Galactic" label="Virgin Galactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="89428" end="89438" title="suborbital" label="suborbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506596" start="89565" end="89586" title="VSS Unity" label="VSS &amp;quot;Unity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164216" start="90085" end="90111" title="Constitution of New Mexico" label="Constitution of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="90127" end="90145" title="referendum" label="popular referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="90172" end="90201" title="republican form of government" label="republican form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q285950" start="90211" end="90230" title="popular sovereignty" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="90237" end="90257" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191296" start="90276" end="90290" title="bill of rights" label="bill of rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="90306" end="90325" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="federal counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q48412" start="90728" end="90756" title="Article Four of the United States Constitution" label="Mirroring the federal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089908" start="90874" end="90882" title="Governor of New Mexico" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q238994" start="90936" end="90955" title="Lieutenant Governor of New Mexico" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818643" start="91002" end="91018" title="Attorney General of New Mexico" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444382" start="91020" end="91038" title="Secretary of State of New Mexico" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090708" start="91040" end="91053" title="New Mexico State Auditor" label="state auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090715" start="91055" end="91070" title="New Mexico State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090701" start="91076" end="91104" title="New Mexico Commissioner of Public Lands" label="commissioner of public lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010195" start="91332" end="91354" title="New Mexico Legislature" label="New Mexico Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746909" start="91381" end="91405" title="New Mexico House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269844" start="91424" end="91430" title="New Mexico Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706079" start="91824" end="91848" title="New Mexico Supreme Court" label="New Mexico Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="91898" end="91917" title="appellate court" label="adjudicates appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010163" start="92086" end="92113" title="New Mexico Court of Appeals" label="New Mexico Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695164" start="92232" end="92252" title="general jurisdiction" label="general jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30694062" start="92284" end="92294" title="State court magistrate judge" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12201088" start="92318" end="92338" title="limited jurisdiction" label="limited jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917203" start="92527" end="92549" title="Michelle Lujan Grisham" label="Michelle Lujan Grisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732833" start="92574" end="92587" title="Howie Morales" label="Howie Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="92601" end="92617" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q27864085" start="92701" end="92723" title="Maggie Toulouse Oliver" label="Maggie Toulouse Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q115522181" start="92742" end="92753" title="Raúl Torrez" label="Raúl Torrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q103598125" start="92769" end="92783" title="Joseph Maestas" label="Joseph Maestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201725" start="92809" end="92833" title="Stephanie Garcia Richard" label="Stephanie Garcia Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q115208828" start="92855" end="92868" title="Laura Montoya (politician)" label="Laura Montaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010195" start="92892" end="92914" title="New Mexico Legislature" label="New Mexico Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="93101" end="93112" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q565374" start="93126" end="93141" title="Martin Heinrich" label="Martin Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q324256" start="93146" end="93159" title="Ben Ray Luján" label="Ben Ray Luján"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="93201" end="93230" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q96184996" start="93245" end="93262" title="Melanie Stansbury" label="Melanie Stansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q115155647" start="93264" end="93276" title="Gabe Vasquez" label="Gabe Vasquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q96054905" start="93282" end="93304" title="Teresa Leger Fernandez" label="Teresa Leger Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q699289" start="93403" end="93407" title="1912 United States presidential election" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="93514" end="93518" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="93523" end="93527" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="93572" end="93583" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="93615" end="93628" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="93732" end="93739" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="93770" end="93774" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="93793" end="93807" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="93815" end="93819" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="93862" end="93874" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="93878" end="93882" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190344" start="93923" end="93946" title="Red states and blue states" label="a Democratic stronghold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="94531" end="94543" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436010" start="94598" end="94616" title="political moderate" label="political moderate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="94639" end="94652" title="conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="94662" end="94669" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314661" start="94999" end="95009" title="Republican Party of New Mexico" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255720" start="95014" end="95046" title="Democratic Party of New Mexico" label="Democratic parties of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884227" start="95106" end="95122" title="bellwether" label="bellwether state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="95141" end="95157" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727149" start="95261" end="95281" title="Miguel Antonio Otero (born 1859)" label="Miguel Antonio Otero"/>
<link wikidata="Q881439" start="95301" end="95329" title="Octaviano Ambrosio Larrazolo" label="Octaviano Ambrosio Larrazolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="95439" end="95457" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093017" start="95590" end="95602" title="Rough Riders" label="Rough Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q256334" start="95658" end="95673" title="Susana Martinez" label="Susana Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="95694" end="95706" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="95762" end="95766" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="95771" end="95775" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="95803" end="95820" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="95952" end="95960" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58399761" start="95961" end="95981" title="Xochitl Torres Small" label="Xochitl Torres Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q115155647" start="96051" end="96063" title="Gabe Vasquez" label="Gabe Vasquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="96349" end="96357" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="96377" end="96388" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="96511" end="96535" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="96585" end="96600" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="96632" end="96645" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012695" start="96752" end="96762" title="Farmington, New Mexico" label="Farmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q33555" start="96769" end="96779" title="Rio Rancho, New Mexico" label="Rio Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="97218" end="97232" title="women of color" label="women of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631689" start="97465" end="97486" title="Soledad C. Chacón" label="Soledad Chávez Chacón"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="97628" end="97638" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q256334" start="97648" end="97663" title="Susana Martinez" label="Susana Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="97729" end="97737" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54860790" start="97752" end="97763" title="Deb Haaland" label="Deb Haaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344622" start="97853" end="97891" title="Center for American Women and Politics" label="Center for American Women and Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="97895" end="97913" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334180" start="98991" end="98999" title="List of counties in New Mexico" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661329" start="99004" end="99018" title="List of settlements in New Mexico" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q156297" start="99073" end="99083" title="Bernalillo County, New Mexico" label="Bernalillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="99131" end="99142" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158280" start="100257" end="100272" title="concealed carry" label="concealed carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="100447" end="100464" title="Same-sex marriage in the United States" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706079" start="100664" end="100688" title="New Mexico Supreme Court" label="New Mexico Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="100993" end="101008" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010251" start="101083" end="101106" title="New Mexico State Police" label="New Mexico State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249686" start="101540" end="101578" title="Legalization of non-medical cannabis in the United States" label="legalize cannabis for recreational use"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032602" start="101870" end="101894" title="Medicinal marijuana in the United States" label="medical use of marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="101987" end="101999" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668505" start="102372" end="102401" title="Abortion law in the United States by state" label="most permissive abortion laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841721" start="102585" end="102596" title="trigger law" label="trigger law"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058269" start="102735" end="102784" title="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization" label="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q106158" start="103240" end="103261" title="S&amp;amp;P Global Ratings" label="S&amp;amp;P Global Rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169280" start="103412" end="103426" title="permanent fund" label="permanent fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q125635517" start="103433" end="103465" title="New Mexico Land Grant Permanent Fund" label="Land Grant Permanent Fund (LGPF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250780" start="103595" end="103603" title="oil boom" label="oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q484296" start="104224" end="104241" title="Los Alamos County, New Mexico" label="Los Alamos County"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="104259" end="104288" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="eponymous national laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010224" start="106098" end="106136" title="New Mexico Public Education Department" label="New Mexico Public Education Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930897" start="107217" end="107259" title="The Institute for College Access and Success" label="Institute for College Access &amp;amp; Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="107594" end="107633" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico at Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="107636" end="107677" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University at Las Cruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052208" start="107717" end="107775" title="New Mexico Tech" label="New Mexico Institute of Mining &amp;amp; Technology at Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854154" start="107777" end="107818" title="Eastern New Mexico University" label="Eastern New Mexico University at Portales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010189" start="107821" end="107865" title="New Mexico Highlands University" label="New Mexico Highlands University at Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988105" start="107868" end="107912" title="Western New Mexico University" label="Western New Mexico University at Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="Q189409" start="108026" end="108033" title="lottery" label="lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108037" start="108063" end="108070" title="New Mexico Lottery" label="lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="109645" end="109653" title="Toponymy" label="toponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="110020" end="110054" title="Black Legend (Spain)" label="American biases and misconceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="110332" end="110350" title="Southwestern United States" label="American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="110393" end="110401" title="American frontier" label="Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="110464" end="110479" title="cattle ranching" label="cattle ranching"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="110481" end="110487" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="110490" end="110498" title="American pioneer" label="pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="110504" end="110518" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621675" start="110651" end="110675" title="List of ghost towns in New Mexico" label="abundance of ghost towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="110768" end="110781" title="Western (genre)" label="Western genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348715" start="110786" end="110815" title="List of films shot in New Mexico" label="set or produced in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q478805" start="110907" end="110926" title="Ancestral Puebloans" label="Ancestral Puebloans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885121" start="110934" end="110946" title="Oasisamerica" label="Oasisamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="110952" end="110974" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400431" start="110987" end="111006" title="Pueblo architecture" label="Pueblo architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="111076" end="111087" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703756" start="111101" end="111118" title="Territorial Style" label="Territorial Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051019" start="111213" end="111234" title="New Mexico vernacular" label="New Mexico vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258468" start="111327" end="111341" title="Pueblo Revival architecture" label="Pueblo Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703749" start="111346" end="111386" title="Territorial Revival architecture" label="Territorial Revival architectural styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933931" start="111565" end="111589" title="Pueblo Deco architecture" label="Pueblo Deco architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500702" start="111744" end="111759" title="Mimbres culture" label="Mimbres Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705975" start="111928" end="111954" title="Deming Armory" label="Deming Luna Mimbres Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988105" start="111966" end="111995" title="Western New Mexico University" label="Western New Mexico University"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="112005" end="112013" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q168665" start="112106" end="112118" title="Bruce Nauman" label="Bruce Nauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q836743" start="112120" end="112134" title="Richard Tuttle" label="Richard Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q456260" start="112136" end="112148" title="John Connell (artist)" label="John Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482323" start="112150" end="112164" title="Steina Vasulka" label="Steina Vasulka"/>
<link wikidata="Q112116308" start="112169" end="112182" title="Ned Bittinger" label="Ned Bittinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q559229" start="112240" end="112264" title="New Mexico Museum of Art" label="New Mexico Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940891" start="112298" end="112330" title="Museum of International Folk Art" label="Museum of International Folk Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940883" start="112332" end="112365" title="Museum of Indian Arts and Culture" label="Museum of Indian Arts and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201524" start="112367" end="112400" title="Museum of Contemporary Native Art" label="Museum of Contemporary Native Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390499" start="112403" end="112416" title="SITE Santa Fe" label="SITE Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419537" start="112552" end="112574" title="Santa Fe Indian Market" label="Santa Fe Indian Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204962" start="112686" end="112700" title="Santa Fe Opera" label="Santa Fe Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419510" start="112767" end="112798" title="Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival" label="Santa Fe Chamber Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523247" start="112834" end="112848" title="Lensic Theater" label="Lensic Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104932" start="112950" end="112957" title="Zozobra" label="Zozobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447344" start="112997" end="113016" title="Fiestas de Santa Fe" label="Fiestas de Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329691" start="113152" end="113200" title="New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science" label="New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062400" start="113206" end="113239" title="National Hispanic Cultural Center" label="National Hispanic Cultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974490" start="113245" end="113293" title="National Museum of Nuclear Science &amp;amp; History" label="National Museum of Nuclear Science &amp;amp; History"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712821" start="113316" end="113356" title="Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta" label="Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403585" start="113919" end="113931" title="KiMo Theater" label="KiMo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258468" start="113953" end="113986" title="Pueblo Revival Style architecture" label="Pueblo Revival Style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="114054" end="114063" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021290" start="114268" end="114297" title="Indian Pueblo Cultural Center" label="Indian Pueblo Cultural Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="114344" end="114357" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q148163" start="114457" end="114465" title="zarzuela" label="zarzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="114471" end="114479" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781926" start="114654" end="114667" title="María Benítez" label="María Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762698" start="115289" end="115304" title="Angélico Chávez" label="Angélico Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681948" start="115306" end="115323" title="Adelina Otero-Warren" label="Nina Otero-Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720094" start="115367" end="115384" title="Cleofas Martínez Jaramillo" label="Cleofas Jaramillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299002" start="115386" end="115404" title="Juan Bautista Rael" label="Juan Bautista Rael"/>
<link wikidata="Q98476583" start="115410" end="115433" title="Aurora Lucero-White Lea" label="Aurora Lucero-White Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="115451" end="115465" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="115477" end="115481" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203614" start="115503" end="115523" title="D. H. Lawrence Ranch" label="D. H. Lawrence Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327022" start="115602" end="115609" title="Culture of Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27353" start="115611" end="115616" title="Anglo-America" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="115622" end="115640" title="Wild West" label="Wild West frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518747" start="115677" end="115695" title="New Mexican literature" label="body of literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326764" start="115755" end="115768" title="Rudolfo Anaya" label="Rudolfo Anaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q181920" start="115770" end="115784" title="Tony Hillerman" label="Tony Hillerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159871" start="115790" end="115804" title="Daniel Abraham (author)" label="Daniel Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q367591" start="115806" end="115821" title="Western fiction" label="Western fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q44200" start="115834" end="115847" title="Billy the Kid" label="Billy the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q979842" start="115849" end="115860" title="Elfego Baca" label="Elfego Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="115862" end="115870" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q450746" start="115876" end="115887" title="Pat Garrett" label="Pat Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="116017" end="116024" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="116029" end="116036" title="Western music (North America)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="116057" end="116073" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="116106" end="116118" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347713" start="116120" end="116134" title="Robert Mirabal" label="Robert Mirabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928543" start="116140" end="116162" title="Michael Martin Murphey" label="Michael Martin Murphey"/>
<link wikidata="Q985526" start="116165" end="116176" title="Silver City, New Mexico" label="Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="116344" end="116350" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q826840" start="116448" end="116457" title="Wild Hogs" label="Wild Hogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="116679" end="116686" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111970" start="117048" end="117065" title="Sunshine Cleaning" label="Sunshine Cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q669231" start="117082" end="117090" title="Vampires (1998 film)" label="Vampires"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="117121" end="117128" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="117129" end="117136" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006225" start="117150" end="117158" title="Longmire (TV series)" label="Longmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q676171" start="117220" end="117229" title="Las Vegas, New Mexico" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="117231" end="117239" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164992" start="117241" end="117251" title="Eagle Nest, New Mexico" label="Eagle Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428577" start="117257" end="117266" title="Red River, New Mexico" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461786" start="117289" end="117323" title="Breaking Bad (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Breaking Bad&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805630" start="117406" end="117423" title="Media in Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="media in the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740583" start="117448" end="117467" title="Albuquerque Studios" label="Albuquerque Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="117513" end="117520" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="117525" end="117537" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBCUniversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="117641" end="117660" title="Native American cuisine" label="indigenous cuisines"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="117675" end="117682" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q207965" start="117687" end="117694" title="Mexican cuisine" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="117695" end="117703" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="117719" end="117731" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010123" start="117781" end="117800" title="New Mexican cuisine" label="New Mexican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707196" start="117900" end="117905" title="Latin American cuisine" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="117940" end="117964" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750898" start="118089" end="118105" title="New Mexico chile" label="New Mexico chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28692" start="118115" end="118120" title="anise" label="anise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905014" start="118130" end="118153" title="Bizcochito" label="&amp;quot;bizcochitos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="118160" end="118177" title="Pine nuts" label="&amp;quot;piñon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214426" start="118234" end="118242" title="frybread" label="frybread"/>
<link wikidata="Q763843" start="118249" end="118271" title="Sopapilla" label="&amp;quot;sopapillas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004446" start="118273" end="118290" title="breakfast burrito" label="breakfast burrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q876096" start="118299" end="118308" title="enchilada" label="enchilada"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130295" start="118369" end="118379" title="carne seca" label="carne seca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072897" start="118414" end="118419" title="jerky" label="jerky"/>
<link wikidata="Q515692" start="118449" end="118455" title="Pozole" label="posole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394051" start="118465" end="118471" title="hominy" label="hominy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323635" start="118530" end="118540" title="pinto bean" label="pinto bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533" start="118577" end="118585" title="zucchini" label="zucchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119307" start="118590" end="118603" title="summer squash" label="summer squash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="118616" end="118629" title="Adobada#New Mexico" label="carne adovada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303463" start="118821" end="118831" title="food truck" label="food truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q966879" start="118924" end="118944" title="Albuquerque Isotopes" label="Albuquerque Isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353669" start="118953" end="118973" title="Pacific Coast League" label="Pacific Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="119000" end="119003" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="119004" end="119020" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158798" start="119068" end="119080" title="Pecos League" label="Pecos League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="119086" end="119102" title="Roswell Invaders" label="Roswell Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317824" start="119104" end="119116" title="Ruidoso Osos" label="Ruidoso Osos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="119118" end="119132" title="Santa Fe Fuego" label="Santa Fe Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995367" start="119141" end="119160" title="White Sands Pupfish (baseball)" label="White Sands Pupfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867641" start="119166" end="119186" title="Duke City Gladiators" label="Duke City Gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="119194" end="119216" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808156" start="119249" end="119265" title="Tingley Coliseum" label="Tingley Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075003" start="119320" end="119337" title="New Mexico United" label="New Mexico United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054125" start="119366" end="119377" title="United States soccer league system" label="second tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362411" start="119378" end="119394" title="USL Championship" label="USL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788544" start="119423" end="119444" title="New Mexico United U23" label="New Mexico United U23"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="119477" end="119491" title="USL League Two" label="USL League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356073" start="119533" end="119548" title="spectator sport" label="spectator sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257637" start="119613" end="119643" title="New Mexico Lobos" label="University of New Mexico Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q934835" start="119652" end="119675" title="New Mexico State Aggies" label="New Mexico State Aggies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335227" start="119757" end="119775" title="Rio Grande Rivalry" label="Rio Grande Rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q981638" start="119805" end="119809" title="Interstate 25 in New Mexico" label="I-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="119882" end="119886" title="NMSU" label="NMSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093110" start="119915" end="119945" title="University of Texas at El Paso" label="University of Texas at El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715868" start="119959" end="119977" title="The Battle of I-10" label="The Battle of I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715868" start="120040" end="120052" title="Silver Spade" label="Silver Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q685026" start="120084" end="120093" title="Tom Jager" label="Tom Jager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538290" start="120124" end="120146" title="high-altitude training" label="high-altitude training"/>
<link wikidata="Q318637" start="120232" end="120242" title="Los Alamos, New Mexico" label="Los Alamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="120306" end="120321" title="shooting sports" label="shooting sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401473" start="120350" end="120372" title="NRA Whittington Center" label="NRA Whittington Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="120745" end="120786" title="U.S. National Historic Landmark" label="U.S. National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324397" start="121065" end="121073" title="El Morro National Monument" label="El Morro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313033" start="121078" end="121098" title="Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument" label="Gila Cliff Dwellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623809" start="121242" end="121268" title="List of World Heritage Sites in the United States" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010208" start="121489" end="121508" title="New Mexico Magazine" label="New Mexico Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752939" start="122028" end="122056" title="Climate change in New Mexico" label="Climate change in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333729" start="122059" end="122080" title="Economy of New Mexico" label="Economy of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612480" start="122083" end="122104" title="Geology of New Mexico" label="Geology of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152647" start="122107" end="122131" title="Government of New Mexico" label="Government of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089908" start="122135" end="122157" title="Governor of New Mexico" label="Governor of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334180" start="122161" end="122191" title="List of counties in New Mexico" label="List of counties in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q50386194" start="122195" end="122231" title="List of municipalities in New Mexico" label="List of municipalities in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865632" start="122234" end="122255" title="History of New Mexico" label="History of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860969" start="122259" end="122289" title="Timeline of New Mexico history" label="Timeline of New Mexico history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018496" start="122292" end="122328" title="Index of New Mexico-related articles" label="Index of New Mexico-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000256" start="122331" end="122367" title="List of mountain peaks of New Mexico" label="List of mountain peaks of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908322" start="122370" end="122398" title="List of rivers of New Mexico" label="List of rivers of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112379" start="122401" end="122422" title="Outline of New Mexico" label="Outline of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127215" start="122425" end="122451" title="Paleontology in New Mexico" label="Paleontology in New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q40258353" start="122982" end="123005" title="Erlinda Gonzáles-Berry" label="Gonzales-Berry, Erlinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005771" start="123443" end="123458" title="F Chris Garcia" label="F. Chris Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057501" start="123533" end="123545" title="Paul Horgan" label="Horgan, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q181920" start="124732" end="124746" title="Tony Hillerman" label="Tony Hillerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="125232" end="125256" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21650" wikidata="Q1454" url="?curid=21650" title="North Carolina">
<text>North Carolina ( ) is a state in the Southeastern region of the United States. It is bordered by Virginia to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the east, South Carolina to the south, Georgia to the southwest, and Tennessee to the west. The state is the 28th-largest and 9th-most populous of the United States. Along with South Carolina, it makes up the Carolinas region of the East Coast. At the 2020 census, the state had a population of 10,439,388. Raleigh is the state&#x27;s capital and Charlotte is its most populous city. The Charlotte metropolitan area, with an estimated population of 2,805,115 in 2023, is the most populous metropolitan area in North Carolina, the 22nd-most populous in the United States, and the largest banking center in the nation after New York City. The Research Triangle, with an estimated population of 2,368,947 in 2023, is the second-most populous combined metropolitan area in the state, 31st-most populous in the United States, and is home to the largest research park in the United States, Research Triangle Park.

The earliest evidence of human occupation in North Carolina dates back 10,000 years, found at the Hardaway Site. North Carolina was inhabited by Carolina Algonquian, Iroquoian, and Siouan speaking tribes of Native Americans prior to the arrival of Europeans. King Charles II granted eight lord proprietors a colony they named Carolina after the king and which was established in 1670 with the first permanent settlement at Charles Town (Charleston). Because of the difficulty of governing the entire colony from Charles Town, the colony was eventually divided and North Carolina was established as a royal colony in 1729 and was one of the Thirteen Colonies. The Halifax Resolves resolution adopted by North Carolina on April 12, 1776, was the first formal call for independence from Great Britain among the American Colonies during the American Revolution.

On November 21, 1789, North Carolina became the 12th state to ratify the United States Constitution. In the run-up to the American Civil War, North Carolina reluctantly declared its secession from the Union on May 20, 1861, becoming the tenth of eleven states to join the Confederate States of America. Following the Civil War, the state was restored to the Union on July 4, 1868. On December 17, 1903, Orville and Wilbur Wright successfully piloted the world&#x27;s first controlled, sustained flight of a powered, heavier-than-air aircraft at Kitty Hawk in North Carolina&#x27;s Outer Banks. North Carolina often uses the slogan &quot;First in Flight&quot; on state license plates to commemorate this achievement, alongside a newer alternative design bearing the slogan &quot;First in Freedom&quot; in reference to the Mecklenburg Declaration and Halifax Resolves.

North Carolina is defined by a wide range of elevations and landscapes. From west to east, North Carolina&#x27;s elevation descends from the Appalachian Mountains to the Piedmont and Atlantic coastal plain. North Carolina&#x27;s Mount Mitchell at is the highest point in North America east of the Mississippi River. Most of the state falls in the humid subtropical climate zone; however, the western, mountainous part of the state has a subtropical highland climate.

==History==
===Native Americans, lost colony, and permanent settlement===
North Carolina was inhabited for at least 10,000 years by succeeding prehistoric Indigenous cultures. The Hardaway Site saw major periods of occupation dating to 10,000 years BCE. Before 200 AD, people were building earthwork platform mounds for ceremonial and religious purposes. Succeeding peoples, including those of the South Appalachian Mississippian culture, established by 1000 AD in the Piedmont and mountain region, continued to build this style of mounds. In contrast to some of the larger centers of the classic Mississippian culture in the area that became known as the western Carolinas, northeastern Georgia, and southeastern Tennessee, most of the larger towns had only one central platform mound. Smaller settlements had none, but were close to more prominent towns. This area became known as the homelands of the historic Cherokee people, who are believed to have migrated over time from the Great Lakes area.

In the 500–700 years preceding European contact, the Mississippian culture built elaborate cities and maintained far-flung regional trading networks. Its largest city was Cahokia, which had numerous mounds for different purposes, a highly stratified society, and was located in present-day southwestern Illinois near the Mississippi River. Starting in 1540, the Native polities of the Mississippian culture fell apart and reformed as new groups, such as the Catawba, due to a series of destabilizing events known as the &quot;Mississippian shatter zone&quot;. Introduction of colonial trading arrangements and hostile native groups from the north such as the Westo Indians hastened changes in an already tenuous regional hierarchy. As described by anthropologist Robbie Ethridge, the Mississippian shatter zone was a time of great instability in what is now the American South, caused by the instability of Mississippian chiefdoms, high mortality from new Eurasian diseases, conversion to an agricultural society and the accompanying population increase, and the emergence of Native &quot;militaristic slaving societies&quot;.

Historically documented tribes in the North Carolina region include the Carolina Algonquian-speaking tribes of the coastal areas, such as the Chowanoc, Roanoke, Pamlico, Machapunga, and Coree, who were the first encountered by the English; the Iroquoian-speaking Meherrin, Cherokee, and Tuscarora of the interior; and Southeastern Siouan-speaking tribes, such as the Cheraw, Waxhaw, Saponi, Waccamaw, Cape Fear Indians, and Catawba of the Piedmont.

In the late 16th century, the first Spanish explorers traveling inland recorded meeting Mississippian culture people at Joara, a regional chiefdom near what later developed as Morganton. Records of Hernando de Soto attested to his meeting with them in 1540. In 1567, Captain Juan Pardo led an expedition to claim the area for the Spanish colony and to establish another route to reach silver mines in Mexico. Pardo made a winter base at Joara, which he renamed &quot;Cuenca&quot;. His expedition built Fort San Juan and left a contingent of 30 Spaniards there, while Pardo traveled further. His forces built and garrisoned five other forts. He returned by a different route to Santa Elena on Parris Island, South Carolina, then a center of Spanish Florida. In the spring of 1568, natives killed all but seventy four of the Spaniards and burned the six forts in the interior, including Fort San Juan. Although the Spanish never returned to the interior, this effort marked the first European attempt at colonization of the interior of what became the United States. A 16th-century journal by Pardo&#x27;s scribe Bandera, and archaeological findings since 1986 at Joara, have confirmed the settlement.

===Anglo-European settlement===

In 1584, Elizabeth I granted a charter to Sir Walter Raleigh, for whom the state capital is named, for land in present-day North Carolina (then part of the territory of Virginia). It was the second American territory that the English attempted to colonize. Raleigh established two colonies on the coast in the late 1580s, but both failed. The colony established in 1587 saw 118 colonists &#x27;disappear&#x27; when John White was unable to return from a supply run during battles with the Spanish Armada. The fate of the &quot;Lost Colony&quot; of Roanoke Island remains one of the most widely debated mysteries of American history. Two native Chieftains, Manteo and Wanchese, of which the former helped the colonists and the latter was distrustful, had involvement in the colony and even accompanied Raleigh to England on a previous voyage in 1585. Manteo was also the first Indigenous North American to be baptized by English settlers. Upon White&#x27;s return in 1590, neither native nor Englishman were to be found. Popular theory holds that the colonists either traveled away with or assimilated into local native culture. Virginia Dare, the first English person to be born in North America, was born on Roanoke Island on August 18, 1587; the surrounding Dare County is named for her.

As early as 1650, settlers from the Virginia colony had moved into the Albemarle Sound region. By 1663, King Charles II of England granted a charter to start a new colony on the North American continent; this would generally establish North Carolina&#x27;s borders. He named it &quot;Carolina&quot; in honor of his father, CharlesI. By 1665, a second charter was issued to attempt to resolve territorial questions. This charter rewarded the Lords Proprietors, eight Englishmen to whom King Charles II granted joint ownership of a tract of land in the state. All of these men either had remained loyal to the Crown or aided Charles&#x27;s restoration to the English throne after Cromwell. In 1712, owing to disputes over governance, the Carolina colony split into North Carolina and South Carolina. North Carolina became a crown colony in 1729.

Most of the English colonists had arrived as indentured servants, hiring themselves out as laborers for a fixed period to pay for their passage. In the early years the line between indentured servants and African slaves or laborers was fluid. Some Africans were allowed to earn their freedom before slavery became a lifelong status. Most of the free colored families formed in North Carolina before the Revolution were descended from unions or marriages between free whites and enslaved or free Africans or African-Americans. If the mothers were free, their children were born free. Many had migrated or were descendants of migrants from colonial Virginia. As the flow of indentured laborers to the colony decreased with improving economic conditions in Great Britain, planters imported more slaves, and the state&#x27;s legal delineations between free and slave status tightened, effectively hardening the latter into a racial caste. Conditions for both slaves and workers worsened as the ranks of the former eclipsed the latter and expansion of farming operations into former Indigenous territories lowered prices. Unable to establish deep water ports such as at Charles Town and Norfolk, the economy&#x27;s growth and prosperity was thus based on cheap labor and slave plantation systems, devoted primarily to the production of tobacco, then later cotton and textiles.

In 1738–1739, smallpox caused high fatalities among the Native Americans, who had no immunity to the new disease (it had become endemic over centuries in Europe). According to the historian Russell Thornton, &quot;The 1738 epidemic was said to have killed one-half of the Cherokee, with other tribes of the area suffering equally.&quot;

===Colonial period===
After the Spanish in the 16th century, the first permanent European settlers of North Carolina were English colonists who migrated south from Virginia. Virginia had grown rapidly and land was less available. Nathaniel Batts was documented as one of the first of these Virginian migrants. He settled south of the Chowan River and east of the Great Dismal Swamp in 1655. By 1663, this northeastern area of the Province of Carolina, known as the Albemarle Settlements, was undergoing full-scale English settlement. During the same period, the English monarch CharlesII gave provincial land grants to the Lords Proprietors, the group of noblemen who had helped restore him to the throne in 1660. These grants were predicated on an agreement that the Lords would use their influence to bring in colonists and establish ports of trade. This new Province of Carolina was named in honor and memory of his father, CharlesI (Latin: &quot;Carolus&quot;).

Lacking a viable coastal port city due to geography, towns grew at a slower pace and remained small. By the late 17th century, Carolina was essentially two colonies, one centered in the Albemarle region in the north and the other located in the south around Charleston. In 1705 South Carolinian John Lawson purchased land on the Pamlico River and laid out Bath, North Carolina&#x27;s first town. After returning to England, he published the book A New Voyage to Carolina, which became a travelogue and a marketing piece to encourage new colonists to Carolina. Lawson encouraged Baron Christoph Von Graffenried, the leader of a group of Swiss and German Protestants, to immigrate to Carolina. Von Graffenried purchased land between the Neuse and the Trent Rivers and established the town of New Bern. After an attack on New Bern in which hundreds were killed or injured, Lawson was caught then executed by Tuscarora Indians. A large revolt happened in the state in 1711, known as Cary&#x27;s Rebellion. In 1712, North Carolina became a separate colony, and in 1729 it became a royal colony, with the exception of the Earl Granville holdings.

In June 1718, &quot;Queen Anne&#x27;s Revenge&quot;, the flagship of pirate Blackbeard, ran aground at Beaufort Inlet, North Carolina, in present-day Carteret County. After the grounding, her crew and supplies were transferred to smaller ships. In November 1718, after appealing to the governor of North Carolina, who promised safe-haven and a pardon, Blackbeard was killed in an ambush by troops from Virginia. In 1996, Intersal, Inc., a private maritime research firm, discovered the remains of a vessel likely to be the &quot;Queen Anne&#x27;s Revenge&quot;, which was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.

North Carolina became one of the Thirteen Colonies and with the territory of South Carolina was originally known as the Province of North Carolina. The northern and southern parts of the original province separated in 1712, with North Carolina becoming a royal colony in 1729. Originally settled by small farmers, sometimes having a few slaves, who were oriented toward subsistence agriculture, the colony lacked large cities or towns. Pirates menaced the coastal settlements, but by 1718 piracy in the Carolinas was on the decline. Growth was strong in the middle of the 18th century, as the economy attracted Scots-Irish, Quaker, English and German immigrants. A majority of the North Carolina colonists generally supported the American Revolution, although there were some Loyalists. Loyalists in North Carolina were fewer in number than in some other colonies such as Georgia, South Carolina, Delaware, and New York.

During colonial times, Edenton served as the state capital beginning in 1722, followed by New Bern becoming the capital in 1766. Construction of Tryon Palace, which served as the residence and offices of the provincial governor William Tryon, began in 1767 and was completed in 1771. In 1788, Raleigh was chosen as the site of the new capital, as its central location protected it from coastal attacks. Officially established in 1792 as both county seat and state capital, the city was named after Sir Walter Raleigh, sponsor of Roanoke, the &quot;lost colony&quot; on Roanoke Island. The population of the colony more than quadrupled from 52,000 in 1740 to 270,000 in 1780 from high immigration from Virginia, Maryland and Pennsylvania, plus immigrants from abroad.

North Carolina did not have any printer or print shops until 1749, when the North Carolina Assembly commissioned James Davis from Williamsburg Virginia to act as their official printer. Before this time the laws and legal journals of North Carolina were handwritten and were kept in a largely disorganized manner, prompting the hiring of Davis. Davis settled in New Bern, married, and in 1755 was appointed by Benjamin Franklin as North Carolina&#x27;s first postmaster. In October of that year the North Carolina Assembly awarded Davis a contract to carry mail between Wilmington, North Carolina and Suffolk, Virginia. He was also active in North Carolina politics as a member of the Assembly and later as the Sheriff. Davis also founded and printed the &quot;North-Carolina Gazette&quot;, North Carolina&#x27;s first newspaper, printed in his printing house in New Bern.

Differences in the settlement patterns of eastern and western North Carolina, or the Atlantic coastal plain and uplands, affected the political, economic, and social life of the state from the 18th until the 20th century. Eastern North Carolina was settled chiefly by immigrants from rural England and Gaelic speakers from the Scottish Highlands. The Piedmont upcountry and western mountain region of North Carolina was settled chiefly by Scots-Irish, English, and German Protestants, the so-called &quot;cohee&quot;. Arriving during the mid-to-late 18th century, the Scots-Irish, people of Scottish descent who migrated to and then emigrated from what is today Northern Ireland, were the largest non-English immigrant group before the Revolution; English indentured servants were overwhelmingly the largest immigrant group before the Revolution.

===Revolutionary War===

During the American Revolutionary War, the English and Gaelic speaking Highland Scots of eastern North Carolina tended to remain loyal to the British Crown, because of longstanding business and personal connections with Great Britain. The English, Welsh, Scots-Irish, and German settlers of western North Carolina tended to favor American independence from Britain. British loyalists dubbed the Mecklenburg County area to be &#x27;a hornet&#x27;s nest&#x27; of radicals, birthing the name of the future Charlotte NBA team. On April 12, 1776, the colony became the first to instruct its delegates to the Continental Congress to vote for independence from the British Crown, through the Halifax Resolves passed by the North Carolina Provincial Congress. The date of this event is memorialized on the state flag and state seal. Throughout the Revolutionary War, fierce guerrilla warfare erupted between bands of pro-independence and pro-British colonists. In some cases the war was also an excuse to settle private grudges and rivalries.

North Carolina had around 7,800 Patriots join the Continental Army under General George Washington; and an additional 10,000 served in local militia units under such leaders as General Nathanael Greene. There was some military action, especially in 1780–81. Many Carolinian frontiersmen had moved west over the mountains, into the Washington District (later known as Tennessee), but in 1789, following the Revolution, the state was persuaded to relinquish its claim to the western lands. It ceded them to the national government so the Northwest Territory could be organized and managed nationally.

A major American victory in the war took place at King&#x27;s Mountain along the North Carolina–South Carolina border; on October 7, 1780, a force of 1,000 Patriots from western North Carolina (including what is today the state of Tennessee) and southwest Virginia overwhelmed a force of some 1,000 British troops led by Major Patrick Ferguson. Most of the soldiers fighting for the British side in this battle were Carolinians who had remained loyal to the Crown (they were called &quot;Tories&quot; or Loyalists). The American victory at King&#x27;s Mountain gave the advantage to colonists who favored American independence, and it prevented the British Army from recruiting new soldiers from the Tories.
The road to Yorktown and America&#x27;s independence from Great Britain led through North Carolina. As the British Army moved north from victories in Charleston and Camden, South Carolina, the Southern Division of the Continental Army and local militia prepared to meet them. Following General Daniel Morgan&#x27;s victory over the British Cavalry Commander Banastre Tarleton at the Battle of Cowpens on January 17, 1781, southern commander Nathanael Greene led British Lord Charles Cornwallis across the heartland of North Carolina, and away from the latter&#x27;s base of supply in Charleston, South Carolina. This campaign is known as &quot;The Race to the Dan&quot; or &quot;The Race for the River&quot;.

In the Battle of Cowan&#x27;s Ford, Cornwallis met resistance along the banks of the Catawba River at Cowan&#x27;s Ford on February 1, 1781, in an attempt to engage General Morgan&#x27;s forces during a tactical withdrawal. Morgan had moved to the northern part of the state to combine with General Greene&#x27;s newly recruited forces. Generals Greene and Cornwallis finally met at the Battle of Guilford Courthouse in present-day Greensboro on March 15, 1781. Although the British troops held the field at the end of the battle, their casualties at the hands of the numerically superior Continental Army were crippling. Following this &quot;Pyrrhic victory&quot;, Cornwallis chose to move to the Virginia coastline to get reinforcements, and to allow the Royal Navy to protect his battered army. This decision would result in Cornwallis&#x27; eventual defeat at Yorktown, Virginia, later in 1781. The Patriots&#x27; victory there guaranteed American independence. On November 21, 1789, North Carolina became the twelfth state to ratify the U.S. Constitution.

===Antebellum period===

After 1800, cotton and tobacco became important export crops. The eastern half of the state, especially the Coastal Plain region, developed a slave society based on a plantation system and slave labor. Planters owning large estates wielded significant political and socio-economic power in antebellum North Carolina. They placed their interests above those of the generally non-slave-holding yeoman farmers of North Carolina. While slaveholding was slightly less concentrated compared to some other Southern states, according to the 1860 census, more than 330,000 people, or 33% of the population out of 992,622 people in total, were enslaved African Americans. They lived and worked chiefly on plantations in the Piedmont and Coastal Plain regions of the state. In addition, 30,463 free people of color lived in the state. They were also mainly concentrated in the eastern coastal plain, especially at port cities such as Wilmington and New Bern, where a variety of jobs were available. Most were descendants from free African Americans who had migrated along with neighbors from Virginia during the 18th century. The majority were the descendants of unions in the working classes between white women, indentured servants or free, and African men, indentured, slave or free.

After the American Revolution, Quakers and Mennonites worked to persuade slaveholders to free their slaves. Some were inspired by their efforts and the language of the Revolution to arrange for manumission of their slaves. The number of free people of color rose markedly in the first couple of decades after the Revolution. Many free people of color migrated to the frontier, along with their European-American neighbors, where the social system was looser. By 1810, nearly three percent of the free population consisted of free people of color, who numbered slightly more than 10,000. The western areas of North Carolina were mainly white families of European descent, especially Scotch-Irish, who operated small subsistence farms. In the early national period, the state became a center of Jeffersonian and Jacksonian democracy, with a strong Whig presence, especially in the western part of the state. After Nat Turner&#x27;s slave uprising in 1831, North Carolina and other southern states reduced the rights of free blacks. In 1835, the legislature withdrew their right to vote.

In mid-century, the state&#x27;s rural and commercial areas were connected by the construction of a wooden plank road, known as a &quot;farmer&#x27;s railroad&quot;, from Fayetteville in the east to Bethania (northwest of Winston-Salem). On October 25, 1836, construction began on the Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad to connect the port city of Wilmington with the state capital of Raleigh. In 1840, the state capitol building in Raleigh was completed, and still stands today.

In 1849, the North Carolina Railroad was created by act of the legislature to extend that railroad west to Greensboro, High Point, and Charlotte. During the Civil War, the Wilmington-to-Raleigh stretch of the railroad was vital to the Confederate war effort; supplies shipped into Wilmington were moved by rail through Raleigh to the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia.

===American Civil War===

In 1860, North Carolina was a slave state, in which one-third of the state&#x27;s total population were African-American slaves. The state did not vote to join the Confederacy until President Abraham Lincoln called on it to invade its sister state, South Carolina, becoming the last or penultimate state to officially join the Confederacy. The title of &quot;last to join the Confederacy&quot; has been disputed; although Tennessee&#x27;s informal secession on May 7, 1861, preceded North Carolina&#x27;s official secession on May 20, the Tennessee legislature did not formally vote to secede until June 8, 1861.

Around 125,000 troops from North Carolina served in the Confederate Army, and about 15,000 North Carolina troops (both black and white) served in Union Army regiments, including those who left the state to join Union regiments elsewhere. Over 30,000 North Carolina troops died from combat or disease during the war. Elected in 1862, Governor Zebulon Baird Vance tried to maintain state autonomy against Confederate President Jefferson Davis in Richmond. The state government was reluctant to support the demands of the national government in Richmond, and the state was the scene of only small battles. In 1865, Durham County saw the largest single surrender of Confederate soldiers at Bennett Place, when Joseph E. Johnston surrendered the Army of Tennessee and all remaining Confederate forces still active in North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida, totalling 89,270 soldiers.
Confederate troops from all parts of North Carolina served in virtually all the major battles of the Army of Northern Virginia, the Confederacy&#x27;s most famous army. The largest battle fought in North Carolina was at Bentonville, which was a futile attempt by Confederate General Joseph Johnston to slow Union General William Tecumseh Sherman&#x27;s advance through the Carolinas in the spring of 1865. In April 1865, after losing the Battle of Morrisville, Johnston surrendered to Sherman at Bennett Place, in what is today Durham. North Carolina&#x27;s port city of Wilmington, was the last Confederate port to fall to the Union, in February 1865, after the Union won the nearby Second Battle of Fort Fisher, its major defense downriver.

The first Confederate soldier to be killed in the Civil War was Private Henry Wyatt from North Carolina, in the Battle of Big Bethel in June 1861. At the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, the 26th North Carolina Regiment participated in Pickett/Pettigrew&#x27;s Charge and advanced the farthest into Union lines of any Confederate regiment. During the Battle of Chickamauga, the 58th North Carolina Regiment advanced farther than any other regiment on Snodgrass Hill to push back the remaining Union forces from the battlefield. At Appomattox Court House in Virginia in April 1865, the 75th North Carolina Regiment, a cavalry unit, fired the last shots of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia in the Civil War. The phrase &quot;First at Bethel, Farthest at Gettysburg and Chickamauga, and Last at Appomattox&quot;, later became used through much of the early 20th century.

After secession, some North Carolinians refused to support the Confederacy. Some of the yeoman farmers chiefly in the state&#x27;s mountains and western Piedmont region remained neutral during the Civil War, with others covertly supporting the Union cause during the conflict. Approximately 15,000 North Carolinians (both black and white) from across the state enlisted in the Union Army. Numerous slaves also escaped to Union lines, where they became essentially free.

===Reconstruction era through late 19th century===
Following the collapse of the Confederacy in 1865, North Carolina, along with other former Confederate States (except Tennessee), was put under direct control by the U.S. military and was relieved of its constitutional government and representation within the United States Congress in what is now referred to as the Reconstruction era. To earn back its rights, the state had to make concessions to Washington, one of which was ratifying the Thirteenth Amendment. Congressional Republicans during Reconstruction, commonly referred to as &quot;radical Republicans&quot;, constantly pushed for new constitutions for each of the Southern states that emphasized equal rights for African-Americans. In 1868, a constitutional convention restored the state government of North Carolina. Though the Fifteenth Amendment was also adopted that same year, it remained in most cases ineffective for almost a century, not to mention paramilitary groups and their lynching with impunity.

The elections in April 1868 following the constitutional convention led to a narrow victory for a Republican-dominated government, with 19 African-Americans holding positions in the North Carolina State Legislature. In attempt to put the reforms into effect, the new Republican Governor William W. Holden declared martial law on any county allegedly not complying with law and order using the passage of the Shoffner Act.

A Republican Party coalition of black freedmen, northern carpetbaggers and local scalawags controlled state government for three years. The white conservative Democrats regained control of the state legislature in 1870, in part by Ku Klux Klan violence and terrorism at the polls, to suppress black voting. Republicans were elected to the governorship until 1876, when the Red Shirts, a paramilitary organization that arose in 1874 and was allied with the Democratic Party, helped suppress black voting. More than 150 black Americans were murdered in electoral violence in 1876.

Post–Civil War-debt cycles pushed people to switch from subsistence agriculture to commodity agriculture. Among this time the notorious Crop-Lien system developed and was financially difficult on landless whites and blacks, due to high amounts of usury. Also due to the push for commodity agriculture, the free range was ended. Prior to this time people fenced in their crops and had their livestock feeding on the free range areas. After the ending of the free range people now fenced their animals and had their crops in the open.

Democrats were elected to the legislature and governor&#x27;s office, but the Populists attracted voters displeased with them. In 1896 a biracial, Populist-Republican Fusionist coalition gained the governor&#x27;s office and passed laws that would extend the voting franchise to blacks and poor whites. The Democrats regained control of the legislature in 1896 and passed laws to impose Jim Crow and racial segregation of public facilities. Voters of North Carolina&#x27;s 2nd congressional district elected a total of four African-American congressmen through these years of the late 19th century.

Political tensions ran so high a small group of white Democrats in 1898 planned to take over the Wilmington government if their candidates were not elected. In the Wilmington Insurrection of 1898, white Democrats led around 2,000 of their supporters that attacked the black newspaper and neighborhood, killed an estimated 60 to 300 people, and ran off the white Republican mayor and aldermen. They installed their own people and elected Alfred M. Waddell as mayor, in the only successful coup d&#x27;état in United States history.

In 1899, the state legislature passed a new constitution, with requirements for poll taxes and literacy tests for voter registration which disenfranchised most black Americans in the state. Exclusion from voting had wide effects: it meant black Americans could not serve on juries or in any local office. After a decade of white supremacy, many people forgot North Carolina had ever had thriving middle-class black Americans. Black citizens had no political voice in the state until after the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 were passed to enforce their constitutional rights. It was not until 1992 that another African American was elected as a U.S. Representative from North Carolina.

===Early through mid-20th century===

After the reconstruction era, North Carolina had become a one-party state, dominated by the Democratic Party. The state mainly continued with an economy based on tobacco, cotton textiles and commodity agriculture. Large towns and cities remained in few numbers. However, a major industrial base emerged in the late 19th and early 20th century, in the counties of the Piedmont Triad, based on cotton mills established at the fall line. Railroads were built to connect the new industrializing cities.

The state was the site of the first successful controlled, powered and sustained heavier-than-air flight, by the Wright brothers, near Kitty Hawk on December 17, 1903.
In the first half of the 20th century, many African Americans left the state to go North for better opportunities, in the Great Migration. Their departure changed the demographic characteristics of many areas.

North Carolina was hard hit by the Great Depression, but the New Deal programs of Franklin D. Roosevelt for cotton and tobacco significantly helped the farmers. After World War II, the state&#x27;s economy grew rapidly, highlighted by the growth of such cities as Charlotte, Raleigh, and Durham in the Piedmont region.

Research Triangle Park, established in 1959, serves as the largest research park in the United States. Formed near Raleigh, Durham, and Chapel Hill, the Research Triangle metro is a major area of universities and advanced scientific and technical research.

The Greensboro sit-ins in 1960 played a crucial role in the Civil Rights Movement to bring full equality to American blacks. By the late 1960s, spurred in part by the increasingly leftward tilt of national Democrats, conservative whites began to vote for Republican national candidates and gradually for more Republicans locally.

===Late 20th century to present===

Since the 1970s, North Carolina has seen steady increases in population growth. This growth has largely occurred in metropolitan areas located within the Piedmont Crescent, in places such as Charlotte, Concord, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, Durham and Raleigh. The Charlotte metropolitan area has experienced large growth mainly due to its finance, banking, and tech industries.

By the 1990s, Charlotte had become a major regional and national banking center. Towards Raleigh, North Carolina State, Duke University, and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, have helped the Research Triangle area attract an educated workforce and develop more jobs.

In 1988, North Carolina gained its first professional sports franchise, the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). The hornets team name stems from the American Revolutionary War, when British General Cornwallis described Charlotte as a &quot;hornet&#x27;s nest of rebellion&quot;. The Carolina Panthers of the National Football League (NFL) became based in Charlotte as well, with their first season being in 1995. The Carolina Hurricanes of the National Hockey League (NHL) moved to Raleigh in 1997, with their colors being the same as the NC State Wolfpack, who are also located in Raleigh.

By the late 20th century and into the early 21st century, economic industries such as technology, pharmaceuticals, banking, food processing, vehicle parts, and tourism started to emerge as North Carolina&#x27;s main economic drivers. This marked a shift from the state&#x27;s former main industries of tobacco, textiles, and furniture. Factors that played a role in this shift were globalization, the state&#x27;s higher education system, national banking, the transformation of agriculture, and new companies moving to the state.

==Geography==


North Carolina is bordered by South Carolina on the south, Georgia on the southwest, Tennessee on the west, Virginia on the north, and the Atlantic Ocean on the east. The United States Census Bureau places North Carolina in the South Atlantic division of the southern region. It has a total area of , of which is land and (9.66%) is water.

North Carolina consists of three main geographic regions: the Atlantic coastal plain, occupying the eastern portion of the state; the central Piedmont region, and the mountain region in the west, which is part of the Appalachian Mountains. The coastal plain consists of more specifically defined areas known as the Outer Banks, a string of sandy, narrow barrier islands separated from the mainland by sounds or inlets, including Albemarle Sound and Pamlico Sound, the native home of the venus flytrap, and the inner coastal plain, where longleaf pine trees are native.

So many ships have been lost off Cape Hatteras that the area is known as the &quot;Graveyard of the Atlantic&quot;; more than a thousand ships have sunk in these waters since records began in 1526. The most famous of these is the &quot;Queen Anne&#x27;s Revenge&quot; (flagship of the pirate Blackbeard), which went aground in Beaufort Inlet in 1718.

The coastal plain transitions to the Piedmont region along the Atlantic Seaboard fall line, the elevation at which waterfalls first appear on streams and rivers. The Piedmont region of central North Carolina is the state&#x27;s most populous region, containing the six largest cities in the state by population. It consists of gently rolling countryside frequently broken by hills or low mountain ridges. Small, isolated, and deeply eroded mountain ranges and peaks are located in the Piedmont, including the Sauratown Mountains, Pilot Mountain, the Uwharrie Mountains, Crowder&#x27;s Mountain, King&#x27;s Pinnacle, the Brushy Mountains, and the South Mountains. The Piedmont ranges from about in elevation in the east to about in the west.

The western section of the state is part of the Blue Ridge Mountains of the larger Appalachian Mountain range. Among the subranges of the Blue Ridge Mountains located in the state are the Great Smoky Mountains and the Black Mountains. The Black Mountains are the highest in the eastern United States, and culminate in Mount Mitchell at , the highest point east of the Mississippi River.
North Carolina has 17 major river basins. The five basins west of the Blue Ridge Mountains flow to the Gulf of Mexico, while the remainder flow to the Atlantic Ocean. Of the 17 basins, 11 originate within the state of North Carolina, but only four are contained entirely within the state&#x27;s border—the Cape Fear, the Neuse, the White Oak, and the Tar–Pamlico basin.

===Flora and fauna===
===Major rivers===
===Climate===
Elevation above sea level is most responsible for temperature change across the state, with the mountainous regions being coolest year-round. The climate is also influenced by the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf Stream, especially in the coastal plain. These influences tend to cause warmer winter temperatures along the coast, where temperatures only occasionally drop below the freezing point at night. The coastal plain averages around of snow or ice annually, and in many years, there may be no snow or ice at all.

The Atlantic Ocean exerts less influence on the climate of the Piedmont region, which has hotter summers and colder winters than along the coast, though winters are still mild.

North Carolina experiences severe weather both in summer and in winter, with summer bringing threat of hurricanes, tropical storms, heavy rain, and flooding. Destructive hurricanes that have hit North Carolina include Hurricane Fran, Hurricane Florence, Hurricane Floyd, Hurricane Hugo, and Hurricane Hazel, the latter being the strongest storm ever to make landfall in the state, as a Category4 in 1954. Hurricane Isabel ranks as the most destructive of the 21st century.

North Carolina averages fewer than 20 tornadoes per year, many of them produced by hurricanes or tropical storms along the coastal plain. Tornadoes from thunderstorms are a risk, especially in the eastern part of the state. The western Piedmont is often protected by the mountains, which tend to break up storms as they cross over; the storms will often re-form farther east. A phenomenon known as &quot;cold-air damming&quot; often occurs in the northwestern part of the state, which can weaken storms but can also lead to major ice events in winter.

In April 2011, the worst tornado outbreak in North Carolina&#x27;s history occurred. Thirty confirmed tornadoes touched down, mainly in the Eastern Piedmont and Sandhills, killing at least 24 people. In September 2019 Hurricane Dorian hit the area.


===Parks and recreation===

North Carolina provides a large range of recreational activities, from swimming at the beach to skiing in the mountains. North Carolina offers fall colors, freshwater and saltwater fishing, hunting, birdwatching, agritourism, ATV trails, ballooning, rock climbing, biking, hiking, skiing, boating and sailing, camping, canoeing, caving (spelunking), gardens, and arboretums. North Carolina has theme parks, aquariums, museums, historic sites, lighthouses, elegant theaters, concert halls, and fine dining.

North Carolinians enjoy outdoor recreation using numerous local bike paths, 34 state parks, and 14 national parks. National Park Service units include the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, the Blue Ridge Parkway, Cape Hatteras National Seashore, Cape Lookout National Seashore, Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site at Flat Rock, Fort Raleigh National Historic Site at Manteo, Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Great Smoky Mountains Railroad, Guilford Courthouse National Military Park in Greensboro, Moores Creek National Battlefield near Currie in Pender County, the Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail, Old Salem National Historic Site in Winston-Salem, the Trail of Tears National Historic Trail, and Wright Brothers National Memorial in Kill Devil Hills.

National Forests include Uwharrie National Forest in central North Carolina, Croatan National Forest in Eastern North Carolina, Pisgah National Forest in the western mountains, and Nantahala National Forest in the southwestern part of the state.

===Major cities===

In 2024, the U.S. Census Bureau released the 2023 population estimates for municipalities in North Carolina. Charlotte has the largest population, while Raleigh has the second-largest population in North Carolina.
===Most populous counties===

After the 2020 census, Wake County—with a population of 1,129,410—became the most populous county in the state, overtaking Mecklenburg County—with a population of 1,115,482—by a margin of about 14,000. Both counties are still the only to have populations over one million in North Carolina and the Carolinas region.

===Statistical areas===

North Carolina has four major combined statistical areas (CSA) with a population over 1 million (as of 2023):
* Charlotte Metro: &quot;Charlotte-Concord, NC-SC&quot;; population 3,387,115
* Research Triangle: &quot;Raleigh-Durham-Cary, NC&quot;; population: 2,368,947
* Hampton Roads: &quot;Virginia Beach-Chesapeake, VA-NC&quot;; population: 1,866,723
* Piedmont Triad: &quot;Greensboro–Winston-Salem–High Point, NC&quot;; population: 1,736,099

==Demographics==

The United States Census Bureau determined the population of North Carolina was 10,439,388 at the 2020 census. Based on numbers in 2012 of the people residing in North Carolina 58.5% were born there; 33.1% were born in another state; 1.0% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s); and 7.4% were foreign-born.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 9,382 homeless people in North Carolina.

The top countries of origin for North Carolina&#x27;s immigrants were Mexico, India, Honduras, China and El Salvador, .

===Race and ethnicity===


At the 2010 census, the racial composition of North Carolina was: White: 68.5% (65.3% non-Hispanic white, 3.2% White Hispanic), Black or African American: 21.5%, Latin and Hispanic American of any race: 8.4%, some other race: 4.3%, Multiracial American: 2.2%, Asian American: 2.2%, and Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander: 1%. In 2020, North Carolina like much of the U.S. experienced a decline in its non-Hispanic white population; at the 2020 census, non-Hispanic whites were 62.2%, Blacks or African Americans 20.5%, American Indian and Alaska Natives 1.2%, Asians 3.3%, Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders 0.1%, people from other race 5.9%, and multiracial Americans 6.8%.

Enslaved Africans were brought to North Carolina to be sold into slavery. A majority of the black population is now concentrated in the urban areas and northeastern part of the state.

North Carolina&#x27;s Hispanic population has grown rapidly. The Hispanic population more than doubled in size between 1990 and 2000. Many of North Carolina&#x27;s Hispanic residents are of Mexican heritage. Many of North Carolina&#x27;s newer Latino residents came from Mexico largely to work in agriculture, manufacturing, or on one of North Carolina&#x27;s military installations.

The most common ancestries in North Carolina are African-American, American, German, English, and Irish.

North Carolina has the eighth-largest Native American population in the country. The state is home to eight Native American tribes and four urban Native American organizations.

===Languages===
North Carolina is home to a spectrum of different dialects of Southern American English and Appalachian English.

In 2010, 89.66% (7,750,904) of North Carolina residents age five and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 6.93% (598,756) spoke Spanish, 0.32% (27,310) French, 0.27% (23,204) German, and Chinese (which includes Mandarin) was spoken as a main language by 0.27% (23,072) of the population five and older. In total, 10.34% (893,735) of North Carolina&#x27;s population age five and older spoke a mother language other than English. In 2019, 87.7% of the population aged 5 and older spoke English and 12.3% spoke another language. The most common non-English language was Spanish at the 2019 American Community Survey.

===Religion===
North Carolina residents since the colonial era have historically been overwhelmingly Protestant—first Anglican, then Baptist and Methodist. In 2010, the Southern Baptist Convention was the single largest Christian denomination, with 4,241 churches and 1,513,000 members. The second largest in 2024 was the Roman Catholic Church which is organised into two dioceses. In the west is the Roman Catholic Diocese of Charlotte which includes Charlotte and has 530,000 members in 196 parishes. In the east is the Diocese of Raleigh with a total of 80 parishes and nearly 500,000 Catholics. The third largest was the United Methodist Church, with 660,000 members and 1,923 churches. The fourth largest was the Presbyterian Church (USA), with 186,000 members and 710 congregations; this denomination was brought by Scots-Irish immigrants who settled the backcountry in the colonial era. In 2020, the Southern Baptists remained the largest with 1,324,747 adherents, though Methodists and others were collectively overtaken by non/interdenominational Protestants numbering 1,053,564.

In 1845, the Baptists split into regional associations of the Northern United States and Southern U.S., over the issue of slavery. These new associations were the Northern Baptist Convention (today the American Baptist Churches USA) and Southern Baptist Convention. By the late 19th century, the largest Protestant denomination in North Carolina were Baptists. After emancipation, black Baptists quickly set up their own independent congregations in North Carolina and other states of the South, as they wanted to be free of white supervision. Black Baptists developed their own state and national associations, such as the National Baptist Convention. Other primarily African American Baptist conventions which grew in the state since the 20th century were the Progressive National Baptist Convention and Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship.

Methodists (the second largest group among North Carolinian Protestants) were divided along racial lines in the United Methodist Church and African Methodist Episcopal Church. The Methodist tradition tends to be strong in the northern Piedmont, especially in populous Guilford County. Other prominent Protestant groups in North Carolina as of the Pew Research Center&#x27;s 2014 study were non/interdenominational Protestants and Pentecostalism. The Assemblies of God and Church of God in Christ are the largest Pentecostal denominations operating in the state, while notable minorities include Oneness Pentecostals primarily affiliated with the United Pentecostal Church International.

The state also has a special history with the Moravian Church, as settlers of this faith (largely of German origin) settled in the Winston-Salem area in the 18th and 19th centuries. Historically Scots-Irish have had a strong presence in Charlotte and in Scotland County.

A wide variety of non-Christian faiths are practiced by other residents in the state, including: Judaism, Islam, Baháʼí, Buddhism, and Hinduism. The rapid influx of Northerners and immigrants from Latin America is steadily increasing ethnic and religious diversity within the state. The number of Roman Catholics and Jews in the state has increased, along with general religious diversity as a whole. There are also a substantial number of Quakers in Guilford County and northeastern North Carolina. Many universities and colleges in the state have been founded on religious traditions, and some currently maintain that affiliation, including:
* Barton College (Disciples of Christ)
* Belmont Abbey College (Catholic)
* Bennett College for Women (United Methodist Church)
* Brevard College (United Methodist Church)
* Campbell University (Baptist)
* Catawba College (United Church of Christ)
* Chowan University (Baptist)
* Davidson College (Presbyterian)
* Duke University (Historically Methodist)
* Elon University (Historically United Church of Christ)
* Gardner–Webb University (Cooperative Baptist Fellowship)
* Greensboro College (Methodist)
* Guilford College (Religious Society of Friends/Quakers)
* High Point University (United Methodist Church)
* Lees-McRae College (Presbyterian)
* Lenoir-Rhyne University (Evangelical Lutheran Church in America)
* Livingstone College (African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church)
* Louisburg College (United Methodist Church)
* Mars Hill University (Christian)
* Methodist University (United Methodist Church)
* Montreat College (Christian)
* University of Mount Olive (Baptist)
* North Carolina Wesleyan University (United Methodist Church)
* William Peace University (Presbyterian)
* Pfeiffer University (Methodist)
* Queens University of Charlotte (Presbyterian)
* St. Andrews Presbyterian College (Presbyterian)
* Saint Augustine&#x27;s College (Episcopal)
* Salem College (Moravian Church)
* Shaw University (Baptist)
* Wake Forest University (Historically Baptist)
* Warren Wilson College (Historically Presbyterian)
* Wingate University (Historically Baptist)
The state also has several major seminaries, including the Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary in Wake Forest, and the Hood Theological Seminary (AME Zion) in Salisbury.

== Economy ==
North Carolina&#x27;s 2018 total gross state product was $496 billion. Based on American Community Survey 2010–2014 data, North Carolina&#x27;s median household income was $46,693. It ranked forty-first out of fifty states plus the District of Columbia for median household income. North Carolina had the fourteenth highest poverty rate in the nation at 17.6%, with 13% of families that were below the poverty line.

The state has a very diverse economy because of its great availability of hydroelectric power, its pleasant climate, and its wide variety of soils. The state ranks third among the South Atlantic states in population, but leads the region in industry and agriculture. North Carolina leads the nation in the production of tobacco.

Charlotte, the state&#x27;s largest city, is a major textile and trade center. According to a Forbes article written in 2013, employment in the &quot;Old North State&quot; has gained many different industry sectors. Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) industries in the area surrounding North Carolina&#x27;s capital have grown 17.9 percent since 2001. Raleigh ranked the third best city for technology in 2020 due to the state&#x27;s growing technology sector. In 2010, North Carolina&#x27;s total gross state product was $424.9 billion, while the state debt in November 2012, according to one source, totaled $2.4 billion, while according to another, was in 2012 $57.8 billion. In 2011, the civilian labor force was at around 4.5 million with employment near 4.1 million.

North Carolina is the leading U.S. state in production of flue-cured tobacco and sweet potatoes, and comes second in the farming of pigs and hogs, trout, and turkeys. In the three most recent USDA surveys (2002, 2007, 2012), North Carolina also ranked second in the production of Christmas trees.

North Carolina has 15 metropolitan areas, and in 2010 was chosen as the third-best state for business by Forbes Magazine, and the second-best state by chief executive officer Magazine. Since 2000, there has been a clear division in the economic growth of North Carolina&#x27;s urban and rural areas. While North Carolina&#x27;s urban areas have enjoyed a prosperous economy with steady job growth, low unemployment, and rising wages, many of the state&#x27;s rural counties have suffered from job loss, rising levels of poverty, and population loss as their manufacturing base has declined. According to one estimate, one-half of North Carolina&#x27;s 100 counties have lost population since 2010, primarily due to the poor economy in many of North Carolina&#x27;s rural areas. However, the population of the state&#x27;s urban areas is steadily increasing.

==Arts and culture==
North Carolina has traditions in art, music, and cuisine. The nonprofit arts and culture industry generates $1.2billion in direct economic activity in North Carolina, supporting more than 43,600 full-time equivalent jobs and generating $119million in revenue for local governments and the state of North Carolina. North Carolina established the North Carolina Museum of Art as the first major museum collection in the country to be formed by state legislation and funding and continues to bring millions into the NC economy.

One of the more famous arts communities in the state is Seagrove, the handmade-pottery capital of the U.S., where artisans create handcrafted pottery inspired by the same traditions that began in this community more than two hundred years ago.

===TV and film===
===Music===
North Carolina boasts a large number of noteworthy jazz musicians, some among the most important in the history of the genre. These include: John Coltrane, (Hamlet, High Point); Thelonious Monk (Rocky Mount); Billy Taylor (Greenville); Woody Shaw (Laurinburg); Lou Donaldson (Durham); Max Roach (Newland); Tal Farlow (Greensboro); Albert, Jimmy and Percy Heath (Wilmington); Nina Simone (Tryon); and Billy Strayhorn (Hillsborough).
North Carolina is also famous for its tradition of old-time music, and many recordings were made in the early 20th century by folk-song collector Bascom Lamar Lunsford. Musicians such as the North Carolina Ramblers helped solidify the sound of country music in the late 1920s, while the influential bluegrass musician Doc Watson also hailed from North Carolina. Both North and South Carolina are hotbeds for traditional rural blues, especially the style known as the Piedmont blues.

Ben Folds Five originated in Winston-Salem, and Ben Folds still records and resides in Chapel Hill.

The British band Pink Floyd is named, in part, after Chapel Hill bluesman Floyd Council.

The Research Triangle area has long been a well-known center for folk, rock, metal, jazz and punk. James Taylor grew up around Chapel Hill, and his 1968 song &quot;Carolina in My Mind&quot; has been called an unofficial anthem for the state. Other famous musicians from North Carolina include J. Cole, DaBaby, 9th Wonder, Shirley Caesar, Roberta Flack, Clyde McPhatter, Nnenna Freelon, Link Wray, Warren Haynes, Jimmy Herring, Michael Houser, Eric Church, Future Islands, Randy Travis, Ryan Adams, Ronnie Milsap, Anthony Hamilton, The Avett Brothers, Charlie Daniels, and Luke Combs.

Metal and punk acts such as Corrosion of Conformity, Between the Buried and Me, and Nightmare Sonata are native to North Carolina.

EDM producer Porter Robinson hails from Chapel Hill.

North Carolina is the home of more &quot;American Idol&quot; finalists than any other state: Clay Aiken (season two), Fantasia Barrino (season three), Chris Daughtry (season five), Kellie Pickler (season five), Bucky Covington (season five), Anoop Desai (season eight), Scotty McCreery (season ten), and Caleb Johnson (season thirteen). North Carolina also has the most &quot;American Idol&quot; winners with Barrino, McCreery, and Johnson.

In the mountains, the Brevard Music Center hosts choral, operatic, orchestral, and solo performances during its annual summer schedule.

North Carolina has five professional opera companies: Opera Carolina in Charlotte, NC Opera in Raleigh, Greensboro Opera in Greensboro, Piedmont Opera in Winston-Salem, and Asheville Lyric Opera in Asheville. Academic conservatories and universities also produce fully staged operas, such as the A. J. Fletcher Opera Institute of the University of North Carolina School of the Arts in Winston-Salem, the Department of Music of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and UNC Greensboro.

Among others, there are three high-level symphonic orchestras: NC Symphony in Raleigh, Charlotte Symphony, and Winston-Salem Symphony. The NC Symphony holds the North Carolina Master Chorale. The Carolina Ballet is headquartered in Raleigh, and there is also the Charlotte Ballet.

The state boasts three performing arts centers: DPAC in Durham, Duke Energy Center for the Performing Arts in Raleigh, and the Blumenthal Performing Art Centers in Charlotte. They feature concerts, operas, recitals, and traveling Broadway musicals.

=== Shopping ===
North Carolina has a variety of shopping choices. SouthPark Mall in Charlotte is the largest and most upscale mall in the Carolinas, featuring multiple luxury tenants with their sole location in the state. Other major malls in Charlotte include Northlake Mall and Carolina Place Mall in nearby suburb Pineville. Other major malls throughout the state include Hanes Mall in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, The Thruway Center in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, Crabtree Valley Mall, North Hills Mall, and Triangle Town Center in Raleigh; Friendly Center and Four Seasons Town Centre in Greensboro; Oak Hollow Mall in High Point; Concord Mills in Concord; Valley Hills Mall in Hickory; Cross Creek Mall in Fayetteville; and The Streets at Southpoint in Durham and Independence Mall in Wilmington, North Carolina, and Tanger Outlets in Charlotte, Nags Head, Blowing Rock, and Mebane, North Carolina.

=== Cuisine and agriculture ===
A culinary staple of North Carolina is pork barbecue. There are strong regional differences and rivalries over the sauces and methods used in making the barbecue. The common trend across Western North Carolina is the use of premium grade Boston butt. Western North Carolina pork barbecue uses a tomato-based sauce, and only the pork shoulder (dark meat) is used. Western North Carolina barbecue is commonly referred to as Lexington barbecue after the Piedmont Triad town of Lexington, home of the Lexington Barbecue Festival, which attracts more than 100,000 visitors each October. Eastern North Carolina pork barbecue uses a vinegar-and-red-pepper-based sauce and the &quot;whole hog&quot; is cooked, thus integrating both white and dark meat.

Krispy Kreme, an international chain of doughnut stores, was started in North Carolina; the company&#x27;s headquarters are in Winston-Salem. Pepsi-Cola was first produced in 1898 in New Bern. A regional soft drink, Cheerwine, was created and is still based in the city of Salisbury. Despite its name, the hot sauce Texas Pete was created in North Carolina; its headquarters are also in Winston-Salem. The Hardee&#x27;s fast-food chain was started in Rocky Mount. Another fast-food chain, Bojangles&#x27;, was started in Charlotte, and has its corporate headquarters there. A popular North Carolina restaurant chain is Golden Corral. Started in 1973, the chain was founded in Fayetteville, with headquarters located in Raleigh. Popular pickle brand Mount Olive Pickle Company was founded in Mount Olive in 1926. Fast casual burger chain Hwy 55 Burgers, Shakes &amp; Fries also makes its home in Mount Olive. Cook Out, a popular fast-food chain featuring burgers, hot dogs, and milkshakes in a wide variety of flavors, was founded in Greensboro in 1989 and has begun expanding outside North Carolina. In 2013 &quot;Southern Living&quot; named Durham–Chapel Hill the South&#x27;s &quot;Tastiest City&quot;.

Over the last decade, North Carolina has become a cultural epicenter and haven for internationally prize-winning wine (Noni Bacca Winery), internationally prized cheeses (Ashe County), &quot;L&#x27;institut International aux Arts Gastronomiques: Conquerront Les Yanks les Truffes, January 15, 2010&quot; international hub for truffles (Garland Truffles), and beer making, as tobacco land has been converted to grape orchards while state laws regulating alcohol by volume (ABV) in beer allowed a jump from six to fifteen percent. The Yadkin Valley in particular has become a strengthening market for grape production, while Asheville recently won the recognition of being named &quot;Beer City USA&quot;. Asheville boasts the largest number of breweries per capita of any city in the United States. Recognized and marketed brands of beer in North Carolina include Highland Brewing, Duck Rabbit Brewery, Mother Earth Brewery, Weeping Radish Brewery, Big Boss Brewing, Foothills Brewing, Carolina Brewing Company, Lonerider Brewing, and White Rabbit Brewing Company.

North Carolina has large grazing areas for beef and dairy cattle. Truck farms can be found in North Carolina. A truck farm is a small farm where fruits and vegetables are grown to be sold at local markets. The state&#x27;s shipping, commercial fishing, and lumber industries are important to its economy. Service industries, including education, health care, private research, and retail trade, are also important. Research Triangle Park, a large industrial complex located in the Raleigh-Durham area, is one of the major centers in the country for electronics and medical research.

Tobacco was one of the first major industries to develop after the Civil War. Many farmers grew some tobacco, and the invention of the cigarette made the product especially popular. Winston-Salem is the birthplace of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJR), founded by R. J. Reynolds in 1874 as one of sixteen tobacco companies in the town. By 1914 it was selling 425 million packs of Camels a year. Today it is the second-largest tobacco company in the U.S. (behind Altria Group). RJR is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Reynolds American Inc., which in turn is 42% owned by British American Tobacco.

===Ships named for the state===

Several ships have been named after the state, most famously in the Pacific Ocean theater of World War II. Now decommissioned, she is part of the USS &quot;North Carolina&quot; Battleship Memorial in Wilmington. Another , a nuclear attack submarine, was commissioned in Wilmington on May 3, 2008.

===State parks===
The state maintains a group of protected areas known as the North Carolina State Park System, which is managed by the North Carolina Division of Parks &amp; Recreation (NCDPR), an agency of the North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources (NCDNCR).

===Armed forces installations===

Fort Bragg, near Fayetteville and Southern Pines, is a large and comprehensive military base and is the headquarters of the XVIII Airborne Corps, 82nd Airborne Division, and the U.S. Army Special Operations Command. Serving as the air wing for Fort Bragg is Pope Field, also located near Fayetteville.

Located in Jacksonville, Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune, combined with nearby bases Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Cherry Point, MCAS New River, Camp Geiger, Camp Johnson, Stone Bay and Courthouse Bay, makes up the largest concentration of Marines and sailors in the world. MCAS Cherry Point is home of the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing. Located in Goldsboro, Seymour Johnson Air Force Base is home of the 4th Fighter Wing and 916th Air Refueling Wing. One of the busiest air stations in the United States Coast Guard is located at the Coast Guard Air Station in Elizabeth City. Also stationed in North Carolina is the Military Ocean Terminal Sunny Point in Southport.

On January 24, 1961, a B-52G broke up in midair and crashed after suffering a severe fuel loss, near Goldsboro, dropping two nuclear bombs in the process without detonation. In 2013, it was revealed that three safety mechanisms on one bomb had failed, leaving just one low-voltage switch preventing detonation.

==Tourism==

Charlotte is the most-visited city in the state, attracting 28.3million visitors in 2018. Area attractions include Carolina Panthers NFL football team and Charlotte Hornets basketball team, Carowinds amusement park, Catawba Two Kings Casino (in nearby Kings Mountain), Charlotte Motor Speedway, U.S. National Whitewater Center, Discovery Place, Great Wolf Lodge, Sea Life Aquarium, Bechtler Museum of Modern Art, Billy Graham Library, Carolinas Aviation Museum, Harvey B. Gantt Center for African-American Arts + Culture, Levine Museum of the New South, McColl Center for Art + Innovation, Mint Museum, and the NASCAR Hall of Fame.

Every year the Appalachian Mountains attract several million tourists to the western part of the state, including the historic Biltmore Estate. The scenic Blue Ridge Parkway and Great Smoky Mountains National Park are the two most visited national park and unit in the United States with more than 25million visitors in 2013. The City of Asheville is consistently voted as one of the top places to visit and live in the United States, known for its rich art deco architecture, mountain scenery and outdoor activities.

In Raleigh, many tourists visit the capital, African American Cultural Complex, Contemporary Art Museum of Raleigh, Gregg Museum of Art &amp; Design at NCSU, Haywood Hall House &amp; Gardens, Marbles Kids Museum, North Carolina Museum of Art, North Carolina Museum of History, North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame, Raleigh City Museum, J. C. Raulston Arboretum, Joel Lane House, Mordecai House, Montfort Hall, and the Pope House Museum. The Carolina Hurricanes NHL hockey team is also located in the city.

In the Conover–Hickory area, attractions include Hickory Motor Speedway, RockBarn Golf and Spa, home of the Greater Hickory Classic at Rock Barn; Catawba County Firefighters Museum, the SALT Block, and Valley Hills Mall.

The Piedmont Triad, or center of the state, is home to Krispy Kreme, Mayberry, Texas Pete, the Lexington Barbecue Festival, and Moravian cookies. The internationally acclaimed North Carolina Zoo in Asheboro attracts visitors to its animals, plants, and a 57-piece art collection along of shaded pathways in the world&#x27;s largest-land-area natural-habitat park. Seagrove, in the central portion of the state, attracts many tourists along Pottery Highway (NC Hwy 705). MerleFest in Wilkesboro attracts more than 80,000 people to its four-day music festival; and Wet &#x27;n Wild Emerald Pointe water park in Greensboro is another attraction.

The Outer Banks and surrounding beaches attract millions of people to the Atlantic beaches every year.

The mainland northeastern part of the state, having recently adopted the name the Inner Banks, is also known as the Albemarle Region, for the Albemarle Settlements, some of the first settlements on North Carolina&#x27;s portion of the Atlantic Coastal Plain. The region&#x27;s historic sites are connected by the Historic Albemarle Tour.

==Transportation==

Transportation systems in North Carolina consist of air, water, road, rail, and public transportation including intercity rail via Amtrak and light rail in Charlotte. North Carolina has the second-largest state highway system in the country as well as the largest ferry system on the East Coast.

North Carolina&#x27;s airports serve destinations throughout the United States and international destinations in Canada, Europe, Central America, and the Caribbean. In July 2022, Charlotte Douglas International Airport, which serves as the second busiest hub for American Airlines, ranked as the 11th busiest airport in the United States with Raleigh-Durham International Airport, a focus-city for Delta Air Lines and formerly a hub for American Airlines and Midway Airlines, ranked as the 37th busiest airport in the United States.

North Carolina has a growing passenger rail system with Amtrak serving most major cities. Charlotte is also home to North Carolina&#x27;s only light rail system known as LYNX.

===Major highways===
====Primary Interstates====
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Auxiliary (three-digit) Interstates====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Education==
===Primary and secondary education===
Elementary and secondary public schools are overseen by the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. The North Carolina Superintendent of Public Instruction is the secretary of the North Carolina State Board of Education, but the board, rather than the superintendent, holds most of the legal authority for making public education policy. In 2009, the board&#x27;s chairman also became the &quot;chief executive officer&quot; for the state&#x27;s school system. North Carolina has 115 public school systems, each of which is overseen by a local school board. A county may have one or more systems within it. The largest school systems in North Carolina are the Wake County Public School System, Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, Guilford County Schools, Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools, and Cumberland County Schools. In total there are 2,425 public schools in the state, including over 200 charter schools. North Carolina Schools were segregated until the &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; trial and the release of the Pearsall Plan.

Previously the SAT was the dominant university entrance examination students took. In 2004 76% of NC high school students took the SAT. In 2012 state law changed which required 11th grade students to take the ACT. The SAT testing rate fell to 46% in 2019. Because students now can take that test for free, the ACT became the dominant university entrance examination. This also caused SAT average scores to rise, as in 1996 North Carolina was 48th nationally in SAT scores, but the profile of students taking the SAT has gotten smaller.

===Colleges and universities===

In 1795, North Carolina opened the first public university in the United States—the University of North Carolina (now named the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill). More than 200 years later, the University of North Carolina System encompasses 16 public universities, which are Appalachian State University, East Carolina University, Elizabeth City State University, Fayetteville State University, North Carolina A&amp;T State University, North Carolina Central University, North Carolina State University, the University of North Carolina at Asheville, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, the University of North Carolina at Pembroke, the University of North Carolina School of the Arts, the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, Western Carolina University, and Winston-Salem State University, and one public, boarding high school, the North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics. Along with its public universities, North Carolina has 58 public community colleges in its community college system. The largest university in North Carolina is currently North Carolina State University, with more than 34,000 students.


North Carolina is also home to many well-known private colleges and universities, including Barton College, Belmont Abbey College (the only Catholic college in the Carolinas), Campbell University, Davidson College, Duke University, Elon University, Guilford College, High Point University, Laurel University, Lees-McRae College, Lenoir-Rhyne University (the only Lutheran university in North Carolina), Livingstone College, Meredith College, Methodist University, Montreat College, North Carolina Wesleyan University, Pfeiffer University, Salem College, Shaw University (the first historically black college or university in the South), University of Mount Olive, Wake Forest University, William Peace University, and Wingate University.

North Carolina is also home to the oldest and largest folk school in the United States, the John C. Campbell Folk School.

==Health==
The residents of North Carolina have a lower life expectancy than the U.S. national average of life expectancy. According to the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, in 2014, males in North Carolina lived an average of 75.4 years compared to the national average of 76.7 years. Females in North Carolina lived an average of 80.2 years compared to the national average of 81.5 years. Male life expectancy in North Carolina between 1980 and 2014 increased by an average of 6.9 years, slightly higher than the male national average of a 6.7-year increase. Life expectancy for females in North Carolina between 1980 and 2014 increased by 3.2 years, lower than the female national average of a 3.9-year increase.

Using 2017–2019 data, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation calculated that life expectancy for North Carolina counties ranged from 71.4 years for Swain County to 82.3 years for Orange County. Life expectancy for the state was 78.1 years. The Foundation estimated that life expectancy for the United States as a whole in 2021 was 79.2 years.

==Media==

Early newspapers were established in the eastern part of North Carolina in the mid-18th century. The Fayetteville Observer, established in 1816, is the oldest newspaper still in publication in North Carolina. The Wilmington Star-News, established 1867, is the oldest continuously running newspaper. As of January 1, 2020, there were approximately 240 North Carolina newspapers in publication in the state of North Carolina.

The News and Observer was founded in 1871 and is the largest in circulation in the state. In 2006, The Charlotte Observer was acquired by the company, it is the second largest circulating news paper in the state.

==Government and politics==

The government of North Carolina is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial. These consist of the Council of State (led by the Governor), the bicameral legislature (called the General Assembly), and the state court system (headed by the North Carolina Supreme Court). The state constitution delineates the structure and function of the state government. Most municipalities in North Carolina operate under council–manager governments.

North Carolina&#x27;s party loyalties have undergone a series of important shifts in the last few years: While the 2010 midterms saw Tarheel voters elect a bicameral Republican majority legislature for the first time in more than a century, North Carolina has also become a Southern swing state in presidential races. Since Southern Democrat Jimmy Carter&#x27;s comfortable victory in the state in 1976, the state had consistently leaned Republican in presidential elections until Democrat Barack Obama narrowly won the state in 2008. In the 1990s, Democrat Bill Clinton came within a point of winning the state in 1992 and also only narrowly lost the state in 1996. In 2000, Republican George W. Bush easily won the state by more than 13 points.

By 2008, demographic shifts, population growth, and increased liberalization in densely populated areas such as the Research Triangle, Charlotte, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, Fayetteville, and Asheville, propelled Barack Obama to victory in North Carolina, the first Democrat to win the state since 1976. In 2012, North Carolina was again considered a competitive swing state, with the Democrats even holding their 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte. However, Republican Mitt Romney ultimately eked out a two-point win in North Carolina, the only 2012 swing state Obama lost, and one of only two states (along with Indiana) to flip from Obama in 2008 to the GOP in 2012. Furthermore, Republican Donald Trump carried the state in 2016, 2020, and 2024.

In 2012, the state elected a Republican governor (Pat McCrory) and lieutenant governor (Dan Forest) for the first time in more than two decades, while also giving the Republicans veto-proof majorities in both the State House of Representatives and the State Senate. Several U.S. House of Representatives seats flipped control in 2012, with the Republicans holding nine seats to the Democrats&#x27; four. In the 2014 midterm elections, Republican David Rouzer won the state&#x27;s 7th congressional district seat, increasing the congressional delegation party split to 10–3 in favor of the GOP, a split they retained in subsequent elections until 2020, when it narrowed to 8–5 in favor of the GOP. In 2016, despite Donald Trump winning the state, North Carolina voters elected Democrat Roy Cooper as governor, in part due to an unpopular law passed by former governor Pat McCrory known as HB2. Cooper went on to win re-election in 2020, despite Donald Trump narrowly winning the state again against Joe Biden.

As a result of the 2020 census, North Carolina gained another seat in the 118th United States Congress, for a total of 14. After the 2024 elections, the state was represented by 10 Republicans and 4 Democrats.

In a 2020 study, North Carolina was ranked as the 23rd easiest state for citizens to vote in.

===Gerrymandering===

The state has been sued for racially gerrymandering the districts, which resulted in minority voting power being diluted in some areas, resulting in skewed representation. In 2000, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina ruled that the 12th congressional district was an illegal racial gerrymander. This was again appealed, now as &quot;Easley v. Cromartie&quot;. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Eastern District of North Carolina in 2001 and ruled that the 12th district boundaries were not racially based but was a partisan gerrymander. They said this was a political question that the courts should not rule upon.

In 2015, federal courts again ordered redistricting. Two lawsuits challenging the state congressional district map were led by &quot;two dozen voters, the state Democratic Party, the state chapter of the League of Women Voters, and the interest group Common Cause&quot;. They contend that the redistricting resulted in deliberate under-representation of a substantial portion of voters. This case reached the U.S. Supreme Court in March 2019, which also heard a related partisan gerrymandering case from Maryland.

On February 4, 2022, the North Carolina Supreme Court struck down the congressional and state legislative district maps drawn by the GOP-controlled General Assembly on terms of partisan gerrymandering in a 4–3 ruling. Later that month, a panel of three former judges chosen by the Wake County Superior Court drew and approved a remedial congressional map after the new map proposed by the General Assembly was struck down by the North Carolina Supreme Court. Though, the state legislative maps proposed by the General Assembly were allowed to be used. The General Assembly would then redraw all three maps for the 2024 elections in the state.

On April 28, 2023, the North Carolina Supreme Court—after Republicans gained a majority in the court following the 2022 judicial elections—overturned the same ruling in a 5–2 decision, which cleared the way for gerrymandering in the next redistricting cycle. New maps were approved by the General Assembly on October 25, 2023. All three new maps heavily favor the GOP, with allegations of racial bias made against the maps as well.

In November 2023, a lawsuit was filed against the North Carolina Senate district map—specifically the 1st and 2nd Senate districts—in the Eastern District of North Carolina, arguing the map violates Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In December 2023, two lawsuits were filed in the Middle District of North Carolina, with the first challenging the 1st, 6th, 12th, and 14th congressional districts in the map, and the second, challenging multiple specific districts in all three maps, as racial gerrymanders. Both lawsuits were consolidated together in March 2024.

On January 26, 2024—regarding the lawsuit currently in the Eastern District of North Carolina—a preliminary injunction to block the current North Carolina Senate district map was denied, citing the &quot;Purcell&quot; principle. The ruling was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which upheld the lower court&#x27;s decision on March 28, 2024. The lawsuit will continue in the district court, but no ruling will be made until after the 2024 elections.

==Sports==


North Carolina is home to four major league sports franchises: the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League, the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association, and Charlotte FC of Major League Soccer are based in Charlotte, while the Raleigh-based Carolina Hurricanes play in the National Hockey League. The Panthers and Hurricanes are the only two major professional sports teams that have the same geographical designation while playing in different metropolitan areas. The Hurricanes are the only major professional team from North Carolina to have won a league championship, having captured the Stanley Cup in 2006. North Carolina is also home to two other top-level professional teams — the Charlotte Hounds of Major League Lacrosse and the North Carolina Courage of the National Women&#x27;s Soccer League.

While North Carolina has no Major League Baseball team, it does have numerous Minor League Baseball teams, with the highest level of play coming from the Triple-A Charlotte Knights and Durham Bulls. Additionally, North Carolina has minor league teams in other team sports including soccer and ice hockey, most notably North Carolina FC and the Charlotte Checkers, both of which play in the second tier of their respective sports.

In addition to professional team sports, North Carolina has a strong affiliation with NASCAR and stock-car racing, with Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord hosting two Cup Series races every year. Charlotte also hosts the NASCAR Hall of Fame, while Concord is the home of several top-flight racing teams, including Hendrick Motorsports, Roush Fenway Racing, GMS Racing, Stewart-Haas Racing, and Chip Ganassi Racing. Numerous other tracks around North Carolina host races from low-tier NASCAR circuits as well.

Golf is a popular summertime leisure activity, and North Carolina has hosted several important professional golf tournaments. Pinehurst Resort in Pinehurst has hosted a PGA Championship, Ryder Cup, two U.S. Opens, and one U.S. Women&#x27;s Open. The Wells Fargo Championship is a regular stop on the PGA Tour and is held at Quail Hollow Club in Charlotte, and Quail Hollow has also played host to the PGA Championship. The Wyndham Championship is played annually in Greensboro at Sedgefield Country Club.

College sports are also popular in North Carolina, with 18 schools competing at the Division I level. The Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) is headquartered in Greensboro, and both the ACC Football Championship Game (Charlotte) and the ACC men&#x27;s basketball tournament (Greensboro) were most recently held in North Carolina. Additionally, the city of Charlotte is home to the National Junior College Athletics Association&#x27;s (NJCAA) headquarters. College basketball is very popular in North Carolina, buoyed by the Tobacco Road rivalries between ACC members North Carolina, Duke, North Carolina State, and Wake Forest. The ACC Championship Game and the Duke&#x27;s Mayo Bowl are held annually in Charlotte&#x27;s Bank of America Stadium, featuring teams from the ACC and the Southeastern Conference. Additionally, the state has hosted the NCAA Men&#x27;s Basketball Final Four on two occasions, in Greensboro in 1974 and in Charlotte in 1994.

==See also==

* Index of North Carolina–related articles
* Outline of North Carolina
* List of people from North Carolina
==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==
* (Alternative publication)
* - link to Davis biography
* Lefler, Hugh (numerous editions since 1934). &quot;North Carolina History Told by Contemporaries &quot;. University of North Carolina Press.
* Jones, H. G. (1984). &quot;North Carolina Illustrated, 1524–1984&quot;. University of North Carolina Press.
* &quot;North Carolina Manual&quot;. Published biennially by the Department of the Secretary of State since 1941.
* The Religion in North Carolina Digital Collection . A grant-funded project to provide digital access to publications of and about religious bodies in North Carolina. Partner institutions at Duke University, UNC-Chapel Hill, and Wake Forest University contributed the largest portion of the items in this collection, but the collection is enriched by unique materials from libraries and archives throughout North Carolina. The materials in this collection include local church histories, periodicals, clergy biographies, cookbooks, event programs, directories, and much more.

==Further reading==
* James, Clay; Orr, Douglas, eds. (1971). &quot;North Carolina Atlas: Portrait of a Changing Southern State&quot;.
* Christensen, Rob (2008). &quot;The Paradox of Tarheel Politics&quot;. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
* Cooper, Christopher A.; Knotts, H. Gibbs, eds. (2008). &quot;The New Politics of North Carolina&quot;. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
* Crow; Jeffrey J.; Tise, Larry E. (1979). &quot;Writing North Carolina History&quot;. Online. 
* Eamon, Tom (2014). &quot;The Making of a Southern Democracy: North Carolina Politics from Kerr Scott to Pat McCrory&quot;. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press.
* Fleer, Jack D. (1994). &quot;North Carolina Government &amp; Politics&quot;. Online political science textbook. 
* Hawks, Francis L. (1857). &quot;History of North Carolina, Volumes I and II&quot;.
* Kersey, Marianne M.; Coble, Ran, eds. (1989). &quot;North Carolina Focus: An Anthology on State Government, Politics, and Policy&quot;. 2d ed. Raleigh: North Carolina Center for Public Policy Research.
* Lefler, Hugh Talmage (1963). &quot;A Guide to the Study and Reading of North Carolina History&quot;. Online. 
* Lefler, Hugh Talmage; Newsome, Albert Ray (1954, 1963, 1973). &quot;North Carolina: The History of a Southern State&quot;. Standard textbook.
* Link, William A. (2009). &quot;North Carolina: Change and Tradition in a Southern State&quot;. History by leading scholar.
* Luebke, Paul (1990). &quot;Tar Heel Politics: Myths and Realities&quot;.
* Orr, Doug, and Alfred W. Stuart. (2000) &quot;The North Carolina Atlas: Portrait for a New Century&quot; (U of North Carolina Press, 2000) online
* Powell, William S. (1979–88). &quot;Dictionary of North Carolina Biography&quot;. Vol. 1, A-C; vol. 2, D-G; vol. 3, H-K.
* Powell, William S. (1958). &quot;North Carolina Fiction, 1734–1957: An Annotated Bibliography&quot;.
* Powell, William S. (1989). &quot;North Carolina through Four Centuries&quot;. Standard textbook.
* Powell, William S.; Mazzocchi, Jay, eds. (2006). &quot;Encyclopedia of North Carolina&quot;.
* Ready, Milton. (2005). &quot;The Tarheel State: A History of North Carolina&quot;.
* Thuesen, Sarah Caroline. (2013). &quot;Greater Than Equal: African American Struggles for Schools and Citizenship in North Carolina, 1919–1965&quot;. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press.
* WPA Federal Writers&#x27; Project (1939). &quot;North Carolina: A Guide to the Old North State&quot;. Famous WPA guide to every town.

==External links==
===General===
* North Carolina state library
* North Carolina Court System official site 
* North Carolina State Guide, from the Library of Congress 

===Government and education===
* Energy &amp; Environmental Data for North Carolina
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of North Carolina
* North Carolina facts from U.S. Department of Agriculture ERS 
* NC ECHO—North Carolina Exploring Cultural Heritage Online 
* North Carolina Collection, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* NC Office of Archives and History

===Other===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="0" end="14" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="24" end="29" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="37" end="49" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="64" end="77" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="97" end="105" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="124" end="138" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="152" end="166" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="181" end="188" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="211" end="220" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="251" end="263" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="28th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="268" end="285" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="9th-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682357" start="293" end="306" title="List of states and territories of the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="351" end="360" title="Carolinas" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="375" end="385" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="394" end="405" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="449" end="456" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="477" end="484" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="489" end="498" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674577" start="506" end="524" title="List of municipalities in North Carolina" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705539" start="530" end="557" title="Charlotte metropolitan area" label="Charlotte metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054694" start="617" end="648" title="North Carolina statistical areas" label="most populous metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="672" end="690" title="Metropolitan statistical area" label="22nd-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="783" end="800" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="922" end="940" title="Combined statistical area" label="31st-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187093" start="1026" end="1048" title="Research Triangle Park" label="Research Triangle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655684" start="1149" end="1162" title="Hardaway Site" label="Hardaway Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044773" start="1196" end="1215" title="Carolina Algonquian language" label="Carolina Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="1217" end="1226" title="Iroquoian languages" label="Iroquoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="1232" end="1238" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1310" end="1325" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="1651" end="1663" title="Crown colony" label="royal colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="1691" end="1708" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642242" start="1714" end="1730" title="Halifax Resolves" label="Halifax Resolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1888" end="1907" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1983" end="2009" title="Constitution of the United States" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2032" end="2050" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115346" start="2092" end="2101" title="Secession in the United States" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="2111" end="2116" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2182" end="2211" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="2313" end="2338" title="Wright brothers" label="Orville and Wilbur Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="2426" end="2451" title="Aircraft" label="heavier-than-air aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="2455" end="2465" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="Kitty Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517373" start="2491" end="2502" title="Outer Banks" label="Outer Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="2578" end="2592" title="Vehicle registration plate" label="license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492369" start="2731" end="2754" title="Mecklenburg Declaration" label="Mecklenburg Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="2919" end="2940" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="2948" end="2956" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="2961" end="2983" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="Atlantic coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q615337" start="3007" end="3021" title="Mount Mitchell" label="Mount Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3075" end="3092" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3125" end="3150" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="3215" end="3243" title="Oceanic climate" label="subtropical highland climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="3389" end="3400" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="3401" end="3411" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655684" start="3426" end="3439" title="Hardaway Site" label="Hardaway Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349587" start="3536" end="3545" title="Earthworks (archaeology)" label="earthwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202294" start="3546" end="3561" title="platform mounds" label="platform mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="3644" end="3683" title="South Appalachian Mississippian culture" label="South Appalachian Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="3715" end="3723" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="4159" end="4167" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="4229" end="4240" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q333661" start="4419" end="4426" title="Cahokia" label="Cahokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="4706" end="4713" title="Catawba people" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q122865631" start="4774" end="4800" title="Mississippian shatter zone" label="Mississippian shatter zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q110548687" start="5011" end="5026" title="Robbie Ethridge" label="Robbie Ethridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536013" start="5448" end="5467" title="Carolina Algonquian" label="Carolina Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076799" start="5518" end="5526" title="Chowanoc" label="Chowanoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666992" start="5528" end="5535" title="Roanoke (tribe)" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536013" start="5537" end="5544" title="Pamlico" label="Pamlico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882642" start="5546" end="5556" title="Machapunga" label="Machapunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q426724" start="5562" end="5567" title="Coree" label="Coree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="5620" end="5629" title="Iroquoian" label="Iroquoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q844328" start="5639" end="5647" title="Meherrin" label="Meherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="5649" end="5657" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="5663" end="5672" title="Tuscarora (tribe)" label="Tuscarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="5707" end="5713" title="Siouan" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846124" start="5743" end="5749" title="Cheraw (tribe)" label="Cheraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552970" start="5751" end="5757" title="Waxhaws" label="Waxhaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224073" start="5759" end="5765" title="Saponi" label="Saponi"/>
<link wikidata="Q247007" start="5767" end="5775" title="Waccamaw Siouan" label="Waccamaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q55209" start="5777" end="5794" title="Cape Fear Indians" label="Cape Fear Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="5800" end="5807" title="Catawba (tribe)" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="5914" end="5935" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808596" start="5946" end="5951" title="Joara" label="Joara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="5964" end="5972" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021031" start="6002" end="6011" title="Morganton, North Carolina" label="Morganton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="6024" end="6040" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639778" start="6101" end="6111" title="Juan Pardo (explorer)" label="Juan Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707925" start="6328" end="6341" title="Fort San Juan (Joara)" label="Fort San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316770" start="6503" end="6514" title="Mission Santa Elena" label="Santa Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337823" start="6518" end="6547" title="Parris Island, South Carolina" label="Parris Island, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="6566" end="6581" title="Spanish Florida" label="Spanish Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="6950" end="6964" title="archaeological" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="7069" end="7080" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="7102" end="7120" title="Sir Walter Raleigh" label="Sir Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="7229" end="7237" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182736" start="7475" end="7485" title="John White (colonist and artist)" label="John White"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="7549" end="7563" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="7587" end="7598" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Lost Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="7608" end="7622" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752035" start="7716" end="7722" title="Manteo (Native American leader)" label="Manteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432857" start="7727" end="7735" title="Wanchese (Native American leader)" label="Wanchese"/>
<link wikidata="Q271511" start="8188" end="8201" title="Virginia Dare" label="Virginia Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q295787" start="8320" end="8331" title="Dare County, North Carolina" label="Dare County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="8387" end="8402" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441345" start="8422" end="8437" title="Albemarle Sound" label="Albemarle Sound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8460" end="8481" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="8492" end="8499" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="8674" end="8682" title="Charles I of England" label="CharlesI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869894" start="8792" end="8809" title="Lord proprietor" label="Lords Proprietors"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="9029" end="9037" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="9133" end="9147" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766794" start="9196" end="9225" title="History of slavery in North Carolina" label="Most of the English colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="9241" end="9259" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="9409" end="9414" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="9541" end="9553" title="free people of color" label="free colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="9950" end="9963" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q109170669" start="10572" end="10581" title="1738–1739 North Carolina smallpox epidemic" label="1738–1739"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="10654" end="10662" title="immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="10697" end="10704" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="10841" end="10849" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="11071" end="11079" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969498" start="11137" end="11152" title="Nathaniel Batts" label="Nathaniel Batts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841782" start="11241" end="11253" title="Chowan River" label="Chowan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544257" start="11270" end="11288" title="Great Dismal Swamp" label="Great Dismal Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="11337" end="11357" title="Province of Carolina" label="Province of Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709503" start="11372" end="11393" title="Albemarle Settlements" label="Albemarle Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869894" start="11530" end="11547" title="Lords Proprietors" label="Lords Proprietors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="11768" end="11788" title="Province of Carolina" label="Province of Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q359347" start="12169" end="12180" title="John Lawson (explorer)" label="John Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002490" start="12664" end="12672" title="New Bern, North Carolina" label="New Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="12779" end="12796" title="Tuscarora Indians" label="Tuscarora Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454492" start="12853" end="12874" title="Cary&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Cary&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q335274" start="12990" end="13004" title="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q247567" start="13036" end="13061" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213518" start="13092" end="13102" title="Blackbeard" label="Blackbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q497817" start="13166" end="13181" title="Carteret County, North Carolina" label="Carteret County"/>
<link wikidata="Q247567" start="13545" end="13570" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="13606" end="13642" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="13678" end="13695" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="13722" end="13736" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="13765" end="13791" title="Province of North Carolina" label="Province of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="14015" end="14038" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="14081" end="14088" title="Piracy" label="Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="14256" end="14267" title="Scotch-Irish American" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="14269" end="14275" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="14277" end="14284" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="14289" end="14295" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="14375" end="14394" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="14421" end="14430" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028258" start="14590" end="14597" title="Edenton, North Carolina" label="Edenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002490" start="14657" end="14665" title="New Bern, North Carolina" label="New Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331450" start="14712" end="14724" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace, New Bern" label="Tryon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580817" start="14795" end="14808" title="William Tryon" label="William Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="14860" end="14867" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="15069" end="15083" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q59222" start="15096" end="15103" title="Roanoke Colony" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636839" start="15136" end="15150" title="Roanoke Island" label="Roanoke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="15278" end="15286" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="15291" end="15303" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q108824413" start="15448" end="15459" title="James Davis (printer)" label="James Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="15745" end="15762" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="15905" end="15931" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q342428" start="15936" end="15953" title="Suffolk, Virginia" label="Suffolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118724" start="16096" end="16118" title="North-Carolina Gazette" label="North-Carolina Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="16294" end="16316" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="Atlantic coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="16536" end="16554" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="16560" end="16568" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="16648" end="16659" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851020" start="16714" end="16719" title="cohee" label="cohee"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="17093" end="17119" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q507770" start="17477" end="17495" title="Mecklenburg County, North Carolina" label="Mecklenburg County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="17685" end="17705" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642242" start="17767" end="17783" title="Halifax Resolves" label="Halifax Resolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054573" start="17798" end="17832" title="North Carolina Provincial Congress" label="North Carolina Provincial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19379" start="17880" end="17890" title="Flag of North Carolina" label="state flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q679503" start="17895" end="17905" title="Seal of North Carolina" label="state seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="17948" end="17965" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="18150" end="18158" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="18168" end="18184" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="18199" end="18216" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q366113" start="18303" end="18319" title="Nathanael Greene" label="Nathanael Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971844" start="18449" end="18468" title="Washington District, North Carolina" label="Washington District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="18485" end="18494" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="18654" end="18673" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035455" start="18718" end="18742" title="Battle of Kings Mountain" label="A major American victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742139" start="18768" end="18788" title="King&amp;#x27;s Mountain" label="King&amp;#x27;s Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="18949" end="18958" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571371" start="18964" end="18982" title="southwest Virginia" label="southwest Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146485" start="19045" end="19061" title="Patrick Ferguson" label="Patrick Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="19438" end="19446" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="19484" end="19497" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="19533" end="19545" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="19576" end="19586" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144372" start="19591" end="19613" title="Camden, South Carolina" label="Camden, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="19644" end="19660" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="19720" end="19733" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q332464" start="19784" end="19801" title="Banastre Tarleton" label="Banastre Tarleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326527" start="19809" end="19826" title="Battle of Cowpens" label="Battle of Cowpens"/>
<link wikidata="Q366113" start="19867" end="19883" title="Nathanael Greene" label="Nathanael Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="19901" end="19919" title="Charles Cornwallis" label="Charles Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870799" start="20143" end="20170" title="Battle of Cowan&amp;#x27;s Ford" label="Battle of Cowan&amp;#x27;s Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050460" start="20221" end="20234" title="Catawba River" label="Catawba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q425773" start="20523" end="20552" title="Battle of Guilford Courthouse" label="Battle of Guilford Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="20568" end="20578" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="20611" end="20618" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q170765" start="20779" end="20794" title="Pyrrhic victory" label="Pyrrhic victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="20893" end="20903" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="21000" end="21018" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="21178" end="21195" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="21390" end="21400" title="plantations in the American South" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="21412" end="21417" title="slavery" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="21615" end="21628" title="yeoman farmer" label="yeoman farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="22006" end="22026" title="free people of color" label="free people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="22304" end="22312" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="22531" end="22538" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="22543" end="22552" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="22694" end="22705" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="22830" end="22850" title="free people of color" label="free people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="23153" end="23161" title="European Americans" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="23182" end="23194" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="23293" end="23305" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="23310" end="23330" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="23346" end="23350" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q329730" start="23412" end="23422" title="Nat Turner" label="Nat Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="23757" end="23769" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q831168" start="23785" end="23793" title="Bethania, North Carolina" label="Bethania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="23808" end="23821" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022796" start="23871" end="23902" title="Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad" label="Wilmington and Raleigh Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="23931" end="23941" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="23968" end="23975" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694520" start="23990" end="24003" title="North Carolina State Capitol" label="state capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="24171" end="24181" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q631194" start="24183" end="24193" title="High Point, North Carolina" label="High Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="24199" end="24208" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="24421" end="24439" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="24632" end="24643" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="24660" end="24675" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="24717" end="24731" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592418" start="25228" end="25248" title="List of North Carolina Union Civil War units" label="Union Army regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q169535" start="25424" end="25443" title="Zebulon Baird Vance" label="Zebulon Baird Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="25507" end="25522" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="25526" end="25534" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="25624" end="25632" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896339" start="25768" end="25781" title="Bennett Place" label="Bennett Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q439669" start="25788" end="25806" title="Joseph E. Johnston" label="Joseph E. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="26076" end="26101" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620244" start="26195" end="26206" title="Battle of Bentonville" label="Bentonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q439669" start="26258" end="26273" title="Joseph E. Johnston" label="Joseph Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q188936" start="26296" end="26320" title="William Tecumseh Sherman" label="William Tecumseh Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002416" start="26413" end="26434" title="Battle of Morrisville" label="Battle of Morrisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896339" start="26471" end="26484" title="Bennett Place" label="Bennett Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="26503" end="26509" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="26546" end="26556" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443093" start="26659" end="26687" title="Second Battle of Fort Fisher" label="Second Battle of Fort Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q55769084" start="26791" end="26802" title="Henry Lawson Wyatt" label="Henry Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q794695" start="26831" end="26851" title="Battle of Big Bethel" label="Battle of Big Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="26873" end="26893" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152440" start="26957" end="26988" title="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge" label="Pickett/Pettigrew&amp;#x27;s Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327790" start="27072" end="27093" title="Battle of Chickamauga" label="Battle of Chickamauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744652" start="27252" end="27274" title="Appomattox Court House National Historical Park" label="Appomattox Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="27392" end="27417" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="27843" end="27848" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592418" start="27890" end="27914" title="List of North Carolina Union Civil War units" label="15,000 North Carolinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="27976" end="27986" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="28287" end="28300" title="U.S. military" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164218" start="28325" end="28350" title="Constitution of North Carolina" label="constitutional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="28381" end="28403" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="28438" end="28456" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q175613" start="28563" end="28583" title="Thirteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution" label="Thirteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833539" start="28664" end="28683" title="radical Republicans" label="radical Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="28912" end="28931" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="28977" end="28990" title="Jim Crow laws" label="in most cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="29070" end="29078" title="lynching in the United States" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="29277" end="29309" title="North Carolina State Legislature" label="North Carolina State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q885226" start="29382" end="29399" title="William W. Holden" label="William W. Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881701" start="29503" end="29515" title="Shoffner Act" label="Shoffner Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="29520" end="29536" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q113886" start="29575" end="29587" title="carpetbagger" label="carpetbagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228835" start="29599" end="29607" title="scalawag" label="scalawag"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="29749" end="29761" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305032" start="29891" end="29901" title="Red Shirts (Southern United States)" label="Red Shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="29974" end="29990" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="30710" end="30719" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populists"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="31019" end="31027" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="31032" end="31050" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054382" start="31105" end="31131" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="31173" end="31184" title="United States Congress" label="congressmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="31329" end="31339" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022766" start="31396" end="31427" title="Wilmington Insurrection of 1898" label="Wilmington Insurrection of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645529" start="31669" end="31686" title="Alfred M. Waddell" label="Alfred M. Waddell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31740" end="31761" title="List of coups and coup attempts by country#United States" label="United States history"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="31844" end="31852" title="poll tax" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="31859" end="31872" title="literacy test" label="literacy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="31903" end="31918" title="Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="32087" end="32102" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="32265" end="32289" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="32294" end="32319" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="32613" end="32629" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067058" start="32888" end="32902" title="Piedmont Triad" label="Piedmont Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816534" start="32945" end="32954" title="Atlantic Seaboard fall line" label="fall line"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="33047" end="33125" title="Wright Flyer" label="the first successful controlled, powered and sustained heavier-than-air flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="33134" end="33149" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="33156" end="33166" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="Kitty Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="33311" end="33326" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="33435" end="33451" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="33461" end="33469" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="33482" end="33503" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33567" end="33579" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187093" start="33720" end="33742" title="Research Triangle Park" label="Research Triangle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976594" start="33787" end="33800" title="Science park" label="research park"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="33873" end="33890" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604469" start="33982" end="34000" title="Greensboro sit-ins" label="Greensboro sit-ins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="34461" end="34478" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191505" start="34499" end="34516" title="Piedmont Crescent" label="Piedmont Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="34820" end="34840" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="34842" end="34857" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="34863" end="34906" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="34924" end="34941" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q163480" start="35077" end="35094" title="Charlotte Hornets" label="Charlotte Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="35102" end="35133" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="35178" end="35204" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="35312" end="35329" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="35337" end="35361" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="35446" end="35465" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="35473" end="35495" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="35511" end="35518" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569708" start="35568" end="35585" title="NC State Wolfpack" label="NC State Wolfpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="35719" end="35734" title="Pharmaceutical industry" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="35745" end="35760" title="food processing" label="food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="35762" end="35775" title="automotive industry" label="vehicle parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q907711" start="35923" end="35930" title="Cultivation of tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="35932" end="35940" title="Textile manufacturing" label="textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="36199" end="36213" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="36228" end="36235" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="36254" end="36263" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="36277" end="36285" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="36340" end="36367" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261430" start="36397" end="36411" title="South Atlantic States" label="South Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="36428" end="36436" title="Southern United States" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="36572" end="36594" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="Atlantic coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="36652" end="36660" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="36727" end="36748" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517373" start="36825" end="36836" title="Outer Banks" label="Outer Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="36864" end="36878" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441345" start="36939" end="36954" title="Albemarle Sound" label="Albemarle Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033236" start="36959" end="36972" title="Pamlico Sound" label="Pamlico Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q155825" start="36997" end="37010" title="venus flytrap" label="venus flytrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q148542" start="37047" end="37060" title="longleaf pine" label="longleaf pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q978032" start="37113" end="37126" title="Cape Hatteras" label="Cape Hatteras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505619" start="37163" end="37188" title="Graveyard of the Atlantic" label="Graveyard of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q247567" start="37316" end="37341" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213518" start="37372" end="37382" title="Blackbeard" label="Blackbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816534" start="37495" end="37522" title="Atlantic Seaboard fall line" label="Atlantic Seaboard fall line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427530" start="37941" end="37960" title="Sauratown Mountains" label="Sauratown Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194441" start="37962" end="37976" title="Pilot Mountain (North Carolina)" label="Pilot Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504957" start="37982" end="38000" title="Uwharrie Mountains" label="Uwharrie Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189181" start="38002" end="38025" title="Crowder&amp;#x27;s Mountain" label="Crowder&amp;#x27;s Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738886" start="38027" end="38047" title="King&amp;#x27;s Pinnacle" label="King&amp;#x27;s Pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q994324" start="38053" end="38069" title="Brushy Mountains (North Carolina)" label="Brushy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568005" start="38079" end="38094" title="South Mountains (North Carolina)" label="South Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988113" start="38179" end="38194" title="Western North Carolina" label="western section"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="38223" end="38243" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="38258" end="38278" title="Appalachian Mountain" label="Appalachian Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360486" start="38363" end="38384" title="Great Smoky Mountains" label="Great Smoky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921364" start="38393" end="38408" title="Black Mountains (North Carolina)" label="Black Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q615337" start="38493" end="38507" title="Mount Mitchell (North Carolina)" label="Mount Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="38543" end="38560" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="38632" end="38652" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="38665" end="38679" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034421" start="38868" end="38877" title="Cape Fear River" label="Cape Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606944" start="38883" end="38888" title="Neuse River" label="Neuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995149" start="38894" end="38903" title="White Oak River" label="White Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q841725" start="38913" end="38916" title="Tar River" label="Tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033236" start="38917" end="38924" title="Pamlico Sound" label="Pamlico"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="39191" end="39202" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="39785" end="39795" title="tropical storm" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39797" end="39812" title="tropical cyclone#tropical storm" label="tropical storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107846" start="39900" end="39914" title="Hurricane Fran" label="Hurricane Fran"/>
<link wikidata="Q56552345" start="39916" end="39934" title="Hurricane Florence" label="Hurricane Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110774" start="39936" end="39951" title="Hurricane Floyd" label="Hurricane Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638615" start="39953" end="39967" title="Hurricane Hugo" label="Hurricane Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744086" start="39973" end="39988" title="Hurricane Hazel" label="Hurricane Hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205801" start="40068" end="40077" title="Saffir–Simpson scale" label="Category4"/>
<link wikidata="Q166468" start="40087" end="40103" title="Hurricane Isabel" label="Hurricane Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906781" start="40560" end="40576" title="cold-air damming" label="cold-air damming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781855" start="40724" end="40750" title="Tornado outbreak of April 14–16, 2011" label="the worst tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q66764432" start="40927" end="40943" title="Hurricane Dorian" label="Hurricane Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="41084" end="41090" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156320" start="41131" end="41142" title="Autumn leaf color" label="fall colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q685629" start="41187" end="41199" title="birdwatching" label="birdwatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956672" start="41201" end="41212" title="agritourism" label="agritourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210988" start="41214" end="41217" title="All-terrain vehicle" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q805325" start="41226" end="41236" title="Hot air ballooning" label="ballooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="41238" end="41251" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="41253" end="41259" title="biking" label="biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="41269" end="41275" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141830" start="41277" end="41284" title="boating" label="boating"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="41298" end="41305" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856109" start="41307" end="41315" title="canoeing" label="canoeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="41317" end="41323" title="caving" label="caving"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="41351" end="41360" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="41382" end="41392" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281788" start="41395" end="41404" title="public aquarium" label="aquariums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081138" start="41415" end="41428" title="historic site" label="historic site"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="41431" end="41441" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11302994" start="41462" end="41474" title="concert hall" label="concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316447" start="41481" end="41492" title="fine dining" label="fine dining"/>
<link wikidata="Q257940" start="41574" end="41585" title="List of North Carolina state parks" label="state parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="41594" end="41608" title="National Park Service" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="41610" end="41631" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="41650" end="41683" title="Appalachian National Scenic Trail" label="Appalachian National Scenic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="41689" end="41707" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034439" start="41709" end="41740" title="Cape Hatteras National Seashore" label="Cape Hatteras National Seashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034449" start="41742" end="41772" title="Cape Lookout National Seashore" label="Cape Lookout National Seashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040758" start="41774" end="41815" title="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site" label="Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459852" start="41819" end="41828" title="Flat Rock, Henderson County, North Carolina" label="Flat Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438664" start="41830" end="41865" title="Fort Raleigh National Historic Site" label="Fort Raleigh National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q683205" start="41869" end="41875" title="Manteo, North Carolina" label="Manteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q464004" start="41877" end="41912" title="Great Smoky Mountains National Park" label="Great Smoky Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599977" start="41914" end="41944" title="Great Smoky Mountains Railroad" label="Great Smoky Mountains Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615921" start="41946" end="41988" title="Guilford Courthouse National Military Park" label="Guilford Courthouse National Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="41992" end="42002" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708039" start="42004" end="42037" title="Moores Creek National Battlefield" label="Moores Creek National Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195150" start="42043" end="42049" title="Currie, North Carolina" label="Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q507826" start="42053" end="42066" title="Pender County, North Carolina" label="Pender County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678745" start="42072" end="42116" title="Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail" label="Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q844445" start="42118" end="42127" title="Old Salem" label="Old Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="42154" end="42167" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="42173" end="42211" title="Trail of Tears National Historic Trail" label="Trail of Tears National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038747" start="42217" end="42250" title="Wright Brothers National Memorial" label="Wright Brothers National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029051" start="42254" end="42270" title="Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina" label="Kill Devil Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q844413" start="42298" end="42322" title="Uwharrie National Forest" label="Uwharrie National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q844301" start="42350" end="42373" title="Croatan National Forest" label="Croatan National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330337" start="42377" end="42399" title="Eastern North Carolina" label="Eastern North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817477" start="42401" end="42423" title="Pisgah National Forest" label="Pisgah National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079140" start="42454" end="42479" title="Nantahala National Forest" label="Nantahala National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="42649" end="42658" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="42693" end="42700" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="42794" end="42805" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q506215" start="42807" end="42818" title="Wake County, North Carolina" label="Wake County"/>
<link wikidata="Q507770" start="42907" end="42925" title="Mecklenburg County, North Carolina" label="Mecklenburg County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="43156" end="43181" title="combined statistical area" label="combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705539" start="43238" end="43253" title="Charlotte metropolitan area" label="Charlotte Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="43316" end="43333" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="43396" end="43409" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067058" start="43481" end="43495" title="Piedmont Triad" label="Piedmont Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="43595" end="43622" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="43689" end="43700" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="43955" end="43958" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="43971" end="44004" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="44036" end="44044" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="44142" end="44148" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="44150" end="44155" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="44157" end="44165" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="44167" end="44172" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="44177" end="44188" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="44227" end="44238" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="44286" end="44291" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="44306" end="44324" title="non-Hispanic white" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="44331" end="44345" title="White Hispanic" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="44348" end="44353" title="black people" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="44382" end="44387" title="Latin American" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="44392" end="44409" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021105" start="44429" end="44444" title="race in the United States" label="some other race"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="44452" end="44472" title="Multiracial American" label="Multiracial American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="44506" end="44521" title="Native Hawaiian" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="44526" end="44542" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="44907" end="44924" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="44972" end="44979" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="45282" end="45289" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="45839" end="45864" title="Southern American English" label="Southern American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802476" start="45869" end="45888" title="Appalachian English" label="Appalachian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="45993" end="46009" title="primary language" label="primary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="46122" end="46130" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="46148" end="46161" title="main language" label="main language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="46304" end="46319" title="mother language" label="mother language"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="46499" end="46524" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="46628" end="46638" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="46645" end="46653" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="46660" end="46667" title="Baptism" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="46672" end="46681" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="46849" end="46870" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q867825" start="46928" end="46963" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Charlotte" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143723" start="47020" end="47028" title="Parish (Catholic Church)" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q874866" start="47049" end="47067" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Raleigh" label="Diocese of Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="47152" end="47175" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149100" start="47245" end="47270" title="Presbyterian Church (USA)" label="Presbyterian Church (USA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="47819" end="47848" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="American Baptist Churches USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="47854" end="47881" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="47968" end="47976" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q380351" start="47984" end="47996" title="emancipation" label="emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="48241" end="48268" title="National Baptist Convention USA, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248425" start="48379" end="48418" title="Progressive National Baptist Convention" label="Progressive National Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508059" start="48423" end="48460" title="Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship" label="Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="48463" end="48473" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="48575" end="48598" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="48603" end="48637" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q502257" start="48731" end="48746" title="Guilford County, North Carolina" label="Guilford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="48810" end="48829" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="48853" end="48888" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="non/interdenominational Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="48893" end="48907" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422454" start="48913" end="48930" title="Assemblies of God USA" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q391499" start="48935" end="48958" title="Church of God in Christ" label="Church of God in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466181" start="49058" end="49078" title="Oneness Pentecostalism" label="Oneness Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164722" start="49109" end="49148" title="United Pentecostal Church International" label="United Pentecostal Church International"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="49197" end="49212" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="49282" end="49295" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="49333" end="49357" title="Presbyterians" label="Historically Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="49388" end="49397" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q506690" start="49405" end="49420" title="Scotland County, North Carolina" label="Scotland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="49520" end="49527" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="49529" end="49534" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="49536" end="49542" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="49544" end="49552" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="49558" end="49566" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="49588" end="49599" title="Northern United States" label="Northerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="49863" end="49870" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865607" start="50069" end="50083" title="Barton College" label="Barton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884322" start="50108" end="50129" title="Belmont Abbey College" label="Belmont Abbey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889676" start="50143" end="50168" title="Bennett College for Women" label="Bennett College for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962515" start="50197" end="50212" title="Brevard College" label="Brevard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q904219" start="50241" end="50260" title="Campbell University" label="Campbell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051596" start="50273" end="50288" title="Catawba College" label="Catawba College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105527" start="50317" end="50334" title="Chowan University" label="Chowan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902978" start="50347" end="50363" title="Davidson College" label="Davidson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="50381" end="50396" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568893" start="50424" end="50439" title="Elon University" label="Elon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551409" start="50481" end="50504" title="Gardner–Webb University" label="Gardner–Webb University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604445" start="50540" end="50558" title="Greensboro College" label="Greensboro College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615915" start="50573" end="50589" title="Guilford College" label="Guilford College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756235" start="50631" end="50652" title="High Point University" label="High Point University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516492" start="50681" end="50699" title="Lees-McRae College" label="Lees-McRae College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523054" start="50717" end="50740" title="Lenoir-Rhyne University" label="Lenoir-Rhyne University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659715" start="50784" end="50803" title="Livingstone College" label="Livingstone College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688580" start="50848" end="50865" title="Louisburg College" label="Louisburg College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773136" start="50894" end="50914" title="Mars Hill University" label="Mars Hill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823850" start="50929" end="50949" title="Methodist University" label="Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906389" start="50978" end="50994" title="Montreat College" label="Montreat College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922541" start="51009" end="51034" title="University of Mount Olive" label="University of Mount Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054645" start="51047" end="51081" title="North Carolina Wesleyan University" label="North Carolina Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016704" start="51110" end="51134" title="William Peace University" label="William Peace University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796553" start="51152" end="51171" title="Pfeiffer University" label="Pfeiffer University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270829" start="51186" end="51216" title="Queens University of Charlotte" label="Queens University of Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586947" start="51234" end="51266" title="St. Andrews Presbyterian College" label="St. Andrews Presbyterian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587158" start="51284" end="51314" title="St. Augustine&amp;#x27;s University" label="Saint Augustine&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404072" start="51329" end="51342" title="Salem College" label="Salem College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909345" start="51344" end="51359" title="Moravian Church in North America" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443493" start="51363" end="51378" title="Shaw University" label="Shaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="51391" end="51413" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970595" start="51439" end="51460" title="Warren Wilson College" label="Warren Wilson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025153" start="51491" end="51509" title="Wingate University" label="Wingate University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569414" start="51592" end="51633" title="Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary" label="Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022236" start="51637" end="51648" title="Wake Forest, North Carolina" label="Wake Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613931" start="51658" end="51683" title="Hood Theological Seminary" label="Hood Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028813" start="51698" end="51707" title="Salisbury, North Carolina" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="51757" end="51776" title="gross state product" label="gross state product"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462634" start="53318" end="53336" title="flue-cured tobacco" label="flue-cured tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="53341" end="53353" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="53407" end="53412" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="53452" end="53456" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="53540" end="53554" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459878" start="54783" end="54811" title="North Carolina Museum of Art" label="North Carolina Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022717" start="55020" end="55028" title="Seagrove" label="Seagrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506313" start="55290" end="55304" title="list of jazz musicians" label="jazz musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346" start="55380" end="55393" title="John Coltrane" label="John Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885566" start="55396" end="55402" title="Hamlet, North Carolina" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q631194" start="55404" end="55414" title="High Point, North Carolina" label="High Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q109612" start="55417" end="55432" title="Thelonious Monk" label="Thelonious Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021026" start="55434" end="55445" title="Rocky Mount, North Carolina" label="Rocky Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q718617" start="55448" end="55460" title="Billy Taylor" label="Billy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989904" start="55462" end="55472" title="Greenville, North Carolina" label="Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q168600" start="55475" end="55485" title="Woody Shaw" label="Woody Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904873" start="55487" end="55497" title="Laurinburg, North Carolina" label="Laurinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723821" start="55500" end="55513" title="Lou Donaldson" label="Lou Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="55515" end="55521" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q175899" start="55524" end="55533" title="Max Roach" label="Max Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026131" start="55535" end="55542" title="Newland, North Carolina" label="Newland"/>
<link wikidata="Q489424" start="55545" end="55555" title="Tal Farlow" label="Tal Farlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="55557" end="55567" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370431" start="55570" end="55576" title="Albert Heath" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q711314" start="55578" end="55583" title="Jimmy Heath" label="Jimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q981283" start="55588" end="55599" title="Percy Heath" label="Percy Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="55601" end="55611" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="55614" end="55625" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029202" start="55627" end="55632" title="Tryon, North Carolina" label="Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380626" start="55639" end="55654" title="Billy Strayhorn" label="Billy Strayhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008927" start="55656" end="55668" title="Hillsborough, North Carolina" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="55722" end="55736" title="old-time music" label="old-time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866335" start="55817" end="55838" title="Bascom Lamar Lunsford" label="Bascom Lamar Lunsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066976" start="55862" end="55885" title="North Carolina Ramblers" label="North Carolina Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="55915" end="55928" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="55970" end="55979" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q465636" start="55989" end="55999" title="Doc Watson" label="Doc Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="56097" end="56102" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109497" start="56138" end="56152" title="Piedmont blues" label="Piedmont blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q816495" start="56155" end="56169" title="Ben Folds Five" label="Ben Folds Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="56184" end="56197" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="56203" end="56212" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="56242" end="56253" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="56273" end="56283" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q714602" start="56330" end="56343" title="Floyd Council" label="Floyd Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="56350" end="56367" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="56411" end="56415" title="Folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="56423" end="56428" title="Heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="56439" end="56443" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="56445" end="56457" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044920" start="56510" end="56529" title="Carolina in My Mind" label="Carolina in My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q204018" start="56639" end="56646" title="J. Cole" label="J. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q62107457" start="56648" end="56654" title="DaBaby" label="DaBaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q277512" start="56656" end="56666" title="9th Wonder" label="9th Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498714" start="56668" end="56682" title="Shirley Caesar" label="Shirley Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q231484" start="56684" end="56697" title="Roberta Flack" label="Roberta Flack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103721" start="56699" end="56714" title="Clyde McPhatter" label="Clyde McPhatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q459215" start="56716" end="56730" title="Nnenna Freelon" label="Nnenna Freelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q252248" start="56732" end="56741" title="Link Wray" label="Link Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q599341" start="56743" end="56756" title="Warren Haynes" label="Warren Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179055" start="56758" end="56771" title="Jimmy Herring" label="Jimmy Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831249" start="56773" end="56787" title="Michael Houser" label="Michael Houser"/>
<link wikidata="Q975911" start="56789" end="56800" title="Eric Church" label="Eric Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091284" start="56802" end="56816" title="Future Islands" label="Future Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q467519" start="56818" end="56830" title="Randy Travis" label="Randy Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q437970" start="56832" end="56842" title="Ryan Adams" label="Ryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q558582" start="56844" end="56857" title="Ronnie Milsap" label="Ronnie Milsap"/>
<link wikidata="Q573323" start="56859" end="56875" title="Anthony Hamilton (musician)" label="Anthony Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123320" start="56877" end="56895" title="The Avett Brothers" label="The Avett Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q551478" start="56897" end="56912" title="Charlie Daniels" label="Charlie Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q23884740" start="56918" end="56928" title="Luke Combs" label="Luke Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="56931" end="56936" title="Heavy metal music" label="Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="56941" end="56945" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135391" start="56959" end="56982" title="Corrosion of Conformity" label="Corrosion of Conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q850616" start="56984" end="57009" title="Between the Buried and Me" label="Between the Buried and Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q21084" start="57076" end="57091" title="Porter Robinson" label="Porter Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="57103" end="57114" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="57158" end="57171" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q347128" start="57210" end="57220" title="Clay Aiken" label="Clay Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q232288" start="57235" end="57251" title="Fantasia Barrino" label="Fantasia Barrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q877858" start="57268" end="57282" title="Chris Daughtry" label="Chris Daughtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q234445" start="57298" end="57312" title="Kellie Pickler" label="Kellie Pickler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927481" start="57328" end="57343" title="Bucky Covington" label="Bucky Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549949" start="57359" end="57370" title="Anoop Desai" label="Anoop Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q255969" start="57387" end="57402" title="Scotty McCreery" label="Scotty McCreery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233888" start="57421" end="57434" title="Caleb Johnson (singer)" label="Caleb Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962526" start="57581" end="57601" title="Brevard Music Center" label="Brevard Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096579" start="57750" end="57764" title="Opera Carolina" label="Opera Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804918" start="57869" end="57890" title="Asheville Lyric Opera" label="Asheville Lyric Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895938" start="58030" end="58077" title="University of North Carolina School of the Arts" label="University of North Carolina School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900555" start="58256" end="58267" title="NC Symphony" label="NC Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086159" start="58280" end="58298" title="Charlotte Symphony" label="Charlotte Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044771" start="58389" end="58404" title="Carolina Ballet" label="Carolina Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054468" start="58456" end="58472" title="Charlotte Ballet" label="Charlotte Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565320" start="58792" end="58806" title="SouthPark Mall (Charlotte, North Carolina)" label="SouthPark Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="58810" end="58819" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059496" start="58987" end="59001" title="Northlake Mall (Charlotte)" label="Northlake Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044877" start="59006" end="59025" title="Carolina Place Mall" label="Carolina Place Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029607" start="59043" end="59052" title="Pineville, North Carolina" label="Pineville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126741" start="59101" end="59111" title="Hanes Mall" label="Hanes Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="59115" end="59144" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59146" end="59164" title="The Thruway Center" label="The Thruway Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="59168" end="59197" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180289" start="59199" end="59219" title="Crabtree Valley Mall" label="Crabtree Valley Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055633" start="59221" end="59237" title="North Hills (Raleigh)" label="North Hills Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840090" start="59243" end="59263" title="Triangle Town Center" label="Triangle Town Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="59267" end="59274" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504049" start="59276" end="59291" title="Friendly Center" label="Friendly Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475529" start="59296" end="59320" title="Four Seasons Town Centre" label="Four Seasons Town Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="59324" end="59334" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073598" start="59336" end="59351" title="Oak Hollow Mall" label="Oak Hollow Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q631194" start="59355" end="59365" title="High Point, North Carolina" label="High Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158824" start="59367" end="59380" title="Concord Mills" label="Concord Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="59384" end="59391" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912104" start="59393" end="59410" title="Valley Hills Mall" label="Valley Hills Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028564" start="59414" end="59421" title="Hickory, North Carolina" label="Hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188281" start="59423" end="59439" title="Cross Creek Mall" label="Cross Creek Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="59443" end="59455" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767003" start="59461" end="59486" title="The Streets at Southpoint" label="The Streets at Southpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q49229" start="59490" end="59496" title="Durham, North Carolina" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016112" start="59501" end="59518" title="Independence Mall (North Carolina)" label="Independence Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="59713" end="59721" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420447" start="59907" end="59918" title="Boston butt" label="Boston butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067058" start="60120" end="60134" title="Piedmont Triad" label="Piedmont Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q181370" start="60143" end="60152" title="Lexington, North Carolina" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699570" start="60166" end="60193" title="Lexington Barbecue Festival" label="Lexington Barbecue Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192805" start="60415" end="60427" title="Krispy Kreme" label="Krispy Kreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="60542" end="60555" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="60557" end="60567" title="Pepsi-Cola" label="Pepsi-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089372" start="60631" end="60640" title="Cheerwine" label="Cheerwine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707906" start="60731" end="60741" title="Texas Pete" label="Texas Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585088" start="60821" end="60834" title="Hardee&amp;#x27;s" label="Hardee&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021026" start="60866" end="60877" title="Rocky Mount, North Carolina" label="Rocky Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q891163" start="60904" end="60919" title="Bojangles&amp;#x27;" label="Bojangles&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="60936" end="60945" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039560" start="61034" end="61047" title="Golden Corral" label="Golden Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="61091" end="61103" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="61134" end="61141" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365891" start="61151" end="61157" title="Pickled cucumber" label="pickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109777" start="61164" end="61190" title="Mount Olive Pickle Company" label="Mount Olive Pickle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025945" start="61206" end="61217" title="Mount Olive, North Carolina" label="Mount Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17183098" start="61252" end="61286" title="Hwy 55 Burgers, Shakes &amp;amp; Fries" label="Hwy 55 Burgers, Shakes &amp;amp; Fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025945" start="61310" end="61321" title="Mount Olive, North Carolina" label="Mount Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166992" start="61323" end="61331" title="Cook Out (restaurant)" label="Cook Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="62074" end="62091" title="alcohol by volume" label="alcohol by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="62244" end="62253" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62364" end="62373" title="Brewing in North Carolina#Breweries" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187093" start="63101" end="63123" title="Research Triangle Park" label="Research Triangle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="63337" end="63346" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="63487" end="63517" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123813" start="63536" end="63550" title="R. J. Reynolds" label="R. J. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="63734" end="63746" title="Altria Group" label="Altria Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q856411" start="63849" end="63873" title="British American Tobacco" label="British American Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63977" end="64014" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="64148" end="64157" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="64256" end="64270" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q257940" start="64285" end="64317" title="List of North Carolina state parks" label="North Carolina State Park System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054474" start="64419" end="64478" title="North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources" label="North Carolina Department of Natural and Cultural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="64524" end="64534" title="Fort Bragg" label="Fort Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="64541" end="64553" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028106" start="64558" end="64572" title="Southern Pines, North Carolina" label="Southern Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q582971" start="64648" end="64668" title="XVIII Airborne Corps" label="XVIII Airborne Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="64670" end="64692" title="U.S. 82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342591" start="64702" end="64738" title="U.S. Army Special Operations Command" label="U.S. Army Special Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246941" start="64782" end="64792" title="Pope Air Force Base" label="Pope Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q986369" start="64838" end="64850" title="Jacksonville, North Carolina" label="Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="64852" end="64882" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune" label="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031594" start="64911" end="64955" title="MCAS Cherry Point" label="Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) Cherry Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030738" start="64957" end="64971" title="Marine Corps Air Station New River" label="MCAS New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898344" start="64973" end="64984" title="Camp Geiger" label="Camp Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799276" start="64986" end="64998" title="Camp Gilbert H. Johnson" label="Camp Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618869" start="65000" end="65009" title="Stone Bay" label="Stone Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031594" start="65102" end="65119" title="MCAS Cherry Point" label="MCAS Cherry Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633773" start="65135" end="65159" title="2nd Marine Aircraft Wing" label="2nd Marine Aircraft Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q367400" start="65172" end="65181" title="Goldsboro, North Carolina" label="Goldsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766303" start="65183" end="65213" title="Seymour Johnson Air Force Base" label="Seymour Johnson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817084" start="65229" end="65245" title="4th Fighter Wing" label="4th Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645720" start="65250" end="65274" title="916th Air Refueling Wing" label="916th Air Refueling Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="65315" end="65340" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138107" start="65359" end="65382" title="Coast Guard Air Station Elizabeth City" label="Coast Guard Air Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018467" start="65386" end="65400" title="Elizabeth City, North Carolina" label="Elizabeth City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708034" start="65442" end="65477" title="Military Ocean Terminal Sunny Point" label="Military Ocean Terminal Sunny Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q629993" start="65481" end="65490" title="Southport, North Carolina" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055786" start="65522" end="65552" title="1961 Goldsboro B-52 crash" label="broke up in midair and crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q367400" start="65594" end="65603" title="Goldsboro, North Carolina" label="Goldsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="65618" end="65631" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="65933" end="65950" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163480" start="65973" end="65990" title="Charlotte Hornets" label="Charlotte Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940113" start="66008" end="66017" title="Carowinds" label="Carowinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904093" start="66034" end="66058" title="Catawba Two Kings Casino" label="Catawba Two Kings Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742139" start="66070" end="66084" title="Kings Mountain, North Carolina" label="Kings Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067286" start="66087" end="66111" title="Charlotte Motor Speedway" label="Charlotte Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863251" start="66113" end="66144" title="U.S. National Whitewater Center" label="U.S. National Whitewater Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281960" start="66146" end="66161" title="Discovery Place" label="Discovery Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600260" start="66163" end="66179" title="Great Wolf Lodge" label="Great Wolf Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878575" start="66200" end="66229" title="Bechtler Museum of Modern Art" label="Bechtler Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912629" start="66231" end="66251" title="Billy Graham Library" label="Billy Graham Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044927" start="66253" end="66278" title="Carolinas Aviation Museum" label="Carolinas Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983412" start="66280" end="66338" title="Harvey B. Gantt Center for African-American Arts + Culture" label="Harvey B. Gantt Center for African-American Arts + Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535654" start="66340" end="66370" title="Levine Museum of the New South" label="Levine Museum of the New South"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350156" start="66372" end="66406" title="McColl Center for Art + Innovation" label="McColl Center for Art + Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869561" start="66408" end="66419" title="Mint Museum" label="Mint Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="66429" end="66448" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="66466" end="66487" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q585521" start="66578" end="66593" title="Biltmore Estate" label="Biltmore Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="66606" end="66624" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q464004" start="66629" end="66664" title="Great Smoky Mountains National Park" label="Great Smoky Mountains National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="66789" end="66798" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="66973" end="66980" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951201" start="67050" end="67084" title="Contemporary Art Museum of Raleigh" label="Contemporary Art Museum of Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q109284763" start="67086" end="67126" title="Gregg Museum of Art &amp;amp; Design" label="Gregg Museum of Art &amp;amp; Design at NCSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065099" start="67128" end="67160" title="Haywood Hall" label="Haywood Hall House &amp;amp; Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708028" start="67162" end="67181" title="Marbles Kids Museum" label="Marbles Kids Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459878" start="67183" end="67211" title="North Carolina Museum of Art" label="North Carolina Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054557" start="67213" end="67245" title="North Carolina Museum of History" label="North Carolina Museum of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483656" start="67247" end="67288" title="North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences" label="North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054557" start="67290" end="67324" title="North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame" label="North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286899" start="67326" end="67345" title="Raleigh City Museum" label="Raleigh City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105048" start="67347" end="67371" title="J. C. Raulston Arboretum" label="J. C. Raulston Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213673" start="67373" end="67388" title="Joel Lane House" label="Joel Lane House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909611" start="67390" end="67404" title="Mordecai House" label="Mordecai House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905569" start="67406" end="67419" title="Montfort Hall" label="Montfort Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229176" start="67429" end="67446" title="Pope House Museum" label="Pope House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="67452" end="67471" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027835" start="67525" end="67532" title="Conover, North Carolina" label="Conover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028564" start="67533" end="67540" title="Hickory, North Carolina" label="Hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617265" start="67567" end="67589" title="Hickory Motor Speedway" label="Hickory Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600572" start="67626" end="67662" title="Greater Hickory Classic at Rock Barn" label="Greater Hickory Classic at Rock Barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q502483" start="67664" end="67678" title="Catawba County" label="Catawba County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912104" start="67720" end="67737" title="Valley Hills Mall" label="Valley Hills Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067058" start="67744" end="67758" title="Piedmont Triad" label="Piedmont Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192805" start="67795" end="67807" title="Krispy Kreme" label="Krispy Kreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796971" start="67809" end="67817" title="Mayberry" label="Mayberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707906" start="67819" end="67829" title="Texas Pete" label="Texas Pete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699570" start="67835" end="67862" title="Lexington Barbecue Festival" label="Lexington Barbecue Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909359" start="67868" end="67884" title="Moravian spice cookies" label="Moravian cookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850938" start="67916" end="67934" title="North Carolina Zoo" label="North Carolina Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q725046" start="67938" end="67946" title="Asheboro" label="Asheboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022717" start="68104" end="68112" title="Seagrove" label="Seagrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489245" start="68180" end="68195" title="Pottery Highway" label="Pottery Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061711" start="68210" end="68219" title="MerleFest" label="MerleFest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025995" start="68223" end="68233" title="Wilkesboro, North Carolina" label="Wilkesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="68349" end="68359" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517373" start="68388" end="68399" title="Outer Banks" label="Outer Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519298" start="68570" end="68581" title="Inner Banks" label="Inner Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709503" start="68630" end="68651" title="Albemarle Settlements" label="Albemarle Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="68723" end="68745" title="Atlantic Coastal Plain" label="Atlantic Coastal Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22061022" start="68801" end="68824" title="Historic Albemarle Tour" label="Historic Albemarle Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="69131" end="69141" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q597649" start="69323" end="69362" title="Charlotte Douglas International Airport" label="Charlotte Douglas International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="69407" end="69424" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192962" start="69487" end="69523" title="Raleigh-Durham International Airport" label="Raleigh-Durham International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="69542" end="69557" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843264" start="69603" end="69618" title="Midway Airlines (1993-2003)" label="Midway Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="69734" end="69740" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085831" start="69848" end="69852" title="Charlotte Area Transit System" label="LYNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054477" start="70097" end="70144" title="North Carolina Department of Public Instruction" label="North Carolina Department of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054623" start="70150" end="70201" title="North Carolina Superintendent of Public Instruction" label="North Carolina Superintendent of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054600" start="70226" end="70265" title="North Carolina State Board of Education" label="North Carolina State Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960902" start="70706" end="70738" title="Wake County Public School System" label="Wake County Public School System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944229" start="70740" end="70769" title="Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools" label="Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615918" start="70771" end="70794" title="Guilford County Schools" label="Guilford County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q615158" start="70796" end="70832" title="Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools" label="Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193878" start="70838" end="70863" title="Cumberland County Schools" label="Cumberland County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086781" start="70938" end="70953" title="Charter school (North Carolina)" label="charter schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="71010" end="71037" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158283" start="71073" end="71086" title="Pearsall Plan" label="Pearsall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="71104" end="71107" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="71298" end="71301" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="71787" end="71830" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="71864" end="71899" title="University of North Carolina System" label="University of North Carolina System"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="71915" end="71934" title="public university" label="public universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q620640" start="71946" end="71974" title="Appalachian State University" label="Appalachian State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277776" start="71976" end="72000" title="East Carolina University" label="East Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362587" start="72002" end="72033" title="Elizabeth City State University" label="Elizabeth City State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399078" start="72035" end="72064" title="Fayetteville State University" label="Fayetteville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476484" start="72066" end="72105" title="North Carolina A&amp;amp;T State University" label="North Carolina A&amp;amp;T State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518804" start="72107" end="72140" title="North Carolina Central University" label="North Carolina Central University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="72142" end="72173" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895940" start="72179" end="72220" title="University of North Carolina at Asheville" label="University of North Carolina at Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="72226" end="72269" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783178" start="72275" end="72316" title="University of North Carolina at Charlotte" label="University of North Carolina at Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321380" start="72322" end="72364" title="University of North Carolina at Greensboro" label="University of North Carolina at Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709746" start="72370" end="72410" title="University of North Carolina at Pembroke" label="University of North Carolina at Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895938" start="72416" end="72463" title="University of North Carolina School of the Arts" label="University of North Carolina School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092214" start="72469" end="72511" title="University of North Carolina at Wilmington" label="University of North Carolina at Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050078" start="72513" end="72540" title="Western Carolina University" label="Western Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026034" start="72546" end="72576" title="Winston-Salem State University" label="Winston-Salem State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054585" start="72620" end="72668" title="North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics" label="North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="72735" end="72752" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054453" start="72761" end="72785" title="North Carolina Community College System" label="community college system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="72841" end="72872" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865607" start="73000" end="73014" title="Barton College" label="Barton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884322" start="73016" end="73037" title="Belmont Abbey College" label="Belmont Abbey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q904219" start="73084" end="73103" title="Campbell University" label="Campbell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902978" start="73105" end="73121" title="Davidson College" label="Davidson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="73123" end="73138" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568893" start="73140" end="73155" title="Elon University" label="Elon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615915" start="73157" end="73173" title="Guilford College" label="Guilford College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756235" start="73175" end="73196" title="High Point University" label="High Point University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500038" start="73198" end="73215" title="Laurel University" label="Laurel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516492" start="73217" end="73235" title="Lees-McRae College" label="Lees-McRae College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523054" start="73237" end="73260" title="Lenoir-Rhyne University" label="Lenoir-Rhyne University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659715" start="73311" end="73330" title="Livingstone College" label="Livingstone College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818913" start="73332" end="73348" title="Meredith College" label="Meredith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823850" start="73350" end="73370" title="Methodist University" label="Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906389" start="73372" end="73388" title="Montreat College" label="Montreat College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054645" start="73390" end="73424" title="North Carolina Wesleyan University" label="North Carolina Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796553" start="73426" end="73445" title="Pfeiffer University" label="Pfeiffer University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404072" start="73447" end="73460" title="Salem College" label="Salem College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443493" start="73462" end="73477" title="Shaw University" label="Shaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="73489" end="73529" title="HBCU" label="historically black college or university"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922541" start="73545" end="73570" title="University of Mount Olive" label="University of Mount Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="73572" end="73594" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016704" start="73596" end="73620" title="William Peace University" label="William Peace University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025153" start="73626" end="73644" title="Wingate University" label="Wingate University"/>
<link wikidata="Q170087" start="73701" end="73712" title="Folk high school" label="folk school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224322" start="73739" end="73767" title="John C. Campbell Folk School" label="John C. Campbell Folk School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601005" start="73813" end="73841" title="List of U.S. states and territories by life expectancy" label="have a lower life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039400" start="73910" end="73953" title="Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation" label="Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075569" start="74524" end="74554" title="Robert Wood Johnson Foundation" label="Robert Wood Johnson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q496197" start="74642" end="74654" title="Swain County" label="Swain County"/>
<link wikidata="Q507957" start="74673" end="74686" title="Orange County, North Carolina" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733570" start="74946" end="74971" title="The Fayetteville Observer" label="The Fayetteville Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600514" start="75062" end="75082" title="Wilmington Star-News" label="Wilmington Star-News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753904" start="75278" end="75295" title="News and Observer" label="News and Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486310" start="75373" end="75395" title="The Charlotte Observer" label="The Charlotte Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054461" start="75641" end="75657" title="North Carolina Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202700" start="75670" end="75678" title="Governor of North Carolina" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="75685" end="75694" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="75719" end="75735" title="North Carolina General Assembly" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054626" start="75780" end="75808" title="North Carolina Supreme Court" label="North Carolina Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164218" start="75815" end="75833" title="Constitution of North Carolina" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="75949" end="75975" title="council–manager government" label="council–manager government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684988" start="76112" end="76119" title="Tarheel" label="Tarheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054581" start="76145" end="76155" title="North Carolina Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="76262" end="76273" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="76321" end="76333" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892970" start="76374" end="76381" title="1976 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="in 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="76469" end="76481" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892979" start="76505" end="76512" title="2008 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="76537" end="76549" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892975" start="76591" end="76598" title="1992 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="in 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892976" start="76637" end="76644" title="1996 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="in 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892977" start="76649" end="76653" title="2000 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="76666" end="76680" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892979" start="76730" end="76734" title="2008 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="76843" end="76860" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="76862" end="76871" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="76873" end="76883" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="76885" end="76898" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q331104" start="76900" end="76912" title="Fayetteville, North Carolina" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="76918" end="76927" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100301" start="77033" end="77037" title="2012 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104713" start="77140" end="77175" title="2012 Democratic National Convention" label="2012 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="77210" end="77221" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100236" start="77354" end="77361" title="2012 United States presidential election in Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025837" start="77468" end="77472" title="2016 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519497" start="77474" end="77478" title="2020 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119100" start="77484" end="77488" title="2024 United States presidential election in North Carolina" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q39311" start="77541" end="77552" title="Pat McCrory" label="Pat McCrory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213500" start="77579" end="77589" title="Dan Forest" label="Dan Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890521" start="77902" end="77914" title="2014 United States House of Representatives elections in North Carolina" label="2014 midterm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239255" start="77937" end="77949" title="David Rouzer" label="David Rouzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054394" start="77971" end="77997" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23785494" start="78379" end="78382" title="Public Facilities Privacy &amp;amp; Security Act" label="HB2"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842452" start="78575" end="78603" title="118th United States Congress" label="118th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="78857" end="78880" title="gerrymandering" label="racially gerrymandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889804" start="79014" end="79076" title="U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina" label="U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13860457" start="79092" end="79119" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district" label="12th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327543" start="79193" end="79212" title="Easley v. Cromartie" label="Easley v. Cromartie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="79224" end="79242" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="79377" end="79397" title="gerrymandering" label="partisan gerrymander"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="80141" end="80157" title="North Carolina General Assembly" label="General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q110252005" start="80607" end="80621" title="2024 United States elections" label="2024 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q109973426" start="80752" end="80775" title="2022 North Carolina judicial elections" label="2022 judicial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="81120" end="81141" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162088" start="81172" end="81175" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 1st Senate district" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162089" start="81180" end="81183" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 2nd Senate district" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="81286" end="81311" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889816" start="81362" end="81395" title="United States District Court for the Middle District of North Carolina" label="Middle District of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054378" start="81428" end="81431" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054392" start="81433" end="81436" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q13860457" start="81438" end="81442" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district" label="12th"/>
<link wikidata="Q106795616" start="81448" end="81452" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 14th congressional district" label="14th"/>
<link wikidata="Q115817733" start="81843" end="81872" title="Purcell principle" label="&amp;quot;Purcell&amp;quot; principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="81905" end="81949" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="82168" end="82180" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="82204" end="82221" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="82229" end="82253" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q163480" start="82259" end="82276" title="Charlotte Hornets" label="Charlotte Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="82284" end="82315" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q78944434" start="82321" end="82333" title="Charlotte FC" label="Charlotte FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="82337" end="82356" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201857" start="82405" end="82424" title="Carolina Hurricanes" label="Carolina Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="82437" end="82459" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968223" start="82736" end="82776" title="2006 Stanley Cup Finals" label="having captured the Stanley Cup in 2006."/>
<link wikidata="Q1634225" start="82873" end="82894" title="Major League Lacrosse" label="Major League Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169542" start="82903" end="82925" title="North Carolina Courage" label="North Carolina Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101443" start="82933" end="82968" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="82999" end="83020" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="83049" end="83070" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="83125" end="83133" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q630991" start="83134" end="83151" title="Charlotte Knights" label="Charlotte Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581129" start="83156" end="83168" title="Durham Bulls" label="Durham Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="83264" end="83274" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044425" start="83289" end="83306" title="North Carolina FC" label="North Carolina FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067147" start="83315" end="83333" title="Charlotte Checkers" label="Charlotte Checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="83488" end="83494" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067286" start="83522" end="83546" title="Charlotte Motor Speedway" label="Charlotte Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="83550" end="83557" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="83570" end="83580" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="83624" end="83643" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096654" start="83717" end="83737" title="Hendrick Motorsports" label="Hendrick Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048237" start="83739" end="83758" title="Roush Fenway Racing" label="Roush Fenway Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150891" start="83760" end="83770" title="GMS Racing" label="GMS Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q511684" start="83772" end="83791" title="Stewart-Haas Racing" label="Stewart-Haas Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074531" start="83797" end="83816" title="Chip Ganassi Racing" label="Chip Ganassi Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771977" start="84039" end="84055" title="Pinehurst Resort" label="Pinehurst Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q119542" start="84059" end="84068" title="Pinehurst, North Carolina" label="Pinehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="84082" end="84098" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="84100" end="84109" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="84115" end="84125" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Opens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300124" start="84135" end="84157" title="United States Women&amp;#x27;s Open Championship (golf)" label="U.S. Women&amp;#x27;s Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772214" start="84163" end="84187" title="Wells Fargo Championship" label="Wells Fargo Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="84213" end="84221" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268497" start="84237" end="84254" title="Quail Hollow Club" label="Quail Hollow Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772957" start="84336" end="84356" title="Wyndham Championship" label="Wyndham Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445230" start="84393" end="84416" title="Sedgefield Country Club" label="Sedgefield Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051160" start="84419" end="84433" title="College athletics in the United States" label="College sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="84503" end="84513" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q756355" start="84525" end="84550" title="Atlantic Coast Conference" label="Atlantic Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="84577" end="84587" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650555" start="84602" end="84632" title="ACC Championship Game" label="ACC Football Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650554" start="84653" end="84689" title="ACC men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="ACC men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="84772" end="84781" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973896" start="84797" end="84842" title="National Junior College Athletic Association" label="National Junior College Athletics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="84872" end="84890" title="College basketball" label="College basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811483" start="84940" end="84952" title="Tobacco Road (rivalry)" label="Tobacco Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412061" start="84983" end="84997" title="North Carolina Tar Heels men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171772" start="84999" end="85003" title="Duke Blue Devils men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953251" start="85005" end="85025" title="NC State Wolfpack men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="North Carolina State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960924" start="85031" end="85042" title="Wake Forest Demon Deacons men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Wake Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650555" start="85048" end="85069" title="ACC Championship Game" label="ACC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304723" start="85078" end="85099" title="Duke&amp;#x27;s Mayo Bowl" label="Duke&amp;#x27;s Mayo Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q806673" start="85138" end="85161" title="Bank of America Stadium" label="Bank of America Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="85200" end="85223" title="Southeastern Conference" label="Southeastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="85291" end="85301" title="Final Four (college basketball)" label="Final Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018507" start="85385" end="85425" title="Index of North Carolina–related articles" label="Index of North Carolina–related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112388" start="85428" end="85453" title="Outline of North Carolina" label="Outline of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863945" start="85456" end="85490" title="List of people from North Carolina" label="List of people from North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="85695" end="85729" title="University of North Carolina Press" label="University of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="86147" end="86162" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="86164" end="86179" title="UNC-Chapel Hill" label="UNC-Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="86185" end="86207" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="86753" end="86787" title="University of North Carolina Press" label="University of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="" start="87066" end="87156" title="The Making of a Southern Democracy: North Carolina Politics from Kerr Scott to Pat McCrory" label="The Making of a Southern Democracy: North Carolina Politics from Kerr Scott to Pat McCrory"/>
<link wikidata="Q671812" start="87164" end="87191" title="Chapel Hill, North Carolina" label="Chapel Hill, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895937" start="87193" end="87227" title="University of North Carolina Press" label="University of North Carolina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="89070" end="89073" title="Works Progress Administration" label="WPA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21651" wikidata="Q1207" url="?curid=21651" title="North Dakota">
<text>North Dakota ( ) is a landlocked U.S. state in the Upper Midwest, named after the indigenous Dakota Sioux. It is bordered by the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba to the north and by the U.S. states of Minnesota to the east, South Dakota to the south, and Montana to the west. North Dakota is part of the Great Plains region, characterized by broad prairies, steppe, temperate savanna, badlands, and farmland. North Dakota is the 19th-largest state by area, but with a population of just under 800,000, it is the fourth-least populous and fourth-most sparsely populated. The state capital is Bismarck while the most populous city is Fargo, which accounts for nearly a fifth of the state&#x27;s population; both cities are among the fastest-growing in the U.S., although half of all residents live in rural areas.

What is now North Dakota was inhabited for thousands of years by various Native American tribes, including the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara along the Missouri River; the Ojibwe and Cree in the northeast; and several Sioux groups (the Nakota, Dakota, and Lakota) across the rest of the state. European explorers and traders first arrived in the early 18th century, mostly in pursuit of lucrative furs.

The United States acquired the region in the early 19th century, gradually settling it amid growing resistance by increasingly displaced natives. The Dakota Territory, established in 1861, became central to American pioneers, with the Homestead Act of 1862 precipitating significant population growth and development. The traditional fur trade declined in favor of farming, particularly of wheat. The subsequent Dakota Boom from 1878 to 1886 saw giant farms stretched across the rolling prairies, with the territory becoming a regional economic power. The Northern Pacific and Great Northern railway companies competed for access to lucrative grain centers; farmers banded together in political and socioeconomic alliances that were core to the broader Populist Movement of the Midwest. North and South Dakota were admitted to the Union on November 2, 1889, as the 39th and 40th states. President Benjamin Harrison shuffled the statehood papers before signing them so that no one could tell which became a state first; consequently, the two states are officially numbered in alphabetical order. Statehood marked the gradual winding-down of the pioneer period, with the state fully settled by around 1920. Subsequent decades saw a rise in radical agrarian movements and economic cooperatives, of which one legacy is the Bank of North Dakota, the only state-run bank in the U.S.

Beginning in the mid-20th century, North Dakota&#x27;s rich natural resources became more critical to economic development; into the 21st century, oil extraction from the Bakken formation in the northwest has played a major role in the state&#x27;s prosperity. Such development has led to population growth (along with high birth rates) and reduced unemployment. It ranks relatively well in metrics such as infrastructure, quality of life, economic opportunity, and public safety. It is believed to host the geographic center of North America, Rugby, and is home to what was once the tallest artificial structure in the Western Hemisphere, the KVLY-TV mast.

==History==
===Pre-colonial history===

Native American people lived in what is now North Dakota for thousands of years before the arrival of Europeans. The known tribes included the Mandan people (from around the 11th century), while the first Hidatsa group arrived a few hundred years later. They both assembled in villages on tributaries of the Missouri River in what would become west-central North Dakota. Crow Indians traveled the plains from the west to visit and trade with the related Hidatsas after the split between them, probably in the 17th century.

Later came divisions of the Sioux: the Lakota, the Santee and the Yanktonai. The Assiniboine and the Plains Cree undertook southward journeys to the village Indians, either for trade or for war. The Shoshone Indians in present-day Wyoming and Montana may have carried out attacks on Indian enemies as far east as the Missouri. A group of Cheyennes lived in a village of earth lodges at the lower Sheyenne River (Biesterfeldt Site) for decades in the 18th century.

Due to attacks by Crees, Assiniboines and Chippewas armed with firearms, they left the area around 1780 and crossed Missouri some time after. A band of the few Sotaio Indians lived east of Missouri River and met the uprooted Cheyennes before the end of the century. They soon followed the Cheyennes across Missouri and lived among them south of Cannonball River.

Eventually, the Cheyenne and the Sutaio became one tribe and turned into mounted buffalo hunters with ranges mainly outside North Dakota. Before the middle of the 19th century, the Arikara entered the future state from the south and joined the Mandan and Hidatsa. With time, a number of Indians entered into treaties with the United States. Many of the treaties defined the territory of a specific tribe.

===European exploration and colonization===

The first European to reach the area was the French-Canadian trader Pierre Gaultier, sieur de La Vérendrye, who led an exploration and trading party to the Mandan villages in 1738 guided by Assiniboine Indians.
From 1762 to 1800, the region formed part of Spanish Louisiana.
On 1 October 1800, the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso was signed, and the territory of Spanish Louisiana was transferred to France as part of French Louisiana, which was later sold to the United States in the Louisiana Purchase.

The northwestern portion of the state, corresponding to the Red River Valley and the drainage basin to the Hudson Bay was, at the time, part of Rupert&#x27;s Land, a British North American territory. It remained under control of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company until the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, which set the border between it and the United States to the 49th parallel.

===Settlement and statehood===
European Americans settled in Dakota Territory only sparsely until the late 19th century, when railroads opened up the region. With the advantage of grants of land, they vigorously marketed their properties, extolling the region as ideal for agriculture.

Differences between the northern and southern part caused resentments between the settlers. The northern part was seen by the more populated southern part as somewhat disreputable, &quot;too much controlled by the wild folks, cattle ranchers, fur traders&quot; and too frequently the site of conflict with the indigenous population. The northern part was generally content with remaining a territory. However, following the territorial capital being moved from Yankton in the southern part to Bismarck, the southern part began to call for division. Finally, at the 1887 territorial election, the voters approved splitting the territory into two. The division was done by the seventh standard parallel. Other account(s) state that the real reason for the split was a political lure for four Republican senators instead of two from the Republican dominated Dakota Territory and in their push to split the territory, Republican congressmen also ignored the uncomfortable fact that much of the land in the anticipated state of South Dakota belonged to the Sioux.

Congress passed an omnibus bill for statehood for North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, and Washington, titled the Enabling Act of 1889, on February 22, 1889, during the administration of President Grover Cleveland. His successor, Benjamin Harrison, signed the proclamations formally admitting North Dakota and South Dakota to the Union on November 2, 1889.

There was a rivalry between the two new states that which one would be admitted first. So Harrison directed Secretary of State James G. Blaine to shuffle the papers and obscure from him which he was signing first to keep both the states happy and to avoid showing favor to either state. The actual order went unrecorded, thus no one knows which of the Dakotas was admitted first. However, since &quot;North Dakota&quot; alphabetically appears before &quot;South Dakota&quot;, its proclamation was published first in the Statutes At Large.

===20th century===

Unrest among wheat farmers, especially among Norwegian immigrants, led to a populist political movement centered in the Non Partisan League (&quot;NPL&quot;) around the time of World War I. The NPL ran candidates on the Republican ticket (but merged into the Democratic Party after World War II). It tried to insulate North Dakota from the power of out-of-state banks and corporations.

In addition to founding the state-owned Bank of North Dakota and North Dakota Mill and Elevator (both still in existence), the NPL established a state-owned railroad line (later sold to the Soo Line Railroad). Anti-corporate laws virtually prohibited a corporation or bank from owning title to land zoned as farmland. These laws, still in force today, after having been upheld by state and federal courts, make it almost impossible to foreclose on farmland, as even after foreclosure, the property title cannot be held by a bank or mortgage company. Furthermore, the Bank of North Dakota, having powers similar to a Federal Reserve branch bank, exercised its power to limit the issuance of subprime mortgages and their collateralization in the form of derivative instruments, and so prevented a collapse of housing prices within the state in the wake of 2008&#x27;s financial crisis.

The original North Dakota State Capitol in Bismarck burned to the ground on December 28, 1930. It was replaced by a limestone-faced art-deco skyscraper that still stands today. A round of federal investment and construction projects began in the 1950s, including the Garrison Dam and the Minot and Grand Forks Air Force bases.

Western North Dakota saw a boom in oil exploration in the late 1970s and early 1980s, as rising petroleum prices made development profitable. This boom came to an end after petroleum prices declined.

===21st century===

In 2010, the state had lower rates of unemployment than the national average, and increased job and population growth. Much of the growth has been based on development of the Bakken oil fields in the western part of the state. Estimates as to the remaining amount of oil in the area vary, with some estimating over 100 years&#x27; worth.

For decades, North Dakota&#x27;s annual murder and violent crime rates were regularly the lowest in the United States. In recent years, however, while still below the national average, crime has risen sharply. In 2016, the violent crime rate was three times higher than in 2004, with the rise occurring mostly in the late 2000s, coinciding with the oil boom era. This happened at a time when the national violent crime rate declined slightly. Workers in the oil boom towns have been blamed for much of the increase.

==Geography==

North Dakota is located in the Upper Midwest region of the United States. It lies at the center of the North American continent and borders Canada to the north. The geographic center of North America is near the town of Rugby. Bismarck is the capital of North Dakota, and Fargo is the most populous city.

North Dakota is in the U.S. region known as the Great Plains. The state shares the Red River of the North with Minnesota to the east. South Dakota is to the south, Montana is to the west, and the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba are to the north. North Dakota is near the middle of North America with a stone marker in Rugby, North Dakota marking the &quot;Geographic Center of the North American Continent&quot;. With an area of , of which is land, North Dakota is the 19th largest state.

The western half of the state consists of the hilly Great Plains as well as the northern part of the Badlands, which are to the west of the Missouri River. The state&#x27;s high point, White Butte at , and Theodore Roosevelt National Park are in the Badlands. The region is abundant in fossil fuels including natural gas, crude oil and lignite coal. The Missouri River forms Lake Sakakawea, the third largest artificial lake in the United States, behind the Garrison Dam.

The central region of the state is divided into the Drift Prairie and the Missouri Plateau. The eastern part of the state consists of the flat Red River Valley, the bottom of glacial Lake Agassiz. Its fertile soil, drained by the meandering Red River flowing northward into Lake Winnipeg, supports a large agriculture industry. Devils Lake, the largest natural lake in the state, is also found in the east.

Most of the state is covered in grassland; crops cover most of eastern North Dakota but become increasingly sparse in the center and farther west. Natural trees in North Dakota are found usually where there is good drainage, such as the ravines and valley near the Pembina Gorge and Killdeer Mountains, the Turtle Mountains, the hills around Devils Lake, in the dunes area of McHenry County in central North Dakota, and along the Sheyenne Valley slopes and the Sheyenne delta. This diverse terrain supports nearly 2,000 species of plants.

Soil is North Dakota&#x27;s most precious resource. It is the base of the state&#x27;s great agricultural wealth. North Dakota also has enormous mineral resources. These mineral resources include billions of tons of lignite coal. In addition, North Dakota has large oil reserves. Petroleum was discovered in the state in 1951 and quickly became one of North Dakota&#x27;s most valuable mineral resources. In the early 2000s, the emergence of hydraulic fracturing technologies enabled mining companies to extract huge amounts of oil from the Bakken shale rock formation in the western part of the state.

North Dakota public lands

5 national parks, 5 state forests, 63 national wildlife refuges, 3 national grassland, and 13 state parks plus there are state trust land, bureau of land management, waterfowl production areas, bureau of reclamation, bureau of land management, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, state wildlife management areas

North Dakota wildlife

Currently there are 36 Level I species, 44 Level II species, and 35 Level III species.

List of birds of North Dakota The basic NDGFD list contains 420 confirmed and extant species, two extinct species. Three additional species have been added from the North Dakota Bird Records Committee (NDBRC) review list with some additions from Avibase. The combined lists contain 420 species. Of them, 194 and a subspecies are on the review list (see below). The NDGFD list considers 44 species to be accidental, and eight species have been introduced to North America.

List of mammals of North Dakota 87 species are known to live in the state. This includes mammals that are currently extirpated or locally extinct in North Dakota such as the gray wolf, swift fox, caribou and grizzly bear.

List of insects of North Dakota 1,126 Species known in North Dakota

List of fish of North Dakota 98 Species are currently known in North Dakota

List of reptiles/amphibians of North Dakota 16 Species of Reptiles and 12 Amphibians found in the state.

List of crustaceans/mussels of North Dakota

 Three species of crawfish are found in North Dakota: Devil, Calico, and Virile

North Dakota is home to three freshwater shrimp species, gammarus, hyalella and mysis. The latter is an introduced species stocked in Lake Sakakawea in the early 1970s to add to the forage base.

 Cvancara&#x27;s &quot;Aquatic Mussels of North Dakota&quot; from 1983. He documented 13 species of what are generally referred to as clams in the state along with 13 species of pill clams, which are very small clams, in the order of a few millimeters in length. He also documented 22 species of snails in the state.

===Climate===


North Dakota has a continental climate with warm summers and cold winters. The temperature differences are significant because of its far inland position and being roughly equal distance from the North Pole and the Equator.

On February 21, 1918, Granville, North Dakota experienced a record-breaking 83 °F temperature increase over a 12-hour period, from a low of -33 °F to a high of 50 °F. Another weather record set in Langdon in the winter of 1935–36, with the temperature staying below 0 °F (−17.8 °C) for 41 consecutive days, January 11 though February 20. This is a record for any location in the contiguous U.S.).

==Demographics==
===Population===
At the 2023 estimate North Dakota&#x27;s population was 783,926 on July 1, 2023, a 0.62% increase since the 2020 United States census. North Dakota is the fourth least-populous state in the country; only Alaska, Vermont, and Wyoming have fewer residents.

From fewer than 2,000 people in 1870, North Dakota&#x27;s population grew to near 680,000 by 1930. Growth then slowed, and the population fluctuated slightly over the next seven decades, hitting a low of 617,761 in the 1970 census, with 642,200 in the 2000 census. In the 21st Century North Dakota has experienced significant growth reaching a record population of 783,926 in 2023. Except for Native Americans, the North Dakota population has a lesser percentage of minorities than in the nation as a whole. As of 2011, 20.7% of North Dakota&#x27;s population younger than age1 were minorities. The center of population of North Dakota is in Wells County, near Sykeston.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2023 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 784 homeless people in North Dakota.

===Race and ethnicity===

&quot;Note: Births in table don&#x27;t add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number&quot;.

&quot;Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one Hispanic group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.&quot;

Throughout the mid-19th century, Dakota Territory was still dominated by Native Americans; warfare and disease reduced their population at the same time Europeans and Americans were settling in the area. Throughout the latter half of the nineteenth century and into the early twentieth century, North Dakota, along with most of the Midwest U.S., experienced a mass influx of newcomers from both the eastern United States and immigrants from Europe. North Dakota was a known popular destination for immigrant farmers and general laborers and their families, mostly from Norway, Iceland, Sweden, Germany and the United Kingdom. Much of this settlement gravitated throughout the western side of the Red River Valley, as was similarly seen in South Dakota and in a parallel manner in Minnesota. This area is well known for its fertile lands. By the outbreak of the First World War, this was among North America&#x27;s richest farming regions. But a period of higher rainfall ended, and many migrants were not successful in the arid conditions. Many family plots were too small to farm successfully.

From the 1930s until the end of the 20th century, North Dakota&#x27;s population gradually declined, interrupted by a couple of brief increases. Young adults with university degrees were particularly likely to leave the state. With the advancing process of mechanization of agricultural practices, and environmental conditions requiring larger landholdings for successful agriculture, subsistence farming proved to be too risky for families. Many people moved to urban areas for jobs.

Since the late 20th century, one of the major causes of migration from North Dakota is the lack of skilled jobs for college graduates. Expansion of economic development programs has been urged to create skilled and high-tech jobs, but the effectiveness of such programs has been open to debate. During the first decade of the 21st century, the population increased in large part because of jobs in the oil industry related to development of unconventional tight oil (shale oil) fields. Elsewhere, the Native American population has increased as some reservations have attracted people back from urban areas.

According to the 2010 census, the racial and ethnic composition of North Dakota was 88.7% non-Hispanic white, 5.4% Native American, 1.2% Black or African American, 1.0% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.5% some other race, and 0.2% from two or more races. At the 2019 American Community Survey, North Dakota&#x27;s racial and ethnic makeup was 83.6% non-Hispanic white, 2.9% Black or African American, 5.0% Native American and Alaska Native, 1.4% Asian, 0.4% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, 0.1% some other race, 2.7% multiracial, and 4.0% Hispanic or Latin American of any race.

North Dakota is one of the top resettlement locations for refugees proportionally. According to the U.S. Office of Refugee Resettlement, in 2013–2014 &quot;more than 68 refugees&quot; per 100,000 North Dakotans were settled in the state. In fiscal year 2014, 582 refugees settled in the state. Fargo Mayor Mahoney said North Dakota accepting the most refugees per capita should be celebrated given the benefits they bring to the state. In 2015, Lutheran Social Services of North Dakota, the state&#x27;s only resettlement agency, was &quot;awarded $458,090 in federal funding to improve refugee services&quot;. 29.8% of immigrants in North Dakota are from Africa leading to a rapid increase in the black proportion of the population in recent decades from 0.6% in 2000 to 3.9% in 2020.

Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 3,323 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 21,110 people. Of the residents of North Dakota in 2009, 69.8% were born in North Dakota, 27.2% were born in a different state, 0.6% were born in Puerto Rico, U.S. Island areas, or born abroad to American parent(s), and 2.4% were born in another country. The age and gender distributions approximate the national average. In 2019, 4.1% were foreign-born residents. The Philippines, Bhutan, Nepal, Canada and Liberia are the top countries of origin for North Dakota&#x27;s immigrants.

===Native American tribes===
The five federally recognized tribes in North Dakota are Mandan, Hidatsa, &amp; Arikara Nation (Three Affiliated Tribes), the Spirit Lake Nation, the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and the Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate Nation.

===Languages===

In 2010, 94.86% (584,496) of North Dakotans over 5 years old spoke English as their primary language. 5.14% (31,684) of North Dakotans spoke a language other than English. 1.39% (8,593) spoke German, 1.37% (8,432) spoke Spanish, and 0.30% (1,847) spoke Norwegian. Other languages spoken included Serbo-Croatian (0.19%), Chinese and Japanese (both 0.15%), and Native American languages and French (both 0.13%). In 2000, 2.5% of the population spoke German in addition to English, reflecting early 20th century immigration.

In 1940, (355,400) of North Dakotans spoke English, (128,700) spoke German, (81,300) spoke Norwegian, (12,600) spoke Swedish, and (54,640) spoke some other language.

===Religion===


The Pew Research Center determined 77% of the adult population was Christian in 2014. In contrast with many southern U.S. states, mainline Protestantism was the largest form of Protestantism practiced (28%). The largest mainline Protestant denomination in North Dakota was the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, and the United Methodist Church was the second largest. Evangelical Protestants, forming the second largest Protestant branch (22%), were also dominated by Lutherans; the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod was the largest Evangelical denomination. Among the Christian population of North Dakota, the Roman Catholic Church was the single largest Christian denomination. According to the Public Religion Research Institute in 2020, 75% of the adult population were Christian, with mainline Protestantism remaining the majority and evangelical Protestantism at 18% of the population. In 2022, the Public Religion Research Institute determined 80% of the population were Christian.

Per the Pew Research Center in 2014, non-Christian religions accounted for 3% of the adult population, with Islam being the largest non-Christian religion. Other faiths such as Unitarians and New Agers collectively made up 1% of the practicing population. At the 2014 survey, 20% were unaffiliated with any religion, and 2% of North Dakotans were atheist; 13% of the population practiced nothing in particular. The 2020 Public Religion Research Institute&#x27;s survey determined 22% were unaffiliated with any religion, and 12% in 2022.

The largest church bodies by number of adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church with 167,349; the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 163,209; and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod with 22,003. In 2006, North Dakota had the most churches per capita of any state. Additionally, North Dakota had the highest percentage of church-going population of any state in 2006. By 2020, the Association of Religion Data Archives numbered 164,843, remaining the largest Christian body by attendance; it had an adherence rate of 211.58 per 1,000 people.

A 2001 survey indicated 35% of North Dakota&#x27;s population was Lutheran, and 30% was Catholic. Other religious groups represented were Methodists (7%), Baptists (6%), the Assemblies of God (3%), Presbyterians (1.27%), and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses (1%). Christians with unstated or other denominational affiliations, including other Protestants and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), totaled 3%, bringing the total Christian population to 86%. There were an estimated 920 Muslims and 730 Jews in the state in 2000. Three percent of respondents answered &quot;no religion&quot; on the survey, and 6% declined to answer.

==Economy==


Agriculture is North Dakota&#x27;s largest industry, although petroleum, food processing, and technology are also major industries. Its growth rate is about 4.1%. According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis the economy of North Dakota had a gross domestic product of $55.180 billion in the second quarter of 2018. The per capita income for the state was $34,256, when measured from 2013 to 2017 by the United States Department of Commerce. The three-year median household income from 2013 to 2017 was $61,285.

According to Gallup data, North Dakota led the U.S. in job creation in 2013 and has done so since 2009. The state has a Job Creation Index score of 40, nearly 10 points ahead of its nearest competitors. North Dakota has added 56,600 private-sector jobs since 2011, creating an annual growth rate of 7.32 percent. According to statistics released in December 2020, by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, North Dakota had the highest rate of annual growth in personal consumption expenditures of all 50 states, from 2009 to 2018. During this time period, annual nominal personal income growth averaged 6% per year, compared to the U.S. average of 4.4%. North Dakota&#x27;s personal income growth is tied to various private business sectors such as agriculture, energy development, and construction. North Dakota also had the highest growth in personal expenditures on housing and utilities of all states, reflecting the sharply increased demand for housing in the 2010s.

Just over 21% of North Dakota&#x27;s total 2013 gross domestic product (GDP) of $49.77 billion comes from natural resources and mining.

North Dakota is the only state with a state-owned bank, the Bank of North Dakota in Bismarck, and a state-owned flour mill, the North Dakota Mill and Elevator in Grand Forks. These were established by the NPL before World War II.

As of 2012, Fargo is home to the second-largest campus of Microsoft with 1,700 employees, and Amazon.com employs several hundred in Grand Forks.

, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate is among the lowest in the nation at 2.4 percent. With the exception of a five-month period in 2020, the unemployment rate remained below five percent each month since 1987. At end of 2010, the state per capita income was ranked 17th in the nation, the biggest increase of any state in a decade from rank 38th. The reduction in the unemployment rate and growth in per capita income is attributable to the oil boom in the state. Due to a combination of oil-related development and investing in technology and service industries, North Dakota has had a budget surplus every year since the 2008 market crash.

Since 1976, the highest that North Dakota&#x27;s unemployment rate has reached is just 6.2%, recorded in 1983. Every U.S. state except neighboring South Dakota has had a higher unemployment rate during that period.

===Agriculture===

North Dakota&#x27;s earliest industries were fur trading and agriculture. Although less than 10% of the population is employed in the agricultural sector, it remains a major part of the state&#x27;s economy. With industrial-scale farming, it ranks 9th in the nation in the value of crops and 18th in total value of agricultural products sold. Large farms generate the most crops. The share of people in the state employed in agriculture is comparatively high: , only two to three percent of the population of the United States is directly employed in agriculture. North Dakota has about 90% of its land area in farms with of cropland, the third-largest amount in the nation. Between 2002 and 2007, total cropland increased by about a million acres (4,000 km2); North Dakota was the only state showing an increase. Over the same period, were shifted into soybean and corn monoculture production, the largest such shift in the United States. Agriculturalists are concerned about too much monoculture, as it makes the economy at risk from insect or crop diseases affecting a major crop. In addition, this development has adversely affected habitats of wildlife and birds, and the balance of the ecosystem.

The state is the largest producer in the U.S. of many cereal grains, including barley (36% of U.S. crop), durum wheat (58%), hard red spring wheat (48%), oats (17%), and combined wheat of all types (15%). It is the second leading producer of buckwheat (20%). , corn became the state&#x27;s largest crop produced, although it is only 2% of total U.S. production. The Corn Belt extends to North Dakota but is more on the edge of the region instead of in its center. Corn yields are high in the southeast part of the state and smaller in other parts of the state. Most of the cereal grains are grown for livestock feed.
The state is the leading producer of many oilseeds, including 92% of the U.S. canola crop, 94% of flax seed, 53% of sunflower seeds, 18% of safflower seeds, and 62% of mustard seed. Canola is suited to the cold winters and it matures fast. Processing of canola for oil production produces canola meal as a by-product. The by-product is a high-protein animal feed.

Soybeans are also an increasingly important crop, with additional planted between 2002 and 2007. Soybeans are a major crop in the eastern part of the state, and cultivation is common in the southeast part of the state. Soybeans were not grown at all in North Dakota in the 1940s, but the crop has become especially common since 1998. In North Dakota soybeans have to mature fast, because of the comparatively short growing season. Soybeans are grown for livestock feed.

North Dakota is the second leading producer of sugarbeets, which are grown mostly in the Red River Valley. The state is also the largest producer of honey, dry edible peas and beans, lentils, and the third-largest producer of potatoes.

North Dakota&#x27;s Top Agricultural Commodities (according to the USDA )

===Energy===

The energy industry is a major contributor to the economy. North Dakota has both coal and oil reserves. On average, the state&#x27;s production of oil production grew at average annual rate of 48.4% from 2009 to 2018. During these years, oil production increased each year from 2009 to 2015, with 2016 marked by a slight decline and a return to growth since. Shale gas is also produced. Lignite coal reserves in Western North Dakota are used to generate about 90% of the electricity consumed, and electricity is also exported to nearby states. North Dakota has the second largest lignite coal production in the U.S. However, lignite coal is the lowest grade coal. There are larger and higher grade coal reserves (anthracite, bituminous coal and subbituminous coal) in other U.S. states.

Oil was discovered near Tioga in 1951, generating of oil a year by 1984. Recoverable oil reserves have jumped dramatically recently. The oil reserves of the Bakken Formation may hold up to of oil, 25 times larger than the reserves in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. A report issued in April 2008 by the U.S. Geological Survey estimates the oil recoverable by current technology in the Bakken formation is two orders of magnitude less, in the range of to , with a mean of .

The northwestern part of the state is the center of the North Dakota oil boom. The Williston, Tioga, Stanley and Minot-Burlington communities are having rapid growth that strains housing and local services. , the state is the 2nd-largest oil producer in the U.S., with an average of per day while producing per day of natural gas for a total of of oil equivalent (BOE).

The Great Plains region, which includes the state of North Dakota, has been referred to as &quot;the Saudi Arabia of wind energy&quot;. Development of wind energy in North Dakota has been cost effective because the state has large rural expanses and wind speeds seldom go below .

===Tourism===
North Dakota is considered the least visited state, owing, in part, to its not having a major tourist attraction. 
Nonetheless, tourism is North Dakota&#x27;s third largest industry, contributing more than $3 billion into the state&#x27;s economy annually. Outdoor attractions like the 144-mile (232 km) Maah Daah Hey Trail and activities like fishing and hunting attract visitors. The state is known for the Lewis &amp; Clark Trail and being the winter camp of the Corps of Discovery. Areas popular with visitors include Theodore Roosevelt National Park in the western part of the state. The park often exceeds 475,000 visitors each year.

Regular events in the state that attract tourists include &quot;Norsk Høstfest&quot; in Minot, billed as North America&#x27;s largest Scandinavian festival; the Medora Musical; and the North Dakota State Fair. The state also receives a significant number of visitors from the neighboring Canadian provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan, particularly when the exchange rate is favorable.

International tourists now also come to visit the Oscar-Zero Missile Alert Facility.

===Health care===

North Dakota has one level-I trauma center, six level-II trauma centers, 44 hospitals, 52 rural health clinics, and 80 nursing homes. Major provider networks include Sanford, St. Alexius, Trinity, and Altru.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Dakota is the largest medical insurer in the state. North Dakota expanded Medicaid in 2014, and its health insurance exchange is the federal site, HealthCare.gov.

North Dakota law requires pharmacies, other than hospital dispensaries and pre-existing stores, to be majority-owned by pharmacists. Voters rejected a proposal to change the law in 2014.

==Culture==

===Native American First Nations===

In the 21st century, North Dakota has an increasing population of Native Americans, who in 2010 made up 5.44% of the population. By the early 19th century the territory was dominated by Siouan-speaking peoples, whose territory stretched west from the Great Lakes area. The word &quot;Dakota&quot; is a Sioux (Lakota/Dakota) word meaning &quot;allies&quot; or &quot;friends&quot;.

The primary historic tribal nations in or around North Dakota, are the Lakota and the Dakota (&quot;The Great Sioux Nation&quot; or &quot;Oceti Sakowin&quot;, meaning the seven council fires), the Blackfoot, the Cheyenne, the Chippewa (known as Ojibwe in Canada), and the Mandan. There are six Indian reservations in North Dakota--Spirit Lake Tribe, Standing Rock Indian Reservation, Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate, Fort Berthold Indian Reservation, Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation, and The Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation.

===Pow wows===

Social gatherings known as &quot;powwows&quot; (or wacipis in Lakota/Dakota) continue to be an important part of Native American culture and are held regularly throughout the state. Throughout Native American history, powwows were held, usually in the spring, to rejoice at the beginning of new life and the end of the winter cold. These events brought Native American tribes together for singing and dancing and allowed them to meet with old friends and acquaintances, as well as to make new ones. Many powwows also held religious significance for some tribes. Today, powwows are still a part of the Native American culture and are attended by Natives and non-Natives alike. In North Dakota, the United Tribes International Powwow held each September in the capital of Bismarck, is one of the largest powwows in the United States.

A pow wow is an occasion for parades and Native American dancers in regalia, with many dancing styles presented. It is traditional for male dancers to wear regalia decorated with beads, quills, and eagle feathers; male grass dancers wear colorful fringe regalia, and male fancy dancers wear brightly colored feathers. Female dancers dance much more subtly than male dancers. Fancy female dancers wear cloth, beaded moccasins, and jewelry, while the jingle dress dancer wears a dress made of metal cones. Inter-tribal dances during the powwow, allow everyone (even spectators) to take part in the dancing.

===Norwegian and Icelandic influences===

Around 1870 many European immigrants from Norway settled in North Dakota&#x27;s northeastern corner, especially near the Red River. Icelanders also arrived from Canada. Pembina was a town of many Norwegians when it was founded; they worked on family farms. They started Lutheran churches and schools, greatly outnumbering other denominations in the area. This group has unique foods such as &quot;lefse&quot; and &quot;lutefisk&quot;. The continent&#x27;s largest Scandinavian event, &quot;Norsk Høstfest&quot;, is celebrated each September in Minot&#x27;s North Dakota State Fair Center, a local attraction featuring art, architecture, and cultural artifacts from all five Nordic countries. The Icelandic State Park in Pembina County and an annual Icelandic festival reflect immigrants from that country, who are also descended from Scandinavians.

Old World folk customs have persisted for decades in North Dakota, with the revival of techniques in weaving, silver crafting, and wood carving. Traditional turf-roof houses are displayed in parks; this style originated in Iceland. A stave church is a landmark in Minot. Norwegian-Americans constitute nearly one-third or 32.3% of Minot&#x27;s total population and 30.8% of North Dakota&#x27;s total population.

===Germans from Russia===

Ethnic Germans who had settled in Russia for several generations since the reign of Catherine the Great grew dissatisfied in the nineteenth century because of economic problems and because of the revocation of religious freedoms for Mennonites and Hutterites, in particular the revocation of exemption from military service in 1871. Most Mennonites and Hutterites migrated to America in the late 1870s. By 1900, about 100,000 had immigrated to the U.S., settling primarily in North Dakota, South Dakota, Kansas, and Nebraska. The south-central part of North Dakota became known as &quot;the German-Russian triangle&quot;. By 1910, about 60,000 ethnic Germans from Russia lived in Central North Dakota. These individuals were Lutherans, Mennonites, Hutterites and Roman Catholics who had kept most of their German customs of the time when their ancestors immigrated to Russia. They were committed to agriculture. Traditional iron cemetery grave markers are a famous art form practiced by ethnic Germans.

===Fine and performing arts===

North Dakota&#x27;s major fine art museums and venues include the Chester Fritz Auditorium, Empire Arts Center, the Fargo Theatre, North Dakota Museum of Art, and the Plains Art Museum. The Bismarck-Mandan Symphony Orchestra, Fargo-Moorhead Symphony Orchestra, Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra, Minot Symphony Orchestra and Great Plains Harmony Chorus are full-time professional and semi-professional musical ensembles who perform concerts and offer educational programs to their communities.

===Entertainment===

North Dakotan musicians of many genres include blues guitarist Jonny Lang, country music singer Lynn Anderson, jazz and traditional pop singer and songwriter Peggy Lee, big band leader Lawrence Welk, and pop singer Bobby Vee.

Hollywood and TV star Angie Dickinson was born in Kulm and moved to Burbank, California as a ten-year-old. Ed Schultz was known around the country as the host of progressive talk radio show, &quot;The Ed Schultz Show&quot;, and &quot;The Ed Show&quot; on MSNBC. Shadoe Stevens hosted &quot;American Top 40&quot; from 1988 to 1995. Josh Duhamel is an Emmy Award-winning actor known for his roles in &quot;All My Children&quot; and &quot;Las Vegas&quot;. Nicole Linkletter and CariDee English were winning contestants of Cycles 5 and 7, respectively, of &quot;America&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot;. Kellan Lutz has appeared in movies such as &quot;Stick It&quot;, &quot;Accepted&quot;, &quot;Prom Night&quot;, and &quot;Twilight&quot;.

North Dakota has the largest population of clowns in the United States.

===Cuisine===

===Sports===

Bismarck was home of the Dakota Wizards of the NBA Development League, and currently hosts the Bismarck Bucks of the Indoor Football League.

North Dakota has two NCAA Division I teams, the North Dakota Fighting Hawks and North Dakota State Bison, and two Division II teams, the Mary Marauders and Minot State Beavers.

Fargo is home to the USHL ice hockey team the Fargo Force. Fargo is also the home of the Fargo-Moorhead RedHawks of the American Association.

The North Dakota High School Activities Association features more than 25,000 participants.

Outdoor activities such as hunting and fishing are hobbies for many North Dakotans. Ice fishing, skiing, and snowmobiling are also popular during the winter months. Residents of North Dakota may own or visit a cabin along a lake. Popular sport fish include walleye, perch, and northern pike.

The western terminus of the North Country National Scenic Trail is on Lake Sakakawea, where it abuts the Lewis and Clark Trail.

==Media==
The state has 10 daily newspapers, the largest being &quot;The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead&quot;. Other weekly and monthly publications (most of which are fully supported by advertising) are also available. The most prominent of these is the alternative weekly &quot;High Plains Reader&quot;.

The state&#x27;s oldest radio station, WDAY-AM, was launched on May 23, 1922. North Dakota&#x27;s three major radio markets center around Fargo, Bismarck, and Grand Forks, though stations broadcast in every region of the state. Several new stations were built in Williston in the early 2010s. North Dakota has 34 AM and 88 FM radio stations. KFGO in Fargo has the largest audience.

Broadcast television in North Dakota started on April 3, 1953, when KCJB-TV (now KXMC-TV) in Minot started operations. North Dakota&#x27;s television media markets are Fargo-Grand Forks (117th largest nationally), including the eastern half of the state, and Minot-Bismarck (152nd), making up the western half of the state. There are currently 31 full-power television stations, arranged into 10 networks, with 17 digital subchannels.

Public broadcasting in North Dakota is provided by Prairie Public, with statewide television and radio networks affiliated with PBS and NPR. Public access television stations open to community programming are offered on cable systems in Bismarck, Dickinson, Fargo, and Jamestown.

==Education==
===Higher education===

The state has 11 public colleges and universities, five tribal community colleges, and four private schools. The largest institutions are North Dakota State University and the University of North Dakota.

The higher education system consists of the following institutions:

North Dakota University System (public institutions):

:* Bismarck State College in Bismarck
:* Dickinson State University in Dickinson
:* Lake Region State College in Devils Lake
:* Mayville State University in Mayville
:* Minot State University in Minot
:* Dakota College at Bottineau in Bottineau
:* North Dakota State University in Fargo
:* North Dakota State College of Science in Wahpeton and Fargo
:* University of North Dakota in Grand Forks
:* Valley City State University in Valley City
:* Williston State College in Williston
Tribal institutions:

:* Cankdeska Cikana Community College in Fort Totten
:* Fort Berthold Community College in New Town
:* Sitting Bull College in Fort Yates
:* Turtle Mountain Community College in Belcourt
:* United Tribes Technical College in Bismarck
Private institutions:

:* University of Mary in Bismarck
:* University of Jamestown in Jamestown
:* Rasmussen College in Fargo
:* Trinity Bible College in Ellendale
===Primary and secondary education===

There were 142 schools in North Dakota cities and 4,722 one room schools in the state in 1917. The urban schools had 36,008 students, and 83,167 students attended the one room schools. 1,889 of the one room schools closed between 1929 and 1954. In 1954 North Dakotan cities had 513 schools while 2,447 one room schools were in the state. At that time the urban schools had 94,019 students while the one room schools had 25,212 students. The Nation&#x27;s Report Card ranks North Dakota fifteenth in the country in K-12 education based on standardized test scores.

==Emergency services==

The North Dakota Department of Emergency Services provides 24/7 communication and coordination for more than 50 agencies. In addition, &quot;it administers federal disaster recovery programs and the Homeland Security Grant Program&quot;. In 2011, the Department selected Geo-Comm, Inc. &quot;for the Statewide Seamless Base Map Project&quot;, which will facilitate &quot;identifying locations 9–1–1 callers&quot; and route emergency calls based on locations. In 1993 the state adopted the Burkle addressing system numbering rural roads and buildings to aid in the delivery of emergency services.

==Transportation==


Transportation in North Dakota is overseen by the North Dakota Department of Transportation. The major Interstate highways are Interstate 29 and Interstate 94, with I-29 and I-94 meeting at Fargo, with I-29 oriented north to south along the eastern edge of the state, and I-94 bisecting the state from east to west between Minnesota and Montana. A unique feature of the North Dakota Interstate Highway system is virtually all of it is paved in concrete, not blacktop, because of the extreme weather conditions it must endure. BNSF and the Canadian Pacific Railway operate the state&#x27;s largest rail systems. Many branch lines formerly used by BNSF and Canadian Pacific Railway are now operated by the Dakota, Missouri Valley and Western Railroad and the Red River Valley and Western Railroad.

North Dakota&#x27;s principal airports are the Hector International Airport (FAR) in Fargo, Grand Forks International Airport (GFK), Bismarck Municipal Airport (BIS), Minot International Airport (MOT) and Williston Basin International Airport (XWA) in Williston.

Amtrak&#x27;s Empire Builder runs through North Dakota, making stops at Fargo (2:13 am westbound, 3:35 am eastbound), Grand Forks (4:52 am westbound, 12:57 am eastbound), Minot (around 9 am westbound and around 9:30 pm eastbound), and four other stations. It is the descendant of the famous line of the same name run by the Great Northern Railway, which was built by the tycoon James J. Hill and ran from St. Paul to Seattle.

Intercity bus service is provided by Greyhound and Jefferson Lines. Public transit in North Dakota includes daily fixed-route bus systems in Fargo, Bismarck-Mandan, Grand Forks, and Minot, paratransit service in 57 communities, along with multi-county rural transit systems.

==Law and government==

As with the federal government of the United States, political power in North Dakota state government is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.

The Constitution of North Dakota and the North Dakota Century Code form the formal law of the state; the &quot;North Dakota Administrative Code&quot; incorporates additional rules and policies of state agencies.

In a 2020 study, North Dakota was ranked as the 8th easiest state for citizens to vote in.

===Executive===

The executive branch is headed by the elected governor. The current governor is Kelly Armstrong, a Republican who took office December 15, 2024, after his predecessor, Doug Burgum did not seek reelection and was subsequently nominated to be United States Secretary of the Interior. The current Lieutenant Governor of North Dakota is Michelle Strinden, who is also the President of the Senate. The offices of governor and lieutenant governor have four-year terms, which are next up for election in 2028. The governor has a cabinet consisting of appointed leaders of various state government agencies, called commissioners. The other elected constitutional offices are secretary of state, attorney general, state auditor, state insurance commissioner and state treasurer.

===Legislative===

The North Dakota Legislative Assembly is a bicameral body consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives. The state has 47 districts, each with one senator and two representatives. Both senators and representatives are elected to four-year terms. The state&#x27;s legal code is named the North Dakota Century Code.

===Judicial===

North Dakota&#x27;s court system has four levels, one of which is dormant. Municipal courts serve the cities. Decisions from municipal courts are generally appealable to district court. Most cases start in the district courts, which are courts of general jurisdiction. There are 42 district court judges in seven judicial districts. Appeals from final district court decisions are made to the North Dakota Supreme Court. An intermediate court of appeals was provided for by statute in 1987, but the North Dakota Court of Appeals has only heard 65 cases since its inception. The North Dakota Court of Appeals is essentially dormant, but capable of meeting if the North Dakota Supreme Court&#x27;s case load necessitates the reestablishment of intermediate review.

===Indian tribes and reservations===
Historically, North Dakota was populated by the Mandan, Hidatsa, Lakota, and Ojibwe, and later by the Sanish and Métis. Today, five federally recognized tribes within the boundaries of North Dakota have independent, sovereign relationships with the federal government and territorial reservations:

* Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation, Fort Berthold Reservation;
* Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate, Lake Traverse Indian Reservation;
* Standing Rock Sioux, Standing Rock Indian Reservation;
* Spirit Lake Tribe, Spirit Lake Reservation; and
* Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians, Turtle Mountain Reservation.

===Federal===

North Dakota&#x27;s United States Senators are John Hoeven (R) and Kevin Cramer (R). The state has one at-large congressional district represented by Representative Julie Fedorchak (R).

Federal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for the District of North Dakota, which holds court in Bismarck, Fargo, Grand Forks, and Minot. Appeals are heard by the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals based in St. Louis, Missouri.

===Politics===
MIT&#x27;s Election Performance Index ranked North Dakota #1 in overall election administration policy and performance in the 2018, 2014, 2012, 2010, and 2008 elections. 

The major political parties in North Dakota are the Democratic-NPL and the Republican Party. , the Constitution Party and the Libertarian Party are also organized parties in the state.

At the state level, the governorship has been held by the Republican Party since 1992, along with a majority of the state legislature and statewide officers. Dem-NPL showings were strong in the 2000 governor&#x27;s race, and in the 2006 legislative elections, but the League has not had a major breakthrough since the administration of former state governor George Sinner.

The Republican Party presidential candidate usually carries the state by a considerable margin; in 2020, Donald Trump won over 65% of the vote. Of all the Democratic presidential candidates since 1892, only Grover Cleveland (1892, one of three votes), Woodrow Wilson (1912 and 1916), Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932 and 1936), and Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) received Electoral College votes from North Dakota.

On the other hand, Dem-NPL candidates for North Dakota&#x27;s federal Senate and House seats won every election between 1982 and 2008, and the state&#x27;s federal delegation was entirely Democratic from 1987 to 2011. However, both of the current U.S. senators, John Hoeven and Kevin Cramer, are Republicans, as is the sole House member, Julie Fedorchak.

A six-week abortion ban is active in North Dakota. Despite this, a simple majority of the state&#x27;s citizens oppose the legislation.

===State taxes===

North Dakota has a slightly progressive income tax structure; the five brackets of state income tax rates are 1.1%, 2.04%, 2.27%, 2.64%, and 2.90% as of 2017. In 2005 North Dakota ranked 22nd highest by per capita state taxes. The sales tax in North Dakota is 6% for most items. The state allows municipalities to institute local sales taxes and special local taxes, such as the 1.75% supplemental sales tax in Grand Forks. Excise taxes are levied on the purchase price or market value of aircraft registered in North Dakota. The state imposes a use tax on items purchased elsewhere but used within North Dakota. Owners of real property in North Dakota pay property tax to their county, municipality, school district, and special taxing districts.

The Tax Foundation ranks North Dakota as the state with the 20th most &quot;business friendly&quot; tax climate in the nation. Tax Freedom Day arrives on April 1, 10 days earlier than the national Tax Freedom Day. In 2006, North Dakota was the state with the lowest number of returns filed by taxpayers with an adjusted gross income of over $1M—only 333.

==Notable people==

* Lynn Anderson, country music singer
* Sam Anderson, actor
* Carmen Berg, Playboy Playmate, July 1987
* Brian Bohrer, minister and author
* Paula Broadwell, American writer, academic and former military officer
* James Buchli, former NASA astronaut
* Quentin Burdick, former U.S. Senator, third longest-serving Senator among current members of this body
* Doug Burgum, United States Secretary of the Interior, former Governor of North Dakota, and candidate for president
* Warren Christopher, former U.S. Secretary of State, diplomat and lawyer
* Shannon Curfman, American blues-rock guitarist and singer
* Angie Dickinson, Golden Globe-winning television and film actress
* Josh Duhamel, Emmy Award-winning actor and former male fashion model
* Carl Ben Eielson, aviator, bush pilot and explorer
* CariDee English, winner of Cycle 7 on &quot;America&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot;. Host of &quot;Pretty Wicked&quot;
* Louise Erdrich, Native American author of novels, poetry, and children&#x27;s books
* Darin Erstad, MLB all-star and World Series Champion
* Travis Hafner, Former MLB Designated Hitter for the Cleveland Indians
* Richard Hieb, former NASA astronaut
* Clint Hill, United States Secret Service agent who was in the presidential motorcade during the assassination of John F. Kennedy
* Virgil Hill, former WBA World Cruiserweight champion and Olympic boxer
* Phil Jackson, former basketball coach who won 11 NBA championships in his coaching career
* David C. Jones, 9th chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff
* Gordon Kahl, tax protester best known for the Medina shootout in 1983
* Chuck Klosterman, writer, journalist, critic, humorist, and essayist whose work often focuses on pop culture
* Louis L&#x27;Amour, author of primarily Western fiction
* Jonny Lang, Grammy-winning blues guitarist and singer.
* Peggy Lee, jazz and traditional pop singer and songwriter
* Nicole Linkletter, winner of Cycle 5 on America&#x27;s Next Top Model
* Kellan Lutz, actor who portrays Emmett Cullen in &quot;Twilight&quot; and &quot;New Moon&quot;. Former male fashion model
* Roger Maris, right fielder in Major League Baseball and former single season home run record holder
* Connor McGovern, professional football player for the Denver Broncos and the New York Jets
* Cara Mund, Miss America 2018
* Thomas McGrath, poet and political activist
* Michael H. Miller, 61st Superintendent of the United States Naval Academy
* Griffin Neal, professional football player for the New Orleans Saints
* Mancur Olson, economist
* Alan Ritchson, participant in 3rd season of &quot;American Idol&quot;, singer, model and actor
* Sakakawea, who joined Lewis and Clark on their expedition
* Ed Schultz, host of &quot;The Ed Schultz Show&quot;
* Eric Sevareid, CBS news journalist
* Ann Sothern, Oscar nominated film and television actress
* Richard St. Clair, Harvard-educated composer of modern classical music
* Shadoe Stevens, host of &quot;American Top 40&quot;
* Bobby Vee, pop music singer
* Lawrence Welk, musician, accordion player, bandleader, and television impresario
* Carson Wentz, professional football player for the Kansas City Chiefs

==See also==
* Index of North Dakota-related articles
* Outline of North Dakota
* 

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* Arends, Shirley Fischer. &quot;The Central Dakota Germans: Their History, Language, and Culture.&quot; (1989). 289 pp.
* Berg, Francie M., ed. &quot;Ethnic Heritage in North Dakota.&quot; (1983). 174 pp.
* Blackorby, Edward C. &quot;Prairie Rebel: The Public Life of William Lemke&quot; (1963), a radical leader in 1930s online edition 
* Collins, Michael L. &quot;That Damned Cowboy: Theodore Roosevelt and the American West, 1883–1898&quot; (1989). 
* Cooper, Jerry and Smith, Glen. &quot;Citizens as Soldiers: A History of the North Dakota National Guard.&quot; (1986). 447 pp.
* Crawford, Lewis F. &quot;History of North Dakota&quot; (3 vol 1931), excellent history in vol 1; biographies in vol. 2–3
* Danbom, David B. &quot;&quot;Our Purpose Is to Serve&quot;: The First Century of the North Dakota Agricultural Experiment Station.&quot; (1990). 237 pp.
* Eisenberg, C. G. &quot;History of the First Dakota-District of the Evangelical-Lutheran Synod of Iowa and the Other States.&quot; (1982). 268 pp.
* Ginsburg, Faye D. &quot;Contested Lives: The Abortion Debate in an American Community&quot; (1989). 315 pp. the issue in Fargo
* Hargreaves, Mary W. M. &quot;Dry Farming in the Northern Great Plains: Years of Readjustment, 1920–1990.&quot; (1993). 386 pp.
* Howard, Thomas W., ed. &quot;The North Dakota Political Tradition.&quot; (1981). 220 pp.
* Hudson, John C. &quot;Plains Country Towns.&quot; (1985). 189 pp. geographer studies small towns
* Junker, Rozanne Enerson. &quot;The Bank of North Dakota: An Experiment in State Ownership.&quot; (1989). 185 pp.
* Lamar, Howard R. &quot;Dakota Territory, 1861–1889: A Study of Frontier Politics&quot; (1956).
* Lounsberry, Clement A. &quot;Early history of North Dakota&quot; (1919) excellent history by an editor of &quot;Bismarck Tribune&quot;; 645pp online edition
* Lysengen, Janet Daley and Rathke, Ann M., eds. &quot;The Centennial Anthology of &quot;North Dakota History: Journal of the Northern Plains&quot;&quot; (1996). 526 pp. articles from state history journal covering all major topics in the state&#x27;s history
* Morlan, Robert L. &quot;Political Prairie Fire: The Nonpartisan League, 1915–1922.&quot; (1955). 414 pp. NPL comes to power briefly
* Peirce, Neal R. &quot;The Great Plains States of America: People, Politics, and Power in the Nine Great Plains States&quot; (1973) excerpt and text ssearch, chapter on North Dakota
* Robinson, Elwyn B., D. Jerome Tweton, and David B. Danbom. &quot;History of North Dakota&quot; (2nd ed. 1995) standard history, by leading scholars; extensive bibliography
** Robinson, Elwyn B. &quot;History of North Dakota&quot; (1966) First edition online
* Schneider, Mary Jane. &quot;North Dakota Indians: An Introduction.&quot; (1986). 276 pp.
* Sherman, William C. and Thorson, Playford V., eds. &quot;Plains Folk: North Dakota&#x27;s Ethnic History.&quot; (1988). 419 pp.
* Sherman, William C. &quot;Prairie Mosaic: An Ethnic Atlas of Rural North Dakota.&quot; (1983). 152 pp.
* Smith, Glen H. &quot;Langer of North Dakota: A Study in Isolationism, 1940–1959.&quot; (1979). 238 pp. biography of influential conservative Senator
* Snortland, J. Signe, ed. &quot;A Traveler&#x27;s Companion to North Dakota State Historic Sites.&quot; (1996). 155 pp.
* Stock, Catherine McNicol. &quot;Main Street in Crisis: The Great Depression and the Old Middle Class on the Northern Plains.&quot; (1992). 305pp. online edition 
* Tauxe, Caroline S. &quot;Farms, Mines and Main Streets: Uneven Development in a Dakota County.&quot; (1993). 276 pp. coal and grain in Mercer County
* Tweton, D. Jerome and Jelliff, Theodore B. &quot;North Dakota: The Heritage of a People.&quot; (1976). 242 pp. textbook history
* Wilkins, Robert P. and Wilkins, Wynona Hachette. &quot;North Dakota: A Bicentennial History.&quot; (1977) 218 pp. popular history
* Wishart, David J. ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of the Great Plains&quot;, University of Nebraska Press, 2004, . complete text online; 900 pages of scholarly articles
* Young, Carrie. &quot;Prairie Cooks: Glorified Rice, Three-Day Buns, and Other Reminiscences.&quot; (1993). 136 pp.

===Primary sources===

* Benson, Bjorn; Hampsten, Elizabeth; and Sweney, Kathryn, eds. &quot;Day In, Day Out: Women&#x27;s Lives in North Dakota.&quot; (1988). 326 pp.
* Maximilian, Prince of Wied. &quot;Travels in the Interior of North America in the rears 1832 to 1834&quot; (Vols. XXII-XXIV of &quot;Early Western Travels, 1748–1846&quot;, ed. by Reuben Gold Thwaites; 1905–1906). Maximilian spent the winter of 1833–1834 at Fort Clark.
* the University of North Dakota, Bureau of Governmental Affairs, ed., &quot;A Compilation of North Dakota Political Party Platforms, 1884–1978.&quot; (1979). 388 pp.
* WPA. &quot;North Dakota: A Guide to the Northern Prairie State&quot; (2nd ed. 1950), the classic guide online edition

==External links==
* 
* USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of North Dakota
* North Dakota State Guide, from the Library of Congress
* North Dakota State Facts —USDA
* NETSTATE Geography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="0" end="12" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="33" end="43" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="51" end="64" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="93" end="99" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="100" end="105" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="151" end="163" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="168" end="176" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="216" end="225" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="239" end="251" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="270" end="277" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="319" end="331" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="363" end="370" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="373" end="379" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="391" end="398" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="400" end="408" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="444" end="462" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="19th-largest state"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="527" end="548" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="fourth-least populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="553" end="583" title="List of U.S. states by population density" label="fourth-most sparsely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="589" end="602" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="606" end="614" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q253074" start="625" end="643" title="List of cities in North Dakota" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="647" end="652" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="901" end="916" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285430" start="939" end="967" title="Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation" label="Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="978" end="992" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="998" end="1004" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="1009" end="1013" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="1062" end="1068" title="Assiniboine" label="Nakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="1070" end="1076" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="1082" end="1088" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="1322" end="1340" title="American Indian Wars" label="growing resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="1380" end="1396" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="1437" end="1453" title="American pioneer" label="American pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="1465" end="1486" title="Homestead Act of 1862" label="Homestead Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="1786" end="1802" title="Northern Pacific Railway" label="Northern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="1807" end="1821" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="1983" end="2000" title="Populist movement (United States, 19th Century)" label="Populist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="2045" end="2066" title="Admission to the Union" label="admitted to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="2127" end="2144" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365365" start="2549" end="2569" title="Bank of North Dakota" label="Bank of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="2668" end="2684" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349660" start="2755" end="2769" title="Extraction of petroleum" label="oil extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119891" start="2779" end="2795" title="Bakken formation" label="Bakken formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958771" start="2826" end="2836" title="North Dakota oil boom" label="major role"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="3031" end="3046" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q168420" start="3152" end="3157" title="Rugby, North Dakota" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="3228" end="3246" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6340111" start="3252" end="3259" title="KVLY-TV" label="KVLY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120886" start="3260" end="3264" title="KVLY-TV mast" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="3450" end="3463" title="Mandan people" label="Mandan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="3512" end="3519" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="3678" end="3690" title="Crow Nation" label="Crow Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="3859" end="3864" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="3870" end="3876" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="3882" end="3888" title="Dakota people" label="Santee"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="3897" end="3906" title="Assiniboine" label="Yanktonai"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="3912" end="3923" title="Assiniboine" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="3932" end="3943" title="Plains Cree people" label="Plains Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="4030" end="4046" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="4169" end="4177" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278535" start="4227" end="4241" title="Sheyenne River" label="Sheyenne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904674" start="4243" end="4260" title="Biesterfeldt Site" label="Biesterfeldt Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="4338" end="4347" title="Ojibwe" label="Chippewas"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="4456" end="4470" title="Cheyenne" label="Sotaio Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033473" start="4641" end="4657" title="Cannonball River" label="Cannonball River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="4841" end="4848" title="Arikara" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="5156" end="5171" title="French-Canadian" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q970183" start="5179" end="5217" title="Pierre Gaultier de Varennes, sieur de La Vérendrye" label="Pierre Gaultier, sieur de La Vérendrye"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="5267" end="5273" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="5367" end="5384" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="5409" end="5438" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="5527" end="5543" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="5594" end="5612" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408452" start="5675" end="5691" title="Red River Valley" label="Red River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="5722" end="5732" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q738395" start="5759" end="5777" title="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="5781" end="5802" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="5848" end="5873" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="5884" end="5917" title="Treaty of 1818" label="Anglo-American Convention of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="5980" end="5993" title="Canada–United States border" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q989288" start="6744" end="6751" title="Yankton, South Dakota" label="Yankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="7407" end="7419" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="7421" end="7428" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="7434" end="7444" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375151" start="7457" end="7477" title="Enabling Act of 1889" label="Enabling Act of 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="7540" end="7556" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="7573" end="7590" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q448778" start="7828" end="7843" title="James G. Blaine" label="James G. Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="8316" end="8326" title="immigrants" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651128" start="8381" end="8400" title="Non Partisan League" label="Non Partisan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8438" end="8449" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055001" start="8520" end="8536" title="North Dakota Democratic-Nonpartisan League Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8543" end="8555" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365365" start="8688" end="8708" title="Bank of North Dakota" label="Bank of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055029" start="8713" end="8743" title="North Dakota Mill and Elevator" label="North Dakota Mill and Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q359293" start="8838" end="8855" title="Soo Line Railroad" label="Soo Line Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696010" start="9546" end="9572" title="North Dakota State Capitol" label="North Dakota State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="9649" end="9658" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="9665" end="9673" title="art-deco" label="art-deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426217" start="9800" end="9812" title="Garrison Dam" label="Garrison Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114128" start="9821" end="9826" title="Minot Air Force Base" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577056" start="9831" end="9842" title="Grand Forks Air Force Base" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="9843" end="9852" title="United States Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="9896" end="9911" title="oil exploration" label="oil exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119891" start="10257" end="10274" title="Bakken formation" label="Bakken oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="10984" end="10997" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="11056" end="11080" title="North American continent" label="North American continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="11093" end="11099" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q168420" start="11173" end="11178" title="Rugby, North Dakota" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="11180" end="11188" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="11225" end="11230" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="11307" end="11319" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q156006" start="11342" end="11364" title="Red River of the North" label="Red River of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="11370" end="11379" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="11393" end="11405" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="11423" end="11430" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="11477" end="11489" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="11494" end="11502" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="11556" end="11569" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q168420" start="11593" end="11612" title="Rugby, North Dakota" label="Rugby, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="11817" end="11829" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="11866" end="11874" title="Badlands" label="Badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="11905" end="11919" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q590820" start="11950" end="11961" title="White Butte (North Dakota)" label="White Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137669" start="11971" end="12003" title="Theodore Roosevelt National Park" label="Theodore Roosevelt National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="12051" end="12062" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="12074" end="12085" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="12087" end="12096" title="petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="12101" end="12108" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="12119" end="12133" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801077" start="12140" end="12154" title="Lake Sakakawea" label="Lake Sakakawea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426217" start="12223" end="12235" title="Garrison Dam" label="Garrison Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307443" start="12290" end="12303" title="Drift Prairie" label="Drift Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q719852" start="12312" end="12328" title="Missouri Plateau" label="Missouri Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408452" start="12381" end="12397" title="Red River Valley" label="Red River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q390804" start="12421" end="12433" title="Lake Agassiz" label="Lake Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156006" start="12479" end="12488" title="Red River of the North" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272" start="12512" end="12525" title="Lake Winnipeg" label="Lake Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267424" start="12566" end="12577" title="Devils Lake (North Dakota)" label="Devils Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="12678" end="12687" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161910" start="12911" end="12924" title="Pembina Gorge State Recreation Area" label="Pembina Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22061147" start="12929" end="12947" title="Killdeer Mountains" label="Killdeer Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856432" start="12953" end="12969" title="Turtle Mountain (plateau)" label="Turtle Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="13466" end="13475" title="Petroleum" label="Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111190" start="14235" end="14264" title="List of birds of North Dakota" label="List of birds of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20749148" start="14481" end="14488" title="Avibase" label="Avibase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="14678" end="14688" title="Introduced species" label="introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870602" start="14708" end="14739" title="List of mammals of North Dakota" label="List of mammals of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="14882" end="14891" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q263706" start="14893" end="14902" title="swift fox" label="swift fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="14904" end="14911" title="caribou" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="14916" end="14928" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="15858" end="15877" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322138" start="16086" end="16109" title="Granville, North Dakota" label="Granville, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779807" start="16261" end="16268" title="Langdon, North Dakota" label="Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="16604" end="16629" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="16700" end="16706" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="16708" end="16715" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="16721" end="16728" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="17145" end="17161" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="17351" end="17371" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q48874" start="17394" end="17406" title="Wells County, North Dakota" label="Wells County"/>
<link wikidata="Q21849" start="17413" end="17421" title="Sykeston, North Dakota" label="Sykeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="17437" end="17440" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="17453" end="17486" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="17516" end="17524" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="17772" end="17786" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="18472" end="18478" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="18480" end="18487" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="18489" end="18495" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="18497" end="18504" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="18513" end="18527" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408452" start="18599" end="18615" title="Red River Valley" label="Red River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18764" end="18779" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822542" start="19926" end="19940" title="Unconventional (oil &amp;amp; gas) reservoir" label="unconventional"/>
<link wikidata="Q45734" start="19941" end="19950" title="tight oil" label="tight oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="20111" end="20122" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="20184" end="20202" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="20209" end="20224" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="20231" end="20256" title="African Americans" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="20263" end="20268" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="20275" end="20291" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="20329" end="20346" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="20360" end="20385" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="20643" end="20669" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="21471" end="21482" title="Immigration to the United States" label="Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="21983" end="21994" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="21996" end="22002" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="22004" end="22009" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="22011" end="22017" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="22022" end="22029" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="22475" end="22482" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="22492" end="22508" title="primary language" label="primary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="22600" end="22606" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="22628" end="22635" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="22661" end="22670" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="22704" end="22718" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="22728" end="22735" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="22740" end="22748" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="22767" end="22792" title="Native American languages" label="Native American languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22797" end="22803" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="23048" end="23055" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="23119" end="23138" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="23182" end="23191" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="23245" end="23264" title="mainline Protestant" label="mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="23392" end="23430" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="23440" end="23463" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="23603" end="23633" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="23814" end="23848" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="23957" end="23982" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="24215" end="24220" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="24284" end="24294" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="24299" end="24306" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24712" end="24733" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="25270" end="25278" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25342" end="25352" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="25359" end="25367" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="25378" end="25395" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="25402" end="25414" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="25429" end="25453" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="25539" end="25550" title="Mainline Protestant" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="25555" end="25602" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="25940" end="25955" title="food processing" label="food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="26047" end="26079" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="26328" end="26351" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="26397" end="26403" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850328" start="26504" end="26522" title="Job Creation Index" label="Job Creation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="26755" end="26782" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="27526" end="27537" title="public ownership" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365365" start="27548" end="27568" title="Bank of North Dakota" label="Bank of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="27572" end="27580" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="27600" end="27610" title="flour mill" label="flour mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055029" start="27616" end="27646" title="North Dakota Mill and Elevator" label="North Dakota Mill and Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="27650" end="27661" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="27777" end="27786" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="27813" end="27823" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q628708" start="27884" end="27896" title="Unemployment in the United States" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958771" start="28307" end="28315" title="North Dakota oil boom" label="oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="28789" end="28800" title="fur trading" label="fur trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="30027" end="30033" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="30054" end="30065" title="durum" label="durum wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="30102" end="30105" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="30190" end="30199" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="30314" end="30323" title="Corn Belt" label="Corn Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="30559" end="30563" title="Fodder" label="feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="30643" end="30649" title="canola" label="canola"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="30663" end="30667" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="30681" end="30695" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q156625" start="30705" end="30714" title="safflower" label="safflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937700" start="30733" end="30745" title="mustard seed" label="mustard seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="30930" end="30938" title="Soybeans" label="Soybeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="31345" end="31359" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q151964" start="31448" end="31457" title="sugarbeet" label="sugarbeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408452" start="31490" end="31506" title="Red River Valley" label="Red River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="31584" end="31590" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151621" start="31731" end="31746" title="energy industry" label="energy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q564726" start="32086" end="32095" title="Shale gas" label="Shale gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="32114" end="32126" title="Lignite coal" label="Lignite coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="32440" end="32450" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="32452" end="32467" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q790674" start="32472" end="32490" title="subbituminous coal" label="subbituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016802" start="32539" end="32544" title="Tioga, North Dakota" label="Tioga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119891" start="32672" end="32688" title="Bakken Formation" label="Bakken Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638097" start="32753" end="32784" title="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge" label="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958771" start="33050" end="33071" title="North Dakota oil boom" label="North Dakota oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999172" start="33077" end="33086" title="Williston, North Dakota" label="Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016802" start="33088" end="33093" title="Tioga, North Dakota" label="Tioga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999227" start="33095" end="33102" title="Stanley, North Dakota" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="33107" end="33112" title="Minot" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018782" start="33113" end="33123" title="Burlington, North Dakota" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337405" start="33358" end="33361" title="Barrel of oil equivalent" label="BOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="33369" end="33381" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721028" start="33964" end="33983" title="Maah Daah Hey Trail" label="Maah Daah Hey Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137669" start="34182" end="34214" title="Theodore Roosevelt National Park" label="Theodore Roosevelt National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053433" start="34365" end="34379" title="Norsk Høstfest" label="Norsk Høstfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="34389" end="34394" title="Minot, North Dakota" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="34435" end="34446" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8773162" start="34462" end="34476" title="Medora Musical" label="Medora Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055059" start="34486" end="34509" title="North Dakota State Fair" label="North Dakota State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105833" start="34739" end="34772" title="Oscar-Zero Missile Alert Facility" label="Oscar-Zero Missile Alert Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="34823" end="34836" title="trauma center" label="trauma center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="34870" end="34878" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774898" start="34897" end="34903" title="clinic" label="clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="34913" end="34925" title="nursing home" label="nursing home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417625" start="34960" end="34967" title="Sanford Health" label="Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586777" start="34969" end="34980" title="CHI St. Alexius Health Bismarck" label="St. Alexius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842826" start="34982" end="34989" title="Trinity Health (Minot, North Dakota)" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737007" start="34995" end="35000" title="Altru Health System" label="Altru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051231" start="35003" end="35041" title="Noridian Mutual Insurance Company" label="Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="35109" end="35117" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691097" start="35135" end="35160" title="health insurance exchange" label="health insurance exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092158" start="35182" end="35196" title="HealthCare.gov" label="HealthCare.gov"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="35918" end="35940" title="The Great Sioux Nation" label="The Great Sioux Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="36015" end="36024" title="Blackfoot" label="Blackfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="36030" end="36038" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="36044" end="36052" title="Chippewa" label="Chippewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="36063" end="36069" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="36090" end="36096" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="36112" end="36130" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577890" start="36149" end="36166" title="Spirit Lake Tribe" label="Spirit Lake Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028848" start="36168" end="36200" title="Standing Rock Indian Reservation" label="Standing Rock Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590690" start="36202" end="36225" title="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate" label="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470821" start="36227" end="36259" title="Fort Berthold Indian Reservation" label="Fort Berthold Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856437" start="36261" end="36295" title="Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation" label="Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285430" start="36301" end="36340" title="Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation" label="The Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="36392" end="36399" title="powwows" label="powwows"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="37129" end="37137" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="37194" end="37201" title="pow wow" label="pow wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597484" start="37411" end="37422" title="grass dance" label="grass dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433706" start="37464" end="37475" title="fancy dance" label="fancy dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202380" start="37641" end="37653" title="jingle dress" label="jingle dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985741" start="37972" end="37982" title="Icelandic American" label="Icelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087860" start="38009" end="38016" title="Pembina, North Dakota" label="Pembina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="38036" end="38046" title="Norwegian American" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q888720" start="38237" end="38242" title="lefse" label="lefse"/>
<link wikidata="Q890197" start="38259" end="38267" title="lutefisk" label="lutefisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053433" start="38330" end="38344" title="Norsk Høstfest" label="Norsk Høstfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="38384" end="38396" title="Minot, North Dakota" label="Minot&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38397" end="38427" title="North Dakota State Fair Center" label="North Dakota State Fair Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q48920" start="38560" end="38574" title="Pembina County, North Dakota" label="Pembina County"/>
<link wikidata="Q746310" start="38924" end="38936" title="stave church" label="stave church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="38961" end="38980" title="Norwegian-Americans" label="Norwegian-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="39214" end="39233" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q571942" start="39363" end="39373" title="Russian Mennonite" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="39378" end="39387" title="Hutterite" label="Hutterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="40192" end="40200" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093558" start="40232" end="40256" title="Chester Fritz Auditorium" label="Chester Fritz Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374034" start="40258" end="40276" title="Empire Arts Center" label="Empire Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435124" start="40282" end="40295" title="Fargo Theatre" label="Fargo Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055031" start="40297" end="40323" title="North Dakota Museum of Art" label="North Dakota Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097996" start="40333" end="40350" title="Plains Art Museum" label="Plains Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918281" start="40356" end="40390" title="Bismarck-Mandan Symphony Orchestra" label="Bismarck-Mandan Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435097" start="40392" end="40425" title="Fargo-Moorhead Symphony Orchestra" label="Fargo-Moorhead Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840055" start="40427" end="40465" title="Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra" label="Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869357" start="40467" end="40491" title="Minot Symphony Orchestra" label="Minot Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="40734" end="40739" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703462" start="40750" end="40760" title="Jonny Lang" label="Jonny Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="40762" end="40775" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q163593" start="40783" end="40796" title="Lynn Anderson" label="Lynn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="40798" end="40802" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196752" start="40807" end="40822" title="traditional pop" label="traditional pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q229139" start="40845" end="40854" title="Peggy Lee" label="Peggy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="40856" end="40864" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q676226" start="40872" end="40885" title="Lawrence Welk" label="Lawrence Welk"/>
<link wikidata="Q448336" start="40902" end="40911" title="Bobby Vee" label="Bobby Vee"/>
<link wikidata="Q235989" start="40936" end="40951" title="Angie Dickinson" label="Angie Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q422303" start="41021" end="41031" title="Ed Schultz" label="Ed Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248875" start="41076" end="41098" title="progressive talk radio" label="progressive talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992261" start="41111" end="41130" title="The Ed Schultz Show" label="The Ed Schultz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731540" start="41148" end="41159" title="The Ed Show" label="The Ed Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="41169" end="41174" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q446118" start="41176" end="41190" title="Shadoe Stevens" label="Shadoe Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q467079" start="41204" end="41219" title="American Top 40" label="American Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794" start="41245" end="41257" title="Josh Duhamel" label="Josh Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="41264" end="41274" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="41318" end="41333" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q752234" start="41350" end="41359" title="Las Vegas (TV series)" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q265076" start="41367" end="41384" title="Nicole Linkletter" label="Nicole Linkletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075077" start="41389" end="41404" title="CariDee English" label="CariDee English"/>
<link wikidata="Q211240" start="41433" end="41441" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model, Cycle 5" label="Cycles 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531826" start="41446" end="41447" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model, Cycle 7" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q31426" start="41472" end="41501" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q235707" start="41509" end="41520" title="Kellan Lutz" label="Kellan Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093420" start="41558" end="41566" title="Stick It" label="Stick It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519049" start="41580" end="41588" title="Accepted (film)" label="Accepted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301177" start="41602" end="41612" title="Prom Night (2008 film)" label="Prom Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q160071" start="41630" end="41638" title="Twilight (2008 film)" label="Twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059313" start="41774" end="41788" title="Dakota Wizards" label="Dakota Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="41796" end="41818" title="NBA Development League" label="NBA Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404608" start="41844" end="41858" title="Bismarck Bucks" label="Bismarck Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248855" start="41866" end="41888" title="Indoor Football League" label="Indoor Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032528" start="41939" end="41966" title="North Dakota Fighting Hawks" label="North Dakota Fighting Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055047" start="41971" end="41995" title="North Dakota State Bison" label="North Dakota State Bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821982" start="42028" end="42042" title="Mary Marauders" label="Mary Marauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974232" start="42047" end="42066" title="Minot State Beavers" label="Minot State Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q499211" start="42090" end="42094" title="USHL" label="USHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="42095" end="42105" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076862" start="42115" end="42126" title="Fargo Force" label="Fargo Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435100" start="42158" end="42181" title="Fargo-Moorhead RedHawks" label="Fargo-Moorhead RedHawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743069" start="42189" end="42209" title="American Association of Professional Baseball" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055015" start="42216" end="42263" title="North Dakota High School Activities Association" label="North Dakota High School Activities Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313678" start="42389" end="42400" title="Ice fishing" label="Ice fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="42402" end="42408" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="42414" end="42426" title="snowmobiling" label="snowmobiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="42562" end="42569" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q600262" start="42571" end="42576" title="perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="42582" end="42595" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716246" start="42626" end="42661" title="North Country National Scenic Trail" label="North Country National Scenic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801077" start="42668" end="42682" title="Lake Sakakawea" label="Lake Sakakawea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123048" start="42703" end="42725" title="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail" label="Lewis and Clark Trail."/>
<link wikidata="Q7734927" start="42796" end="42823" title="The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead" label="The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736543" start="42975" end="42993" title="alternative weekly" label="alternative weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995374" start="43000" end="43018" title="High Plains Reader" label="High Plains Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948279" start="43066" end="43073" title="WDAY (AM)" label="WDAY-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="43137" end="43150" title="media market" label="radio markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="43165" end="43170" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="43172" end="43180" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="43186" end="43197" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999172" start="43290" end="43299" title="Williston, North Dakota" label="Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718548" start="43369" end="43373" title="KFGO (AM)" label="KFGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="43410" end="43430" title="Terrestrial television" label="Broadcast television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341355" start="43491" end="43498" title="KXMC-TV" label="KXMC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="43560" end="43572" title="media market" label="media market"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="43578" end="43583" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="43584" end="43595" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="43669" end="43674" title="Minot, North Dakota" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="43675" end="43683" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049235" start="43754" end="43767" title="List of television stations in North Dakota" label="31 full-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276171" start="43824" end="43843" title="digital subchannels" label="digital subchannels"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="43846" end="43865" title="Public broadcasting" label="Public broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708380" start="43928" end="43938" title="Prairie Public Television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237947" start="43943" end="43948" title="Prairie Public Radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="43974" end="43977" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="43982" end="43985" title="National Public Radio" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q119400" start="43987" end="44011" title="Public access television" label="Public access television"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="44083" end="44091" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q853559" start="44093" end="44102" title="Dickinson, North Dakota" label="Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="44104" end="44109" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052658" start="44115" end="44124" title="Jamestown, North Dakota" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="44221" end="44246" title="Tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal community colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000624" start="44303" end="44332" title="North Dakota State University" label="North Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="44341" end="44367" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878529" start="44439" end="44469" title="North Dakota University System" label="North Dakota University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918312" start="44497" end="44519" title="Bismarck State College" label="Bismarck State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="44523" end="44531" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273748" start="44535" end="44561" title="Dickinson State University" label="Dickinson State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q853559" start="44565" end="44574" title="Dickinson, North Dakota" label="Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477507" start="44578" end="44603" title="Lake Region State College" label="Lake Region State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772496" start="44607" end="44618" title="Devils Lake, North Dakota" label="Devils Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708361" start="44622" end="44647" title="Mayville State University" label="Mayville State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q385320" start="44651" end="44659" title="Mayville, North Dakota" label="Mayville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017530" start="44663" end="44685" title="Minot State University" label="Minot State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="44689" end="44694" title="Minot, North Dakota" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209997" start="44698" end="44725" title="Dakota College at Bottineau" label="Dakota College at Bottineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523895" start="44729" end="44738" title="Bottineau, North Dakota" label="Bottineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000624" start="44742" end="44771" title="North Dakota State University" label="North Dakota State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="44775" end="44780" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055057" start="44784" end="44821" title="North Dakota State College of Science" label="North Dakota State College of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996092" start="44825" end="44833" title="Wahpeton, North Dakota" label="Wahpeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="44838" end="44843" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q968559" start="44847" end="44873" title="University of North Dakota" label="University of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="44877" end="44888" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912012" start="44892" end="44920" title="Valley City State University" label="Valley City State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407484" start="44924" end="44935" title="Valley City, North Dakota" label="Valley City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022152" start="44939" end="44962" title="Williston State College" label="Williston State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999172" start="44966" end="44975" title="Williston, North Dakota" label="Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032498" start="45001" end="45035" title="Cankdeska Cikana Community College" label="Cankdeska Cikana Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757936" start="45039" end="45050" title="Fort Totten, North Dakota" label="Fort Totten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470816" start="45054" end="45085" title="Fort Berthold Community College" label="Fort Berthold Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310050" start="45089" end="45097" title="New Town, North Dakota" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532066" start="45101" end="45121" title="Sitting Bull College" label="Sitting Bull College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300641" start="45125" end="45135" title="Fort Yates, North Dakota" label="Fort Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856434" start="45139" end="45172" title="Turtle Mountain Community College" label="Turtle Mountain Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126540" start="45176" end="45184" title="Belcourt, North Dakota" label="Belcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893617" start="45188" end="45219" title="United Tribes Technical College" label="United Tribes Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="45223" end="45231" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708393" start="45258" end="45276" title="University of Mary" label="University of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="45280" end="45288" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146207" start="45292" end="45315" title="University of Jamestown" label="University of Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052658" start="45319" end="45328" title="Jamestown, North Dakota" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295135" start="45332" end="45349" title="Rasmussen College" label="Rasmussen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="45353" end="45358" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842593" start="45362" end="45383" title="Trinity Bible College" label="Trinity Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q959555" start="45387" end="45396" title="Ellendale, North Dakota" label="Ellendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308121" start="45492" end="45508" title="one room schools" label="one room schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406979" start="45873" end="45902" title="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Report Card" label="The Nation&amp;#x27;s Report Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688594" start="46514" end="46538" title="Burkle addressing system" label="Burkle addressing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569030" start="46693" end="46734" title="North Dakota Department of Transportation" label="North Dakota Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="46746" end="46765" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q94015" start="46770" end="46783" title="Interstate 29" label="Interstate 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q94965" start="46788" end="46801" title="Interstate 94" label="Interstate 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="46833" end="46838" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="47101" end="47109" title="Asphalt concrete" label="blacktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="47169" end="47173" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="47182" end="47206" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157750" start="47347" end="47391" title="Dakota, Missouri Valley and Western Railroad" label="Dakota, Missouri Valley and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304875" start="47400" end="47437" title="Red River Valley and Western Railroad" label="Red River Valley and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699491" start="47487" end="47515" title="Hector International Airport" label="Hector International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062820" start="47532" end="47565" title="Grand Forks International Airport" label="Grand Forks International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q387593" start="47573" end="47599" title="Bismarck Municipal Airport" label="Bismarck Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566301" start="47607" end="47634" title="Minot International Airport" label="Minot International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27349419" start="47645" end="47682" title="Williston Basin International Airport" label="Williston Basin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="47704" end="47710" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="47718" end="47732" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435101" start="47776" end="47781" title="Fargo (Amtrak station)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594553" start="47822" end="47833" title="Grand Forks (Amtrak station)" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869330" start="47875" end="47880" title="Minot (Amtrak station)" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="48028" end="48050" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q771991" start="48082" end="48095" title="James J. Hill" label="James J. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="48109" end="48117" title="St. Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="48121" end="48128" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="48168" end="48177" title="Greyhound Bus Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175527" start="48182" end="48197" title="Jefferson Lines" label="Jefferson Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="48199" end="48213" title="Public transit" label="Public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740966" start="48245" end="48260" title="Public transport bus service" label="fixed-route bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435113" start="48272" end="48277" title="MATBUS (Fargo-Moorhead)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113039730" start="48279" end="48294" title="Bis-Man Transit" label="Bismarck-Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122471" start="48296" end="48307" title="Cities Area Transit" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869336" start="48313" end="48318" title="Minot City Transit" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="48320" end="48331" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164220" start="48608" end="48636" title="Constitution of North Dakota" label="Constitution of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054993" start="48645" end="48670" title="North Dakota Century Code" label="North Dakota Century Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773741" start="48972" end="48980" title="Governor of North Dakota" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q50362353" start="49006" end="49021" title="Kelly Armstrong" label="Kelly Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055038" start="49025" end="49035" title="North Dakota Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095395" start="49094" end="49105" title="Doug Burgum" label="Doug Burgum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="49167" end="49206" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="United States Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059070" start="49220" end="49255" title="Lieutenant Governor of North Dakota" label="Lieutenant Governor of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q108276951" start="49259" end="49276" title="Michelle Strinden" label="Michelle Strinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269913" start="49294" end="49317" title="President of the Senate" label="President of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055042" start="49593" end="49611" title="North Dakota Secretary of State" label="secretary of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054992" start="49613" end="49629" title="North Dakota Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055044" start="49631" end="49644" title="North Dakota State Auditor" label="state auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147633" start="49646" end="49674" title="North Dakota Insurance Commissioner" label="state insurance commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055065" start="49679" end="49694" title="North Dakota State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055026" start="49720" end="49753" title="North Dakota Legislative Assembly" label="North Dakota Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="49759" end="49768" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269857" start="49792" end="49798" title="North Dakota Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536328" start="49807" end="49831" title="North Dakota House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054993" start="50015" end="50040" title="North Dakota Century Code" label="North Dakota Century Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178757" start="50269" end="50284" title="Courts of North Dakota" label="district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055070" start="50452" end="50478" title="North Dakota Supreme Court" label="North Dakota Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="50908" end="50914" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="50916" end="50923" title="Hidatsa people" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="50925" end="50931" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="50937" end="50943" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="50962" end="50968" title="Arikara people" label="Sanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="50973" end="50978" title="Métis people (United States)" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285430" start="51161" end="51196" title="Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation" label="Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470821" start="51198" end="51223" title="Fort Berthold Reservation" label="Fort Berthold Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590690" start="51227" end="51250" title="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate" label="Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q773809" start="51252" end="51284" title="Lake Traverse Indian Reservation" label="Lake Traverse Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028848" start="51288" end="51307" title="Standing Rock Sioux" label="Standing Rock Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028848" start="51309" end="51341" title="Standing Rock Indian Reservation" label="Standing Rock Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577890" start="51345" end="51362" title="Spirit Lake Tribe" label="Spirit Lake Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577890" start="51364" end="51387" title="Spirit Lake Tribe" label="Spirit Lake Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856433" start="51395" end="51435" title="Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians" label="Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856437" start="51437" end="51464" title="Turtle Mountain Reservation" label="Turtle Mountain Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="51502" end="51524" title="United States Senators" label="United States Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q374762" start="51529" end="51540" title="John Hoeven" label="John Hoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055038" start="51542" end="51543" title="North Dakota Republican Party" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957020" start="51549" end="51561" title="Kevin Cramer" label="Kevin Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="51585" end="51593" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054985" start="51594" end="51616" title="North Dakota&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district" label="congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="51632" end="51646" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37824664" start="51647" end="51662" title="Julie Fedorchak" label="Julie Fedorchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055038" start="51664" end="51665" title="North Dakota Republican Party" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889785" start="51706" end="51767" title="United States District Court for the District of North Dakota" label="United States District Court for the District of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="51790" end="51798" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q34109" start="51800" end="51805" title="Fargo, North Dakota" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34144" start="51807" end="51818" title="Grand Forks, North Dakota" label="Grand Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q487201" start="51824" end="51829" title="Minot, North Dakota" label="Minot"/>
<link wikidata="Q250433" start="51856" end="51887" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit" label="Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="51897" end="51916" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="51934" end="51937" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055001" start="52158" end="52172" title="North Dakota Democratic-NPL Party" label="Democratic-NPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055038" start="52181" end="52197" title="North Dakota Republican Party" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128321" start="52205" end="52223" title="Constitution Party (United States)" label="Constitution Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="52232" end="52249" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773741" start="52316" end="52328" title="Governor of North Dakota" label="governorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q367363" start="52650" end="52663" title="George Sinner" label="George Sinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519499" start="52765" end="52769" title="2020 United States presidential election in North Dakota" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="52771" end="52783" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="52873" end="52889" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="52918" end="52932" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="52950" end="52971" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="52993" end="53010" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="53027" end="53044" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q374762" start="53333" end="53344" title="John Hoeven" label="John Hoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957020" start="53349" end="53361" title="Kevin Cramer" label="Kevin Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37824664" start="53409" end="53424" title="Julie Fedorchak" label="Julie Fedorchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089677" start="53429" end="53460" title="Heartbeat bill" label="six-week abortion ban is active"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="53494" end="53509" title="Plurality voting" label="simple majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="53611" end="53633" title="progressive tax" label="progressive income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="53672" end="53682" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="53814" end="53823" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q159579" start="54007" end="54019" title="Excise" label="Excise taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155766" start="54129" end="54136" title="use tax" label="use tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="54206" end="54219" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="54240" end="54252" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689379" start="54336" end="54350" title="Tax Foundation" label="Tax Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666873" start="54459" end="54474" title="Tax Freedom Day" label="Tax Freedom Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683209" start="54643" end="54664" title="adjusted gross income" label="adjusted gross income"/>
<link wikidata="Q163593" start="54710" end="54723" title="Lynn Anderson" label="Lynn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q374447" start="54748" end="54760" title="Sam Anderson" label="Sam Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594279" start="54770" end="54781" title="Carmen Berg" label="Carmen Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963139" start="54813" end="54825" title="Brian Bohrer" label="Brian Bohrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24225" start="54849" end="54864" title="Paula Broadwell" label="Paula Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q692263" start="54922" end="54934" title="James Buchli" label="James Buchli"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="54943" end="54947" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="54948" end="54957" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q963214" start="54960" end="54975" title="Quentin Burdick" label="Quentin Burdick"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="54984" end="54996" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095395" start="55065" end="55076" title="Doug Burgum" label="Doug Burgum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="55078" end="55117" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="United States Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773741" start="55126" end="55150" title="Governor of North Dakota" label="Governor of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q119168614" start="55156" end="55179" title="Doug Burgum 2024 presidential campaign" label="candidate for president"/>
<link wikidata="Q294358" start="55182" end="55200" title="Warren Christopher" label="Warren Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="55209" end="55232" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q439736" start="55256" end="55271" title="Shannon Curfman" label="Shannon Curfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q235989" start="55316" end="55331" title="Angie Dickinson" label="Angie Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="55333" end="55345" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794" start="55384" end="55396" title="Josh Duhamel" label="Josh Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="55398" end="55408" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938873" start="55455" end="55471" title="Carl Ben Eielson" label="Carl Ben Eielson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="55473" end="55480" title="aviator" label="aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q477799" start="55482" end="55492" title="bush pilot" label="bush pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="55497" end="55505" title="explorer" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075077" start="55508" end="55523" title="CariDee English" label="CariDee English"/>
<link wikidata="Q31426" start="55552" end="55581" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242295" start="55603" end="55616" title="Pretty Wicked" label="Pretty Wicked"/>
<link wikidata="Q442679" start="55625" end="55639" title="Louise Erdrich" label="Louise Erdrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="55687" end="55708" title="children&amp;#x27;s books" label="children&amp;#x27;s books"/>
<link wikidata="Q861442" start="55711" end="55723" title="Darin Erstad" label="Darin Erstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004246" start="55766" end="55779" title="Travis Hafner" label="Travis Hafner"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="55792" end="55809" title="Designated Hitter" label="Designated Hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="55818" end="55835" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q607394" start="55838" end="55850" title="Richard Hieb" label="Richard Hieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="55859" end="55863" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="55864" end="55873" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q325710" start="55876" end="55886" title="Clint Hill (Secret Service)" label="Clint Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="55888" end="55916" title="United States Secret Service" label="United States Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="55972" end="56004" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341919" start="56007" end="56018" title="Virgil Hill" label="Virgil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q316246" start="56080" end="56092" title="Phil Jackson" label="Phil Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="56101" end="56111" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="56129" end="56132" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q823221" start="56172" end="56186" title="David C. Jones" label="David C. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="56213" end="56234" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110908" start="56237" end="56248" title="Gordon Kahl" label="Gordon Kahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q367336" start="56309" end="56325" title="Chuck Klosterman" label="Chuck Klosterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="56406" end="56417" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q379895" start="56420" end="56438" title="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour" label="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q367591" start="56460" end="56475" title="Western fiction" label="Western fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703462" start="56478" end="56488" title="Jonny Lang" label="Jonny Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="56490" end="56504" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy-winning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="56505" end="56510" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q229139" start="56535" end="56544" title="Peggy Lee" label="Peggy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="56546" end="56550" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196752" start="56555" end="56570" title="traditional pop" label="traditional pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q265076" start="56595" end="56612" title="Nicole Linkletter" label="Nicole Linkletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31426" start="56635" end="56664" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q235707" start="56667" end="56678" title="Kellan Lutz" label="Kellan Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160071" start="56722" end="56730" title="Twilight (2008 film)" label="Twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q116928" start="56747" end="56755" title="New Moon (2009 film)" label="New Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="56791" end="56802" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149560" start="56804" end="56817" title="right fielder" label="right fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="56821" end="56842" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053589" start="56893" end="56908" title="Connor McGovern (American football, born 1993)" label="Connor McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="56947" end="56961" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="56970" end="56983" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q39335345" start="56986" end="56995" title="Cara Mund" label="Cara Mund"/>
<link wikidata="Q30635957" start="56997" end="57014" title="Miss America 2018" label="Miss America 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792306" start="57017" end="57031" title="Thomas McGrath (poet)" label="Thomas McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830870" start="57063" end="57080" title="Michael H. Miller" label="Michael H. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883288" start="57139" end="57151" title="Griffin Neal" label="Griffin Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="57190" end="57208" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q519898" start="57211" end="57223" title="Mancur Olson" label="Mancur Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q926963" start="57237" end="57250" title="Alan Ritchson" label="Alan Ritchson"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="57287" end="57300" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q238960" start="57334" end="57343" title="Sacagawea" label="Sakakawea"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="57356" end="57371" title="Lewis and Clark" label="Lewis and Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q422303" start="57394" end="57404" title="Ed Schultz" label="Ed Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992261" start="57420" end="57439" title="The Ed Schultz Show" label="The Ed Schultz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387483" start="57448" end="57461" title="Eric Sevareid" label="Eric Sevareid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="57463" end="57466" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q235289" start="57485" end="57496" title="Ann Sothern" label="Ann Sothern"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="57498" end="57513" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar nominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329196" start="57544" end="57561" title="Richard St. Clair" label="Richard St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q446118" start="57617" end="57631" title="Shadoe Stevens" label="Shadoe Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q467079" start="57647" end="57662" title="American Top 40" label="American Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q448336" start="57671" end="57680" title="Bobby Vee" label="Bobby Vee"/>
<link wikidata="Q676226" start="57701" end="57714" title="Lawrence Welk" label="Lawrence Welk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="57726" end="57735" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q806349" start="57744" end="57754" title="bandleader" label="bandleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q943995" start="57771" end="57781" title="impresario" label="impresario"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067205" start="57784" end="57796" title="Carson Wentz" label="Carson Wentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="57835" end="57853" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018504" start="57870" end="57908" title="Index of North Dakota-related articles" label="Index of North Dakota-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112389" start="57911" end="57934" title="Outline of North Dakota" label="Outline of North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="63016" end="63020" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21652" wikidata="Q30642" url="?curid=21652" title="Natural language processing">
<text>Natural language processing (NLP) is a subfield of computer science and especially artificial intelligence. It is primarily concerned with providing computers with the ability to process data encoded in natural language and is thus closely related to information retrieval, knowledge representation and computational linguistics, a subfield of linguistics.

Major tasks in natural language processing are speech recognition, text classification, natural-language understanding, and natural-language generation.

== History ==
Natural language processing has its roots in the 1950s. Already in 1950, Alan Turing published an article titled &quot;Computing Machinery and Intelligence&quot; which proposed what is now called the Turing test as a criterion of intelligence, though at the time that was not articulated as a problem separate from artificial intelligence. The proposed test includes a task that involves the automated interpretation and generation of natural language.

=== Symbolic NLP (1950s – early 1990s) ===
The premise of symbolic NLP is well-summarized by John Searle&#x27;s Chinese room experiment: Given a collection of rules (e.g., a Chinese phrasebook, with questions and matching answers), the computer emulates natural language understanding (or other NLP tasks) by applying those rules to the data it confronts.

* 1950s: The Georgetown experiment in 1954 involved fully automatic translation of more than sixty Russian sentences into English. The authors claimed that within three or five years, machine translation would be a solved problem. However, real progress was much slower, and after the ALPAC report in 1966, which found that ten years of research had failed to fulfill the expectations, funding for machine translation was dramatically reduced. Little further research in machine translation was conducted in America (though some research continued elsewhere, such as Japan and Europe) until the late 1980s when the first statistical machine translation systems were developed.
* 1960s: Some notably successful natural language processing systems developed in the 1960s were SHRDLU, a natural language system working in restricted &quot;blocks worlds&quot; with restricted vocabularies, and ELIZA, a simulation of a Rogerian psychotherapist, written by Joseph Weizenbaum between 1964 and 1966. Using almost no information about human thought or emotion, ELIZA sometimes provided a startlingly human-like interaction. When the &quot;patient&quot; exceeded the very small knowledge base, ELIZA might provide a generic response, for example, responding to &quot;My head hurts&quot; with &quot;Why do you say your head hurts?&quot;. Ross Quillian&#x27;s successful work on natural language was demonstrated with a vocabulary of only &quot;twenty&quot; words, because that was all that would fit in a computer memory at the time.

* 1970s: During the 1970s, many programmers began to write &quot;conceptual ontologies&quot;, which structured real-world information into computer-understandable data. Examples are MARGIE (Schank, 1975), SAM (Cullingford, 1978), PAM (Wilensky, 1978), TaleSpin (Meehan, 1976), QUALM (Lehnert, 1977), Politics (Carbonell, 1979), and Plot Units (Lehnert 1981). During this time, the first chatterbots were written (e.g., PARRY).
* 1980s: The 1980s and early 1990s mark the heyday of symbolic methods in NLP. Focus areas of the time included research on rule-based parsing (e.g., the development of HPSG as a computational operationalization of generative grammar), morphology (e.g., two-level morphology), semantics (e.g., Lesk algorithm), reference (e.g., within Centering Theory) and other areas of natural language understanding (e.g., in the Rhetorical Structure Theory). Other lines of research were continued, e.g., the development of chatterbots with Racter and Jabberwacky. An important development (that eventually led to the statistical turn in the 1990s) was the rising importance of quantitative evaluation in this period.

=== Statistical NLP (1990s–present) ===
Up until the 1980s, most natural language processing systems were based on complex sets of hand-written rules. Starting in the late 1980s, however, there was a revolution in natural language processing with the introduction of machine learning algorithms for language processing. This was due to both the steady increase in computational power (see Moore&#x27;s law) and the gradual lessening of the dominance of Chomskyan theories of linguistics (e.g. transformational grammar), whose theoretical underpinnings discouraged the sort of corpus linguistics that underlies the machine-learning approach to language processing. 
*1990s: Many of the notable early successes in statistical methods in NLP occurred in the field of machine translation, due especially to work at IBM Research, such as IBM alignment models. These systems were able to take advantage of existing multilingual textual corpora that had been produced by the Parliament of Canada and the European Union as a result of laws calling for the translation of all governmental proceedings into all official languages of the corresponding systems of government. However, most other systems depended on corpora specifically developed for the tasks implemented by these systems, which was (and often continues to be) a major limitation in the success of these systems. As a result, a great deal of research has gone into methods of more effectively learning from limited amounts of data.
*2000s: With the growth of the web, increasing amounts of raw (unannotated) language data have become available since the mid-1990s. Research has thus increasingly focused on unsupervised and semi-supervised learning algorithms. Such algorithms can learn from data that has not been hand-annotated with the desired answers or using a combination of annotated and non-annotated data. Generally, this task is much more difficult than supervised learning, and typically produces less accurate results for a given amount of input data. However, there is an enormous amount of non-annotated data available (including, among other things, the entire content of the World Wide Web), which can often make up for the worse efficiency if the algorithm used has a low enough time complexity to be practical.
*2003: word n-gram model, at the time the best statistical algorithm, is outperformed by a multi-layer perceptron (with a single hidden layer and context length of several words, trained on up to 14 million words, by Bengio et al.) 
*2010: Tomáš Mikolov (then a PhD student at Brno University of Technology) with co-authors applied a simple recurrent neural network with a single hidden layer to language modelling, and in the following years he went on to develop Word2vec. In the 2010s, representation learning and deep neural network-style (featuring many hidden layers) machine learning methods became widespread in natural language processing. That popularity was due partly to a flurry of results showing that such techniques can achieve state-of-the-art results in many natural language tasks, e.g., in language modeling and parsing. This is increasingly important in medicine and healthcare, where NLP helps analyze notes and text in electronic health records that would otherwise be inaccessible for study when seeking to improve care or protect patient privacy.

==Approaches: Symbolic, statistical, neural networks ==
Symbolic approach, i.e., the hand-coding of a set of rules for manipulating symbols, coupled with a dictionary lookup, was historically the first approach used both by AI in general and by NLP in particular: such as by writing grammars or devising heuristic rules for stemming.

Machine learning approaches, which include both statistical and neural networks, on the other hand, have many advantages over the symbolic approach: 

* both statistical and neural networks methods can focus more on the most common cases extracted from a corpus of texts, whereas the rule-based approach needs to provide rules for both rare cases and common ones equally.

* language models, produced by either statistical or neural networks methods, are more robust to both unfamiliar (e.g. containing words or structures that have not been seen before) and erroneous input (e.g. with misspelled words or words accidentally omitted) in comparison to the rule-based systems, which are also more costly to produce.

* the larger such a (probabilistic) language model is, the more accurate it becomes, in contrast to rule-based systems that can gain accuracy only by increasing the amount and complexity of the rules leading to intractability problems.

Although rule-based systems for manipulating symbols were still in use in 2020, they have become mostly obsolete with the advance of LLMs in 2023. 

Before that they were commonly used:
* when the amount of training data is insufficient to successfully apply machine learning methods, e.g., for the machine translation of low-resource languages such as provided by the Apertium system,
* for preprocessing in NLP pipelines, e.g., tokenization, or
* for postprocessing and transforming the output of NLP pipelines, e.g., for knowledge extraction from syntactic parses.

=== Statistical approach ===
In the late 1980s and mid-1990s, the statistical approach ended a period of AI winter, which was caused by the inefficiencies of the rule-based approaches.

The earliest decision trees, producing systems of hard if–then rules, were still very similar to the old rule-based approaches.
Only the introduction of hidden Markov models, applied to part-of-speech tagging, announced the end of the old rule-based approach.

=== Neural networks ===

A major drawback of statistical methods is that they require elaborate feature engineering. Since 2015, the statistical approach has been replaced by the neural networks approach, using semantic networks and word embeddings to capture semantic properties of words. 

Intermediate tasks (e.g., part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing) are not needed anymore. 

Neural machine translation, based on then-newly invented sequence-to-sequence transformations, made obsolete the intermediate steps, such as word alignment, previously necessary for statistical machine translation.

== Common NLP tasks ==
The following is a list of some of the most commonly researched tasks in natural language processing. Some of these tasks have direct real-world applications, while others more commonly serve as subtasks that are used to aid in solving larger tasks.

Though natural language processing tasks are closely intertwined, they can be subdivided into categories for convenience. A coarse division is given below.

=== Text and speech processing ===
; Optical character recognition (OCR)
:Given an image representing printed text, determine the corresponding text.

; Speech recognition: Given a sound clip of a person or people speaking, determine the textual representation of the speech. This is the opposite of text to speech and is one of the extremely difficult problems colloquially termed &quot;AI-complete&quot; (see above). In natural speech there are hardly any pauses between successive words, and thus speech segmentation is a necessary subtask of speech recognition (see below). In most spoken languages, the sounds representing successive letters blend into each other in a process termed coarticulation, so the conversion of the analog signal to discrete characters can be a very difficult process. Also, given that words in the same language are spoken by people with different accents, the speech recognition software must be able to recognize the wide variety of input as being identical to each other in terms of its textual equivalent.
; Speech segmentation: Given a sound clip of a person or people speaking, separate it into words. A subtask of speech recognition and typically grouped with it.

; Text-to-speech
:Given a text, transform those units and produce a spoken representation. Text-to-speech can be used to aid the visually impaired.

; Word segmentation (Tokenization) 
:Tokenization is a process used in text analysis that divides text into individual words or word fragments. This technique results in two key components: a word index and tokenized text. The word index is a list that maps unique words to specific numerical identifiers, and the tokenized text replaces each word with its corresponding numerical token. These numerical tokens are then used in various deep learning methods.
:For a language like English, this is fairly trivial, since words are usually separated by spaces. However, some written languages like Chinese, Japanese and Thai do not mark word boundaries in such a fashion, and in those languages text segmentation is a significant task requiring knowledge of the vocabulary and morphology of words in the language. Sometimes this process is also used in cases like bag of words (BOW) creation in data mining.

=== Morphological analysis ===
; Lemmatization: The task of removing inflectional endings only and to return the base dictionary form of a word which is also known as a lemma. Lemmatization is another technique for reducing words to their normalized form. But in this case, the transformation actually uses a dictionary to map words to their actual form.
; Morphological segmentation: Separate words into individual morphemes and identify the class of the morphemes. The difficulty of this task depends greatly on the complexity of the morphology (&quot;i.e.&quot;, the structure of words) of the language being considered. English has fairly simple morphology, especially inflectional morphology, and thus it is often possible to ignore this task entirely and simply model all possible forms of a word (e.g., &quot;open, opens, opened, opening&quot;) as separate words. In languages such as Turkish or Meitei, a highly agglutinated Indian language, however, such an approach is not possible, as each dictionary entry has thousands of possible word forms.
; Part-of-speech tagging: Given a sentence, determine the part of speech (POS) for each word. Many words, especially common ones, can serve as multiple parts of speech. For example, &quot;book&quot; can be a noun (&quot;the book on the table&quot;) or verb (&quot;to book a flight&quot;); &quot;set&quot; can be a noun, verb or adjective; and &quot;out&quot; can be any of at least five different parts of speech.

; Stemming
:The process of reducing inflected (or sometimes derived) words to a base form (e.g., &quot;close&quot; will be the root for &quot;closed&quot;, &quot;closing&quot;, &quot;close&quot;, &quot;closer&quot; etc.). Stemming yields similar results as lemmatization, but does so on grounds of rules, not a dictionary.

=== Syntactic analysis ===

; Grammar induction
: Generate a formal grammar that describes a language&#x27;s syntax.
; Sentence breaking (also known as &quot;sentence boundary disambiguation&quot;)
: Given a chunk of text, find the sentence boundaries. Sentence boundaries are often marked by periods or other punctuation marks, but these same characters can serve other purposes (e.g., marking abbreviations).
; Parsing: Determine the parse tree (grammatical analysis) of a given sentence. The grammar for natural languages is ambiguous and typical sentences have multiple possible analyses: perhaps surprisingly, for a typical sentence there may be thousands of potential parses (most of which will seem completely nonsensical to a human). There are two primary types of parsing: &quot;dependency parsing&quot; and &quot;constituency parsing&quot;. Dependency parsing focuses on the relationships between words in a sentence (marking things like primary objects and predicates), whereas constituency parsing focuses on building out the parse tree using a probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG) (see also &quot;stochastic grammar&quot;).

=== Lexical semantics (of individual words in context) ===
; Lexical semantics: What is the computational meaning of individual words in context?
; Distributional semantics: How can we learn semantic representations from data?
; Named entity recognition (NER): Given a stream of text, determine which items in the text map to proper names, such as people or places, and what the type of each such name is (e.g. person, location, organization). Although capitalization can aid in recognizing named entities in languages such as English, this information cannot aid in determining the type of named entity, and in any case, is often inaccurate or insufficient. For example, the first letter of a sentence is also capitalized, and named entities often span several words, only some of which are capitalized. Furthermore, many other languages in non-Western scripts (e.g. Chinese or Arabic) do not have any capitalization at all, and even languages with capitalization may not consistently use it to distinguish names. For example, German capitalizes all nouns, regardless of whether they are names, and French and Spanish do not capitalize names that serve as adjectives. Another name for this task is token classification.

; Sentiment analysis (see also Multimodal sentiment analysis)
: Sentiment analysis is a computational method used to identify and classify the emotional intent behind text. This technique involves analyzing text to determine whether the expressed sentiment is positive, negative, or neutral. Models for sentiment classification typically utilize inputs such as word n-grams, Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) features, hand-generated features, or employ deep learning models designed to recognize both long-term and short-term dependencies in text sequences. The applications of sentiment analysis are diverse, extending to tasks such as categorizing customer reviews on various online platforms.
; Terminology extraction
:The goal of terminology extraction is to automatically extract relevant terms from a given corpus.
; Word-sense disambiguation (WSD): Many words have more than one meaning; we have to select the meaning which makes the most sense in context. For this problem, we are typically given a list of words and associated word senses, e.g. from a dictionary or an online resource such as WordNet.
; Entity linking: Many words—typically proper names—refer to named entities; here we have to select the entity (a famous individual, a location, a company, etc.) which is referred to in context.

=== Relational semantics (semantics of individual sentences) ===
; Relationship extraction: Given a chunk of text, identify the relationships among named entities (e.g. who is married to whom).
; Semantic parsing: Given a piece of text (typically a sentence), produce a formal representation of its semantics, either as a graph (e.g., in AMR parsing) or in accordance with a logical formalism (e.g., in DRT parsing). This challenge typically includes aspects of several more elementary NLP tasks from semantics (e.g., semantic role labelling, word-sense disambiguation) and can be extended to include full-fledged discourse analysis (e.g., discourse analysis, coreference; see Natural language understanding below).
; Semantic role labelling (see also implicit semantic role labelling below)
:Given a single sentence, identify and disambiguate semantic predicates (e.g., verbal frames), then identify and classify the frame elements (semantic roles).

=== Discourse (semantics beyond individual sentences) ===
; Coreference resolution: Given a sentence or larger chunk of text, determine which words (&quot;mentions&quot;) refer to the same objects (&quot;entities&quot;). Anaphora resolution is a specific example of this task, and is specifically concerned with matching up pronouns with the nouns or names to which they refer. The more general task of coreference resolution also includes identifying so-called &quot;bridging relationships&quot; involving referring expressions. For example, in a sentence such as &quot;He entered John&#x27;s house through the front door&quot;, &quot;the front door&quot; is a referring expression and the bridging relationship to be identified is the fact that the door being referred to is the front door of John&#x27;s house (rather than of some other structure that might also be referred to).
; Discourse analysis: This rubric includes several related tasks. One task is discourse parsing, i.e., identifying the discourse structure of a connected text, i.e. the nature of the discourse relationships between sentences (e.g. elaboration, explanation, contrast). Another possible task is recognizing and classifying the speech acts in a chunk of text (e.g. yes–no question, content question, statement, assertion, etc.).
:Given a single sentence, identify and disambiguate semantic predicates (e.g., verbal frames) and their explicit semantic roles in the current sentence (see Semantic role labelling above). Then, identify semantic roles that are not explicitly realized in the current sentence, classify them into arguments that are explicitly realized elsewhere in the text and those that are not specified, and resolve the former against the local text. A closely related task is zero anaphora resolution, i.e., the extension of coreference resolution to pro-drop languages.

; Recognizing textual entailment: Given two text fragments, determine if one being true entails the other, entails the other&#x27;s negation, or allows the other to be either true or false.

; Topic segmentation and recognition
:Given a chunk of text, separate it into segments each of which is devoted to a topic, and identify the topic of the segment.

; Argument mining
:The goal of argument mining is the automatic extraction and identification of argumentative structures from natural language text with the aid of computer programs. Such argumentative structures include the premise, conclusions, the argument scheme and the relationship between the main and subsidiary argument, or the main and counter-argument within discourse.

=== Higher-level NLP applications ===
; Automatic summarization (text summarization): Produce a readable summary of a chunk of text. Often used to provide summaries of the text of a known type, such as research papers, articles in the financial section of a newspaper.
:Grammatical error detection and correction involves a great band-width of problems on all levels of linguistic analysis (phonology/orthography, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics). Grammatical error correction is impactful since it affects hundreds of millions of people that use or acquire English as a second language. It has thus been subject to a number of shared tasks since 2011. As far as orthography, morphology, syntax and certain aspects of semantics are concerned, and due to the development of powerful neural language models such as GPT-2, this can now (2019) be considered a largely solved problem and is being marketed in various commercial applications.
;Logic translation
:Translate a text from a natural language into formal logic.
; Machine translation (MT)
:Automatically translate text from one human language to another. This is one of the most difficult problems, and is a member of a class of problems colloquially termed &quot;AI-complete&quot;, i.e. requiring all of the different types of knowledge that humans possess (grammar, semantics, facts about the real world, etc.) to solve properly.
; Natural-language understanding (NLU): Convert chunks of text into more formal representations such as first-order logic structures that are easier for computer programs to manipulate. Natural language understanding involves the identification of the intended semantic from the multiple possible semantics which can be derived from a natural language expression which usually takes the form of organized notations of natural language concepts. Introduction and creation of language metamodel and ontology are efficient however empirical solutions. An explicit formalization of natural language semantics without confusions with implicit assumptions such as closed-world assumption (CWA) vs. open-world assumption, or subjective Yes/No vs. objective True/False is expected for the construction of a basis of semantics formalization.
; Natural-language generation (NLG):
:Convert information from computer databases or semantic intents into readable human language.
; Book generation
:Not an NLP task proper but an extension of natural language generation and other NLP tasks is the creation of full-fledged books. The first machine-generated book was created by a rule-based system in 1984 (Racter, &quot;The policeman&#x27;s beard is half-constructed&quot;). The first published work by a neural network was published in 2018, &quot;1 the Road&quot;, marketed as a novel, contains sixty million words. Both these systems are basically elaborate but non-sensical (semantics-free) language models. The first machine-generated science book was published in 2019 (Beta Writer, &quot;Lithium-Ion Batteries&quot;, Springer, Cham). Unlike &quot;Racter&quot; and &quot;1 the Road&quot;, this is grounded on factual knowledge and based on text summarization.
; Document AI
:A Document AI platform sits on top of the NLP technology enabling users with no prior experience of artificial intelligence, machine learning or NLP to quickly train a computer to extract the specific data they need from different document types. NLP-powered Document AI enables non-technical teams to quickly access information hidden in documents, for example, lawyers, business analysts and accountants.
; Dialogue management
:Computer systems intended to converse with a human.
; Question answering: Given a human-language question, determine its answer. Typical questions have a specific right answer (such as &quot;What is the capital of Canada?&quot;), but sometimes open-ended questions are also considered (such as &quot;What is the meaning of life?&quot;).
; Text-to-image generation: Given a description of an image, generate an image that matches the description.
; Text-to-scene generation: Given a description of a scene, generate a 3D model of the scene.
; Text-to-video: Given a description of a video, generate a video that matches the description.

== General tendencies and (possible) future directions ==
Based on long-standing trends in the field, it is possible to extrapolate future directions of NLP. As of 2020, three trends among the topics of the long-standing series of CoNLL Shared Tasks can be observed:

* Interest on increasingly abstract, &quot;cognitive&quot; aspects of natural language (1999–2001: shallow parsing, 2002–03: named entity recognition, 2006–09/2017–18: dependency syntax, 2004–05/2008–09 semantic role labelling, 2011–12 coreference, 2015–16: discourse parsing, 2019: semantic parsing).
* Increasing interest in multilinguality, and, potentially, multimodality (English since 1999; Spanish, Dutch since 2002; German since 2003; Bulgarian, Danish, Japanese, Portuguese, Slovenian, Swedish, Turkish since 2006; Basque, Catalan, Chinese, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Turkish since 2007; Czech since 2009; Arabic since 2012; 2017: 40+ languages; 2018: 60+/100+ languages)
* Elimination of symbolic representations (rule-based over supervised towards weakly supervised methods, representation learning and end-to-end systems)

=== Cognition ===
Most higher-level NLP applications involve aspects that emulate intelligent behaviour and apparent comprehension of natural language. More broadly speaking, the technical operationalization of increasingly advanced aspects of cognitive behaviour represents one of the developmental trajectories of NLP (see trends among CoNLL shared tasks above).

Cognition refers to &quot;the mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses.&quot; Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary, scientific study of the mind and its processes. Cognitive linguistics is an interdisciplinary branch of linguistics, combining knowledge and research from both psychology and linguistics. Especially during the age of symbolic NLP, the area of computational linguistics maintained strong ties with cognitive studies.

As an example, George Lakoff offers a methodology to build natural language processing (NLP) algorithms through the perspective of cognitive science, along with the findings of cognitive linguistics, with two defining aspects:

# Apply the theory of conceptual metaphor, explained by Lakoff as &quot;the understanding of one idea, in terms of another&quot; which provides an idea of the intent of the author. For example, consider the English word &quot;big&quot;. When used in a comparison (&quot;That is a big tree&quot;), the author&#x27;s intent is to imply that the tree is &quot;physically large&quot; relative to other trees or the authors experience. When used metaphorically (&quot;Tomorrow is a big day&quot;), the author&#x27;s intent to imply &quot;importance&quot;. The intent behind other usages, like in &quot;She is a big person&quot;, will remain somewhat ambiguous to a person and a cognitive NLP algorithm alike without additional information.
# Assign relative measures of meaning to a word, phrase, sentence or piece of text based on the information presented before and after the piece of text being analyzed, e.g., by means of a probabilistic context-free grammar (PCFG). The mathematical equation for such algorithms is presented in US Patent 9269353:
::formula_1

::&quot;Where&quot;
:::RMM is the relative measure of meaning
:::token is any block of text, sentence, phrase or word
:::N is the number of tokens being analyzed
:::PMM is the probable measure of meaning based on a corpora
:::d is the non zero location of the token along the sequence of N tokens
:::PF is the probability function specific to a language

Ties with cognitive linguistics are part of the historical heritage of NLP, but they have been less frequently addressed since the statistical turn during the 1990s. Nevertheless, approaches to develop cognitive models towards technically operationalizable frameworks have been pursued in the context of various frameworks, e.g., of cognitive grammar, functional grammar, construction grammar, computational psycholinguistics and cognitive neuroscience (e.g., ACT-R), however, with limited uptake in mainstream NLP (as measured by presence on major conferences of the ACL). More recently, ideas of cognitive NLP have been revived as an approach to achieve explainability, e.g., under the notion of &quot;cognitive AI&quot;. Likewise, ideas of cognitive NLP are inherent to neural models multimodal NLP (although rarely made explicit) and developments in artificial intelligence, specifically tools and technologies using large language model approaches and new directions in artificial general intelligence based on the free energy principle by British neuroscientist and theoretician at University College London Karl J. Friston.

== See also ==

* &quot;1 the Road&quot;
* Artificial intelligence detection software
* Automated essay scoring
* Biomedical text mining
* Compound term processing
* Computational linguistics
* Computer-assisted reviewing
* Controlled natural language
* Deep learning
* Deep linguistic processing
* Distributional semantics
* Foreign language reading aid
* Foreign language writing aid
* Information extraction
* Information retrieval
* Language and Communication Technologies
* Language model
* Language technology
* Latent semantic indexing
* Multi-agent system
* Native-language identification
* Natural-language programming
* Natural-language understanding
* Natural-language search
* Outline of natural language processing
* Query expansion
* Query understanding
* Reification (linguistics)
* Speech processing
* Spoken dialogue systems
* Text-proofing
* Text simplification
* Transformer (machine learning model)
* Truecasing
* Question answering
* Word2vec
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper (2009). &quot;Natural Language Processing with Python&quot;. O&#x27;Reilly Media. .
* Kenna Hughes-Castleberry, &quot;A Murder Mystery Puzzle: The literary puzzle &quot;Cain&#x27;s Jawbone&quot;, which has stumped humans for decades, reveals the limitations of natural-language-processing algorithms&quot;, &quot;Scientific American&quot;, vol. 329, no. 4 (November 2023), pp. 81–82. &quot;This murder mystery competition has revealed that although NLP (natural-language processing) models are capable of incredible feats, their abilities are very much limited by the amount of context they receive. This [...] could cause [difficulties] for researchers who hope to use them to do things such as analyze ancient languages. In some cases, there are few historical records on long-gone civilizations to serve as training data for such a purpose.&quot; (p. 82.)
* Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin (2008). &quot;Speech and Language Processing&quot;, 2nd edition. Pearson Prentice Hall. .
* Mohamed Zakaria Kurdi (2016). &quot;Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics: speech, morphology, and syntax&quot;, Volume 1. ISTE-Wiley. .
* Mohamed Zakaria Kurdi (2017). &quot;Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics: semantics, discourse, and applications&quot;, Volume 2. ISTE-Wiley. .
* Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze (2008). &quot;Introduction to Information Retrieval&quot;. Cambridge University Press. . Official html and pdf versions available without charge.
* Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schütze (1999). &quot;Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing&quot;. The MIT Press. .
* David M. W. Powers and Christopher C. R. Turk (1989). &quot;Machine Learning of Natural Language&quot;. Springer-Verlag. .
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="0" end="27" title="Natural language processing" label="Natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="29" end="32" title="Natural language processing" label="NLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="51" end="67" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="83" end="106" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="203" end="219" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q816826" start="251" end="272" title="information retrieval" label="information retrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="274" end="298" title="knowledge representation" label="knowledge representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="303" end="328" title="computational linguistics" label="computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="344" end="355" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="405" end="423" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q302088" start="425" end="444" title="text classification" label="text classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078276" start="446" end="476" title="natural-language understanding" label="natural-language understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513879" start="482" end="509" title="natural language generation" label="natural-language generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="599" end="610" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q772056" start="645" end="681" title="Computing Machinery and Intelligence" label="Computing Machinery and Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q189223" start="726" end="737" title="Turing test" label="Turing test"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="1073" end="1084" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q304726" start="1092" end="1104" title="Chinese room" label="Chinese room"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160483" start="1350" end="1371" title="Georgetown-IBM experiment" label="Georgetown experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="1395" end="1416" title="automatic translation" label="automatic translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q372321" start="1622" end="1634" title="ALPAC" label="ALPAC report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245113" start="1958" end="1989" title="statistical machine translation" label="statistical machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778029" start="2111" end="2117" title="SHRDLU" label="SHRDLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927302" start="2173" end="2185" title="blocks world" label="blocks world"/>
<link wikidata="Q580318" start="2227" end="2232" title="ELIZA" label="ELIZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338823" start="2252" end="2276" title="Rogerian psychotherapy" label="Rogerian psychotherapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75778" start="2289" end="2306" title="Joseph Weizenbaum" label="Joseph Weizenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2665" end="2678" title="Ross Quillian" label="Ross Quillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="2938" end="2948" title="ontology (information science)" label="ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q870780" start="3249" end="3260" title="chatterbots" label="chatterbots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967077" start="3281" end="3286" title="PARRY" label="PARRY"/>
<link wikidata="Q379294" start="3458" end="3462" title="Head-driven phrase structure grammar" label="HPSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="3504" end="3522" title="generative grammar" label="generative grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291840" start="3583" end="3597" title="Lesk algorithm" label="Lesk algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773538" start="3706" end="3733" title="Rhetorical structure theory" label="Rhetorical Structure Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125331" start="3818" end="3824" title="Racter" label="Racter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676827" start="3829" end="3840" title="Jabberwacky" label="Jabberwacky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="4263" end="4279" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="4385" end="4401" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="4449" end="4458" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Chomskyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411840" start="4489" end="4513" title="transformational grammar" label="transformational grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="4572" end="4590" title="corpus linguistics" label="corpus linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="4760" end="4779" title="machine translation" label="machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11784462" start="4829" end="4849" title="IBM alignment models" label="IBM alignment models"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="4918" end="4933" title="text corpus" label="textual corpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="4964" end="4984" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4993" end="5007" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152135" start="5659" end="5671" title="unsupervised learning" label="unsupervised"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044138" start="5676" end="5700" title="semi-supervised learning" label="semi-supervised learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q334384" start="5916" end="5935" title="supervised learning" label="supervised learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="6143" end="6157" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="6248" end="6263" title="time complexity" label="time complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q117075311" start="6288" end="6305" title="word n-gram language model" label="word n-gram model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991667" start="6372" end="6394" title="multi-layer perceptron" label="multi-layer perceptron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6427" end="6441" title="context length" label="context length"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572699" start="6498" end="6504" title="Yoshua Bengio" label="Bengio"/>
<link wikidata="Q24698708" start="6521" end="6534" title="Tomáš Mikolov" label="Tomáš Mikolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122171" start="6558" end="6587" title="Brno University of Technology" label="Brno University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457734" start="6622" end="6646" title="recurrent neural network" label="recurrent neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673982" start="6746" end="6754" title="Word2vec" label="Word2vec"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013334" start="6770" end="6793" title="representation learning" label="representation learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="6798" end="6817" title="deep learning" label="deep neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621696" start="7091" end="7108" title="language modeling" label="language modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324961" start="7153" end="7179" title="artificial intelligence in healthcare" label="in medicine and healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10871684" start="7223" end="7248" title="Electronic health record" label="electronic health records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416732" start="7678" end="7686" title="stemming" label="stemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="7689" end="7705" title="Machine learning" label="Machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621696" start="8064" end="8078" title="language model" label="language model"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="8615" end="8629" title="intractable problem" label="intractability"/>
<link wikidata="Q115305900" start="8774" end="8777" title="Large language model" label="LLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q184835" start="9010" end="9018" title="Apertium" label="Apertium"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="9071" end="9083" title="Tokenization (lexical analysis)" label="tokenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582085" start="9165" end="9185" title="knowledge extraction" label="knowledge extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652028" start="9315" end="9324" title="AI winter" label="AI winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q831366" start="9409" end="9422" title="decision tree" label="decision tree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9451" end="9464" title="Conditional (computer programming)#If–then(–else)" label="if–then rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771326" start="9556" end="9568" title="Markov model" label="Markov model"/>
<link wikidata="Q22245680" start="9753" end="9772" title="feature engineering" label="feature engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q192776" start="9836" end="9851" title="Artificial neural network" label="neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045785" start="9868" end="9885" title="semantic networks" label="semantic networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18395344" start="9890" end="9904" title="word embedding" label="word embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053937" start="10048" end="10074" title="Neural machine translation" label="Neural machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41589189" start="10105" end="10125" title="Seq2seq" label="sequence-to-sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245113" start="10230" end="10261" title="statistical machine translation" label="statistical machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="10732" end="10761" title="Optical character recognition" label="Optical character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="10848" end="10866" title="Speech recognition" label="Speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="10995" end="11009" title="text to speech" label="text to speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631839" start="11083" end="11094" title="AI-complete" label="AI-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="11117" end="11131" title="natural speech" label="natural speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266173" start="11195" end="11214" title="speech segmentation" label="speech segmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639109" start="11384" end="11398" title="coarticulation" label="coarticulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="11425" end="11438" title="analog signal" label="analog signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266173" start="11739" end="11758" title="Speech segmentation" label="Speech segmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="11848" end="11866" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="11901" end="11915" title="Text-to-speech" label="Text-to-speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948408" start="12050" end="12067" title="Word segmentation" label="Word segmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="12069" end="12081" title="Tokenization (lexical analysis)" label="Tokenization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="12528" end="12535" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="12643" end="12650" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="12652" end="12660" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="12665" end="12669" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="12807" end="12817" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="12822" end="12832" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460803" start="12909" end="12921" title="bag of words" label="bag of words"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554325" start="12987" end="13000" title="Lemmatisation" label="Lemmatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="13311" end="13337" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="Morphological segmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="13370" end="13378" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="13490" end="13500" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13578" end="13585" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="13627" end="13650" title="inflectional morphology" label="inflectional morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="13846" end="13853" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33868" start="13857" end="13863" title="Meitei language" label="Meitei"/>
<link wikidata="Q393272" start="13874" end="13886" title="Agglutination" label="agglutinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271424" start="14012" end="14034" title="Part-of-speech tagging" label="Part-of-speech tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="14068" end="14082" title="part of speech" label="part of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="14218" end="14222" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="14262" end="14266" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="14338" end="14347" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416732" start="14427" end="14435" title="Stemming" label="Stemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593673" start="14779" end="14796" title="Grammar induction" label="Grammar induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="14810" end="14824" title="formal grammar" label="formal grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451191" start="14868" end="14885" title="Sentence breaking" label="Sentence breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451191" start="14907" end="14939" title="sentence boundary disambiguation" label="sentence boundary disambiguation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172008" start="15042" end="15049" title="Full stop" label="periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="15059" end="15075" title="punctuation mark" label="punctuation mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="15144" end="15156" title="abbreviation" label="abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="15162" end="15169" title="Parsing" label="Parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q627921" start="15185" end="15195" title="parse tree" label="parse tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="15244" end="15251" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="15256" end="15272" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="15277" end="15286" title="ambiguous" label="ambiguous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377216" start="15806" end="15840" title="probabilistic context-free grammar" label="probabilistic context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481721" start="15864" end="15882" title="stochastic grammar" label="stochastic grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759657" start="15953" end="15970" title="Lexical semantics" label="Lexical semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283209" start="16040" end="16064" title="Distributional semantics" label="Distributional semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q403574" start="16121" end="16145" title="Named entity recognition" label="Named entity recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q425951" start="16345" end="16359" title="capitalization" label="capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047676" start="16483" end="16495" title="named entity" label="named entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="16760" end="16767" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="16771" end="16777" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="16920" end="16926" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="16943" end="16947" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="16992" end="16998" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="17003" end="17010" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="17049" end="17058" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271421" start="17116" end="17134" title="Sentiment analysis" label="Sentiment analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55008106" start="17145" end="17174" title="Multimodal sentiment analysis" label="Multimodal sentiment analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117075311" start="17475" end="17487" title="Word n-gram language model" label="word n-grams"/>
<link wikidata="Q796584" start="17489" end="17530" title="Term frequency-inverse document frequency" label="Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="17585" end="17598" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748079" start="17830" end="17852" title="Terminology extraction" label="Terminology extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q48522" start="17955" end="17980" title="Word-sense disambiguation" label="Word-sense disambiguation"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="18018" end="18025" title="Meaning (linguistics)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q533822" start="18234" end="18241" title="WordNet" label="WordNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012245" start="18245" end="18259" title="Entity linking" label="Entity linking"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047676" start="18304" end="18318" title="Named entity" label="named entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310755" start="18506" end="18529" title="Relationship extraction" label="Relationship extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632839" start="18635" end="18651" title="Semantic parsing" label="Semantic parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324280" start="18777" end="18788" title="Abstract Meaning Representation" label="AMR parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526815" start="18842" end="18853" title="Discourse representation theory" label="DRT parsing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19116" end="19146" title="#Natural language understanding" label="Natural language understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449085" start="19157" end="19180" title="Semantic role labeling" label="Semantic role labelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713996" start="19317" end="19323" title="Frame semantics (linguistics)" label="frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q613930" start="19373" end="19387" title="semantic roles" label="semantic roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q63087" start="19451" end="19473" title="Coreference" label="Coreference resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156751" start="19612" end="19631" title="Anaphora resolution" label="Anaphora resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="19715" end="19722" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427356" start="19898" end="19918" title="referring expression" label="referring expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129466" start="20276" end="20294" title="Discourse analysis" label="Discourse analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="20393" end="20402" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="20599" end="20609" title="speech act" label="speech act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713996" start="20786" end="20792" title="Frame semantics (linguistics)" label="frames"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20857" end="20880" title="#Semantic role labelling" label="Semantic role labelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q661936" start="21239" end="21256" title="pro-drop language" label="pro-drop language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588467" start="21262" end="21292" title="Textual entailment" label="Recognizing textual entailment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948408" start="21453" end="21471" title="Topic segmentation" label="Topic segmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836357" start="21617" end="21632" title="Argument mining" label="Argument mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="21742" end="21758" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372340" start="21867" end="21882" title="argument scheme" label="argument scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394144" start="22038" end="22061" title="Automatic summarization" label="Automatic summarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q95726727" start="22821" end="22826" title="GPT-2" label="GPT-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q117337220" start="22946" end="22963" title="Logic translation" label="Logic translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="23027" end="23046" title="Machine translation" label="Machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631839" start="23227" end="23238" title="AI-complete" label="AI-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078276" start="23397" end="23427" title="Natural-language understanding" label="Natural-language understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="23499" end="23516" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="23548" end="23556" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102454" start="24053" end="24076" title="closed-world assumption" label="closed-world assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102454" start="24087" end="24108" title="open-world assumption" label="open-world assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513879" start="24230" end="24257" title="Natural language generation" label="Natural-language generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077891" start="24729" end="24739" title="1 the Road" label="1 the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621696" start="24875" end="24889" title="language model" label="language model"/>
<link wikidata="Q105686599" start="25148" end="25159" title="Document AI" label="Document AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270587" start="25570" end="25589" title="Dialogue system" label="Dialogue management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074173" start="25645" end="25663" title="Question answering" label="Question answering"/>
<link wikidata="Q113940039" start="25930" end="25954" title="Text-to-image generation" label="Text-to-image generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="26108" end="26116" title="3D model" label="3D model"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517227" start="26133" end="26146" title="Text-to-video model" label="Text-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="27697" end="27706" title="Cognition" label="Cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="27844" end="27861" title="Cognitive science" label="Cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="27936" end="27957" title="Cognitive linguistics" label="Cognitive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28105" end="28117" title="#Symbolic NLP (1950s – early 1990s)" label="symbolic NLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="28220" end="28233" title="George Lakoff" label="George Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633818" start="28455" end="28474" title="conceptual metaphor" label="conceptual metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377216" start="29357" end="29391" title="probabilistic context-free grammar" label="probabilistic context-free grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q288759" start="30309" end="30314" title="ACT-R" label="ACT-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346375" start="30417" end="30420" title="Association for Computational Linguistics" label="ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890078" start="30505" end="30519" title="Explainable artificial intelligence" label="explainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q738567" start="30636" end="30646" title="multimodal interaction" label="multimodal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="30703" end="30726" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q115305900" start="30770" end="30790" title="large language model" label="large language model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264109" start="30824" end="30855" title="artificial general intelligence" label="artificial general intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014702" start="30869" end="30890" title="free energy principle" label="free energy principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371926" start="30963" end="30978" title="Karl J. Friston" label="Karl J. Friston"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077891" start="31005" end="31015" title="1 the Road" label="1 the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q120883091" start="31024" end="31066" title="Artificial intelligence detection software" label="Artificial intelligence detection software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826449" start="31069" end="31092" title="Automated essay scoring" label="Automated essay scoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915126" start="31095" end="31117" title="Biomedical text mining" label="Biomedical text mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156930" start="31120" end="31144" title="Compound term processing" label="Compound term processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="31147" end="31172" title="Computational linguistics" label="Computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424306" start="31175" end="31202" title="Computer-assisted reviewing" label="Computer-assisted reviewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575129" start="31205" end="31232" title="Controlled natural language" label="Controlled natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="31235" end="31248" title="Deep learning" label="Deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250411" start="31251" end="31277" title="Deep linguistic processing" label="Deep linguistic processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283209" start="31280" end="31304" title="Distributional semantics" label="Distributional semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194674" start="31307" end="31335" title="Foreign language reading aid" label="Foreign language reading aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468415" start="31338" end="31366" title="Foreign language writing aid" label="Foreign language writing aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662562" start="31369" end="31391" title="Information extraction" label="Information extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q816826" start="31394" end="31415" title="Information retrieval" label="Information retrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486692" start="31418" end="31457" title="Language and Communication Technologies" label="Language and Communication Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621696" start="31460" end="31474" title="Language model" label="Language model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976109" start="31477" end="31496" title="Language technology" label="Language technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806883" start="31499" end="31523" title="Latent semantic indexing" label="Latent semantic indexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q529909" start="31526" end="31544" title="Multi-agent system" label="Multi-agent system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630590" start="31547" end="31577" title="Native-language identification" label="Native-language identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081452" start="31580" end="31608" title="Natural-language programming" label="Natural-language programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078276" start="31611" end="31641" title="Natural-language understanding" label="Natural-language understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816772" start="31644" end="31667" title="Natural-language user interface" label="Natural-language search"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089659" start="31670" end="31708" title="Outline of natural language processing" label="Outline of natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488129" start="31711" end="31726" title="Query expansion" label="Query expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591098" start="31729" end="31748" title="Query understanding" label="Query understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310069" start="31751" end="31776" title="Reification (linguistics)" label="Reification (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358061" start="31779" end="31796" title="Speech processing" label="Speech processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578910" start="31799" end="31822" title="Spoken dialogue systems" label="Spoken dialogue systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q834191" start="31825" end="31838" title="Text-proofing" label="Text-proofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484781" start="31841" end="31860" title="Text simplification" label="Text simplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810444" start="31863" end="31899" title="Transformer (machine learning model)" label="Transformer (machine learning model)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092967" start="31902" end="31912" title="Truecasing" label="Truecasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074173" start="31915" end="31933" title="Question answering" label="Question answering"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673982" start="31936" end="31944" title="Word2vec" label="Word2vec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32117" end="32141" title="Kenna Hughes-Castleberry" label="Kenna Hughes-Castleberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q102079372" start="32200" end="32219" title="Cain&amp;#x27;s Jawbone" label="Cain&amp;#x27;s Jawbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="32344" end="32363" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="32485" end="32512" title="natural-language processing" label="natural-language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q196626" start="32609" end="32616" title="context (linguistics)" label="context"/>
<link wikidata="Q436240" start="32735" end="32751" title="ancient language" label="ancient language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="32815" end="32827" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985153" start="32841" end="32854" title="training data" label="training data"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21654" wikidata="Q3224" url="?curid=21654" title="New South Wales">
<text>New South Wales (commonly abbreviated as NSW) is a state on the east coast of :Australia. It borders Queensland to the north, Victoria to the south, and South Australia to the west. Its coast borders the Coral and Tasman Seas to the east. The Australian Capital Territory and Jervis Bay Territory are enclaves within the state. New South Wales&#x27; state capital is Sydney, which is also Australia&#x27;s most populous city. , the population of New South Wales was over 8.3 million, making it Australia&#x27;s most populous state. Almost two-thirds of the state&#x27;s population, 5.3 million, live in the Greater Sydney area.

The Colony of New South Wales was founded as a British penal colony in 1788. It originally comprised more than half of the Australian mainland with its western boundary set at 129th meridian east in 1825. The colony then also included the island territories of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land, Lord Howe Island, and Norfolk Island. During the 19th century, most of the colony&#x27;s area was detached to form separate British colonies that eventually became the various states and territories of Australia. The Swan River Colony (later called the Colony of Western Australia) was never administered as part of New South Wales.

Lord Howe Island remains part of New South Wales, while Norfolk Island became a federal territory, as have the areas now known as the Australian Capital Territory and the Jervis Bay Territory.

== History ==
=== Aboriginal Australians ===

The original inhabitants of New South Wales were the Aboriginal tribes who arrived in Australia about 40,000 to 60,000 years ago. Before European settlement there were an estimated 250,000 Aboriginal people in the region.

The Wodi wodi people, who spoke a variant of the Dharawal language, are the original custodians of an area south of Sydney which was approximately bounded by modern Campbelltown, Shoalhaven River and Moss Vale and included the Illawarra.

The Bundjalung people are the original custodians of parts of the northern coastal areas.

There are other Aboriginal peoples whose traditional lands are within what is now New South Wales, including the Wiradjuri, Gamilaray, Yuin, Ngarigo, Gweagal, and Ngiyampaa peoples.

=== 1788—British settlement ===
In 1770, James Cook charted the unmapped eastern coast of the continent of New Holland, now Australia, and claimed the entire coastline that he had just explored as British territory. Contrary to his instructions, Cook did not gain the consent of the Aboriginal inhabitants. Cook originally named the land &quot;New Wales&quot;, but on his return voyage to Britain he settled on the name &quot;New South Wales&quot;.

In January 1788 Arthur Phillip arrived in Botany Bay with the First Fleet of 11 vessels, which carried over a thousand settlers, including 736 convicts. A few days after arrival at Botany Bay, the fleet moved to the more suitable Port Jackson, where Phillip established a settlement at the place he named Sydney Cove (in honour of the Secretary of State, Lord Sydney) on 26 January 1788. This date later became Australia&#x27;s national day, Australia Day. Governor Phillip formally proclaimed the colony on 7 February 1788 at Sydney. Phillip, as Governor of New South Wales, exercised nominal authority over all of Australia east of the 135th meridian east between the latitudes of 10°37&#x27;S and 43°39&#x27;S, and &quot;all the islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean&quot;. The area included modern New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria, Tasmania. He remained as governor until 1792.

The settlement was initially planned to be a self-sufficient penal colony based on subsistence agriculture. Trade and shipbuilding were banned to keep the convicts isolated. However, after the departure of Governor Phillip, the colony&#x27;s military officers began acquiring land and importing consumer goods obtained from visiting ships. Former convicts also farmed land granted to them and engaged in trade. Farms spread to the more fertile lands surrounding Paramatta, Windsor and Camden, and by 1803 the colony was self-sufficient in grain. Boat building was developed to make travel easier and exploit the marine resources of the coastal settlements. Sealing and whaling became important industries.

In March 1804, Irish convicts led around 300 rebels in the Castle Hill Rebellion, an attempt to march on Sydney, commandeer a ship, and sail to freedom. Poorly armed, and with their leader Philip Cunningham captured, about 100 troops and volunteers routed the main body of insurgents at Rouse Hill. At least 39 convicts were killed in the uprising and subsequent executions.

Lachlan Macquarie (governor 1810–1821) commissioned the construction of roads, wharves, churches and public buildings, sent explorers out from Sydney, and employed a planner to design the street layout of Sydney. A road across the Blue Mountains was completed in 1815, opening the way for large scale farming and grazing in the lightly wooded pastures west of the Great Dividing Range.
In 1825 Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (now Tasmania) became a separate colony and the western border of New South Wales was extended to the 129th meridian east (now the West Australian border).

New South Wales established a military outpost on King George Sound in Western Australia in 1826 which was later transferred to the Swan River colony.

In 1839, the UK decided to formally annex at least part of New Zealand to New South Wales. It was administered as a dependency until becoming the separate Colony of New Zealand on 3 May 1841.

From the 1820s, squatters increasingly established unauthorised cattle and sheep runs beyond the official limits of the settled colony. In 1836, an annual licence was introduced in an attempt to control the pastoral industry, but booming wool prices and the high cost of land in the settled areas encouraged further squatting. The expansion of the pastoral industry led to violent episodes of conflict between settlers and traditional Aboriginal landowners, such as the Myall Creek massacre of 1838. By 1844 wool accounted for half of the colony&#x27;s exports and by 1850 most of the eastern third of New South Wales was controlled by fewer than 2,000 pastoralists.

The transportation of convicts to New South Wales ended in 1840, and in 1842 a Legislative Council was introduced, with two-thirds of its members elected and one-third appointed by the governor. Former convicts were granted the vote, but a property qualification meant that only one in five adult males were enfranchised.

By 1850 the settler population of New South Wales had grown to 180,000, not including the 70,000 living in the area which became the separate colony of Victoria in 1851.

=== 1850s to 1890s ===
In 1856 New South Wales achieved responsible government with the introduction of a bicameral parliament comprising a directly elected Legislative Assembly and a nominated Legislative Council. William Charles Wentworth was prominent in this process, but his proposal for a hereditary upper house was widely ridiculed and subsequently dropped.

The property qualification for voters had been reduced in 1851, and by 1856 95 per cent of adult males in Sydney, and 55 per cent in the colony as a whole, were eligible to vote. Full adult male suffrage was introduced in 1858. In 1859 Queensland became a separate colony.

In 1861 the NSW parliament legislated land reforms intended to encourage family farms and mixed farming and grazing ventures. The amount of land under cultivation subsequently increased from 246,000 acres in 1861 to 800,000 acres in the 1880s. Wool production also continued to grow, and by the 1880s New South Wales produced almost half of Australia&#x27;s wool. Coal had been discovered in the early years of settlement and gold in 1851, and by the 1890s wool, gold and coal were the main exports of the colony.

The NSW economy also became more diversified. From the 1860s, New South Wales had more people employed in manufacturing than any other Australian colony. The NSW government also invested strongly in infrastructure such as railways, telegraph, roads, ports, water and sewerage. By 1889 it was possible to travel by train from Brisbane to Adelaide via Sydney and Melbourne. The extension of the rail network inland also encouraged regional industries and the development of the wheat belt.

In the 1880s trade unions grew and were extended to lower skilled workers. In 1890 a strike in the shipping industry spread to wharves, railways, mines, and shearing sheds. The defeat of the strike was one of the factors leading the Trades and Labor Council to form a political party. The Labor Electoral League won a quarter of seats in the NSW elections of 1891 and held the balance of power between the Free Trade Party and the Protectionist Party.

The suffragette movement was developing at this time. The Womanhood Suffrage League of New South Wales was founded in 1891.

=== 1901—Federation of Australia ===
A Federal Council of Australasia was formed in 1885 but New South Wales declined to join. A major obstacle to the federation of the Australian colonies was the protectionist policies of Victoria which conflicted with the free trade policies dominant in New South Wales. Nevertheless, the NSW premier Henry Parkes was a strong advocate of federation and his Tenterfield Oration in 1889 was pivotal in gathering support for the cause. Parkes also struck a deal with Edmund Barton, leader of the NSW Protectionist Party, whereby they would work together for federation and leave the question of a protective tariff for a future Australian government to decide.

In early 1893 the first citizens&#x27; Federation League was established in the Riverina region of New South Wales and many other leagues were soon formed in the colony. The leagues organised a conference in Corowa in July 1893 which developed a plan for federation. The new NSW premier, George Reid, endorsed the &quot;Corowa plan&quot; and in 1895 convinced the majority of other premiers to adopt it. A constitutional convention held sessions in 1897 and 1898 which resulted in a proposed constitution for a Commonwealth of federated states. However, a referendum on the constitution failed to gain the required majority in New South Wales after that colony&#x27;s Labor party campaigned against it and premier Reid gave it such qualified support that he earned the nickname &quot;yes-no Reid&quot;.

The premiers of the other colonies agreed to a number of concessions to New South Wales (particularly that the future Commonwealth capital would be located in NSW), and in 1899 further referendums were held in all the colonies except Western Australia. All resulted in yes votes, with the yes vote in New South Wales meeting the required majority. The Imperial Parliament passed the necessary enabling legislation in 1900 and Western Australia subsequently voted to join the new federation. The Commonwealth of Australia was inaugurated on 1 January 1901, and Barton was sworn in as Australia&#x27;s first prime minister.

=== 1901 to 1945 ===

The first post-federation NSW governments were Progressive or Liberal Reform and implemented a range of social reforms with Labor support. Women won the right to vote in NSW elections in 1902, but were ineligible to stand for parliament until 1918. Labor increased its parliamentary representation in every election from 1904 before coming to power in 1910 with a majority of one seat.

The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 saw more NSW volunteers for service than the federal authorities could handle, leading to unrest in camps as recruits waited for transfer overseas. In 1916 NSW premier William Holman and a number of his supporters were expelled from the Labor party over their support for military conscription. Holman subsequently formed a Nationalist government which remained in power until 1920. Despite a huge victory for Holman&#x27;s pro-conscription Nationalists in the elections of March 1917, a second referendum on conscription held in December that year was defeated in New South Wales and nationally.

Following the war, NSW governments embarked on large public works programs including road building, the extension and electrification of the rail network and the construction of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. The works were largely funded by loans from London, leading to a debt crisis after the onset of the Great Depression in 1929. New South Wales was hit harder by the depression than other states, and by 1932 one third of union members in the state were unemployed, compared with 20 per cent nationally.

Labor won the November 1930 NSW elections and Jack Lang became premier for the second time. In 1931 Lang proposed a plan to deal with the depression which included a suspension of interest payments to British creditors, diverting the money to unemployment relief. The Commonwealth and state premiers rejected the plan and later that year Lang&#x27;s supporters in the Commonwealth parliament brought down James Scullin&#x27;s federal Labor government. The NSW Lang government subsequently defaulted on overseas interest payments and was dismissed from office in May 1932 by the governor, Sir Phillip Game.

The following elections were won comfortably by the United Australia Party in coalition with the Country Party. Bertram Stevens became premier, remaining in office until 1939, when he was replaced by Alexander Mair.

A contemporary study by sociologist A. P. Elkin found that the population of New South Wales responded to the outbreak of war in 1939 with pessimism and apathy. This changed with the threat of invasion by Japan, which entered the war in December 1941. In May 1942 three Japanese midget submarines entered Sydney harbour and sank a naval ship, killing 29 men aboard. The following month Sydney and Newcastle were shelled by Japanese warships. American troops began arriving in the state in large numbers. Manufacturing, steelmaking, shipbuilding and rail transport all grew with the war effort and unemployment virtually disappeared.

A Labor government led by William McKell was elected in May 1941. The McKell government benefited from full employment, budget surpluses, and a co-operative relationship with John Curtin&#x27;s federal Labor government. McKell became the first Labor leader to serve a full term and to be re-elected for a second. The Labor party was to govern New South Wales until 1965.

=== Post-war period ===
The Labor government introduced two weeks of annual paid leave for most NSW workers in 1944, and the 40-hour working week was implemented by 1947. The post-war economic boom brought near-full employment and rising living standards, and the government engaged in large spending programs on housing, dams, electricity generation and other infrastructure. In 1954 the government announced a plan for the construction of an opera house on Bennelong Point. The design competition was won by Jørn Utzon. Controversy over the cost of the Sydney Opera House and construction delays became a political issue and was a factor in the eventual defeat of Labor in 1965 by the conservative Liberal Party and Country Party coalition led by Robert Askin.

The Askin government promoted private development, law and order issues and greater state support for non-government schools. However, Askin, a former bookmaker, became increasingly associated with illegal bookmaking, gambling and police corruption.

In the late 1960s, a secessionist movement in the New England region of the state led to a 1967 referendum on the issue which was narrowly defeated. The new state would have consisted of much of northern NSW including Newcastle.

Askin&#x27;s resignation in 1975 was followed by a number of short-lived premierships by Liberal Party leaders. When a general election came in 1976, the ALP under Neville Wran came to power. Wran was able to transform this narrow one seat victory into landslide wins (known as Wranslides) in 1978 and 1981.

After winning a comfortable though reduced majority in 1984, Wran resigned as premier and left parliament. His replacement Barrie Unsworth struggled to emerge from Wran&#x27;s shadow and lost a 1988 election against a resurgent Liberal Party led by Nick Greiner. The Greiner government embarked on an efficiency program involving public sector cost-cutting, the corporatisation of government agencies and the privatisation of some government services. An Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) was created. Greiner called a snap election in 1991 which the Liberals were expected to win. However, the ALP polled extremely well and the Liberals lost their majority and needed the support of independents to retain power.

In 1992, Greiner was investigated by ICAC for possible corruption over the offer of a public service position to a former Liberal MP. Greiner resigned but was later cleared of corruption. His replacement as Liberal leader and Premier was John Fahey, whose government narrowly lost the 1995 election to the ALP under Bob Carr, who was to become the longest serving premier of the state.

The Carr government (1995–2005) largely continued its predecessors&#x27; focus on the efficient delivery of government services such as health, education, transport and electricity. There was an increasing emphasis on public-private partnerships to deliver infrastructure such as freeways, tunnels and rail links. The Carr government gained popularity for its successful organisation of international events, especially the 2000 Sydney Olympics, but Carr himself was critical of the federal government over its high immigration intake, arguing that a disproportionate number of new migrants were settling in Sydney, putting undue pressure on state infrastructure.

Carr unexpectedly resigned from office in 2005 and was replaced by Morris Iemma, who remained premier after being re-elected in the March 2007 state election, until he was replaced by Nathan Rees in September 2008. Rees was subsequently replaced by Kristina Keneally in December 2009, who became the first female premier of New South Wales. Keneally&#x27;s government was defeated at the 2011 state election and Barry O&#x27;Farrell became Premier on 28 March. On 17 April 2014 O&#x27;Farrell stood down as Premier after misleading an ICAC investigation concerning a gift of a bottle of wine. The Liberal Party then elected Treasurer Mike Baird as party leader and Premier. Baird resigned as Premier on 23 January 2017, and was replaced by Gladys Berejiklian.

On 23 March 2019, Berejiklian led the Coalition to a third term in office. She maintained high personal approval ratings for her management of a bushfire crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. However, Berejiklian resigned as premier on 5 October 2021, following the opening of an ICAC investigation into her actions between 2012 and 2018. She was replaced by Dominic Perrottet.

== Geography ==

New South Wales is bordered on the north by Queensland, on the west by South Australia, on the south by Victoria and on the east by the Coral and Tasman Seas. The Australian Capital Territory and the Jervis Bay Territory form a separately administered entity that is bordered entirely by New South Wales. The state can be divided geographically into four areas. New South Wales&#x27;s three largest cities, Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong, lie near the centre of a narrow coastal strip extending from cool temperate areas on the far south coast to subtropical areas near the Queensland border. Gulaga National Park in the South Coast features the southernmost subtropical rainforest in the state.

The Illawarra region is centred on the city of Wollongong, with the Shoalhaven, Eurobodalla and the Sapphire Coast to the south. The Central Coast lies between Sydney and Newcastle, with the Mid North Coast and Northern Rivers regions reaching northwards to the Queensland border. Tourism is important to the economies of coastal towns such as Coffs Harbour, Lismore, Nowra and Port Macquarie, but the region also produces seafood, beef, dairy, fruit, sugar cane and timber.
The Great Dividing Range extends from Victoria in the south through New South Wales to Queensland, parallel to the narrow coastal plain. This area includes the Snowy Mountains, the Northern, Central and Southern Tablelands, the Southern Highlands and the South West Slopes. Whilst not particularly steep, many peaks of the range rise above , with the highest Mount Kosciuszko at . Skiing in Australia began in this region at Kiandra around 1861. The relatively short ski season underwrites the tourist industry in the Snowy Mountains. Agriculture, particularly the wool industry, is important throughout the highlands. Major centres include Armidale, Bathurst, Bowral, Goulburn, Inverell, Orange, Queanbeyan and Tamworth.

There are numerous forests in New South Wales, with such tree species as Red Gum Eucalyptus and Crow Ash (&quot;Flindersia australis&quot;), being represented. Forest floors have a diverse set of understory shrubs and fungi. One of the widespread fungi is Witch&#x27;s Butter (&quot;Tremella mesenterica&quot;).

The western slopes and plains fill a significant portion of the state&#x27;s area and have a much sparser population than areas nearer the coast. Agriculture is central to the economy of the western slopes, particularly the Riverina region and Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area in the state&#x27;s south-west. Regional cities such as Albury, Dubbo, Griffith and Wagga Wagga and towns such as Deniliquin, Leeton and Parkes exist primarily to service these agricultural regions. The western slopes descend slowly to the western plains that comprise almost two-thirds of the state and are largely arid or semi-arid. The mining town of Broken Hill is the largest centre in this area.

One possible definition of the centre for New South Wales is located west-north-west of Tottenham.

=== Climate ===

A little more than half of the state has an arid to semi arid climate, where the rainfall averages from a year throughout most of this climate zone. Summer temperatures can be very hot, while winter nights can be quite cold in this region. Rainfall varies throughout the state. The far north-west receives the least, less than annually, while the east receives between of rain.

The climate along the flat, coastal plain east of the range varies from oceanic in the south to humid subtropical in the northern half of the state, right above Wollongong. Rainfall is highest in this area; however, it still varies from around to as high as in the wettest areas, for example Dorrigo. In the state&#x27;s south, on the westward side of the Great Dividing Range, rainfall is heaviest in winter due to cold fronts which move across southern Australia, while in the north, around Lismore, rain is heaviest in summer from tropical systems and occasionally even cyclones. During late winter, the coastal plain is relatively dry due to foehn winds that originate from the Great Dividing Range; the mountain range block the moist, westerly cold fronts that arrive from the Southern Ocean, whereby providing generally clear conditions on the leeward side.

The climate in the southern half of the state is generally warm to hot in summer and cool in the winter. The seasons are more defined in the southern half of the state, especially as one moves inland towards South West Slopes, Central West and the Riverina region. The climate in the northeast region of the state, or the North Coast, bordering Queensland, is hot and humid in the summer and mild in winter. The Northern Tablelands, which are also on the North coast, have relatively mild summers and cold winters, due to their high elevation on the Great Dividing Range.

Peaks along the Great Dividing Range vary from to over above sea level. Temperatures can be cool to cold in winter with frequent frosts and snowfall, and are rarely hot in summer due to the elevation. Lithgow has a climate typical of the range, as do the regional cities of Orange, Cooma, Oberon and Armidale. Such places fall within the subtropical highland (&quot;Cwb&quot;) variety. Rainfall is moderate in this area, ranging from .

Snowfall is common in the higher parts of the range, sometimes occurring as far north as the Queensland border. On the highest peaks of the Snowy Mountains, the climate can be subpolar oceanic and even alpine on the higher peaks with very cold temperatures and heavy snow. The Blue Mountains, Southern Tablelands and Central Tablelands, which are situated on the Great Dividing Range, have mild to warm summers and cold winters, although not as severe as those in the Snowy Mountains.

The highest maximum temperature recorded was at Menindee in the west of the state on 10 January 1939. The lowest minimum temperature was at Charlotte Pass in the Snowy Mountains on 29 June 1994. This is also the lowest temperature recorded in the whole of Australia excluding the Antarctic Territory.

== Demographics ==

The estimated population of New South Wales at the end of December 2021 was 8,095,430 people, representing approximately 31.42% of nationwide population.

In June 2017 Sydney was home to almost two-thirds (65.3%) of the NSW population.

===Cities and towns===

===Ancestry and immigration===
At the , the most commonly nominated ancestries were: 
At the , there were 2,794,666 people living in New South Wales that were born overseas, accounting for 34.6% of the population. Only 43.7% of the population had both parents born in Australia.

3.4% of the population, or 278,043 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2021.

===Language===
According to the , 29.5% of people in New South Wales speak a language other than English at home with Mandarin (3.4%), Arabic (2.8%), Cantonese (1.8%), Vietnamese (1.5%) and Hindi (1.0%) being the most popular.

===Religion===
In the , Christianity was the primary religious affiliation in New South Wales (NSW), comprising 47.6% of the population, mostly Roman Catholicism (22.4%) and Anglicanism (11.9%). This percentage has declined over time, while the number of people identifying with no religious affiliation has risen. In 2016, the Christian affiliation rate was 55.2%, and in 1971 it was 88.4%. About 33.2% of people in NSW reported having no religious affiliation in 2021.

About 12.1% of the population in 2021 identified with a non-Christian religion, with Islam (4.3%), Hinduism (3.4%), and Buddhism (2.8%) being the most common.

== Government ==
Executive power is formally exercised by the Executive Council, which consists of the Governor and senior ministers. The current governor is Margaret Beazley. The governor commissions as premier the leader of the parliamentary political party that can command a simple majority of votes in the Legislative Assembly. The premier then recommends the appointment of other members of the two Houses to the Ministry, under the principle of responsible or Westminster government. As in other Westminster systems, there is no constitutional requirement in New South Wales for the government to be formed from the parliament—merely convention. As of early July 2023, the premier is Chris Minns of the Labor Party.

=== Constitution ===

The form of the Government of New South Wales is prescribed in its Constitution, dating from 1856 and currently the &quot;Constitution Act 1902&quot; (NSW). Since 1901 New South Wales has been a state of the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Australian Constitution regulates its relationship with the Commonwealth.

In 2006, the Constitution Amendment Pledge of Loyalty Act 2006 No 6, was enacted to amend the NSW Constitution Act 1902 to require Members of the New South Wales Parliament and its Ministers to take a pledge of loyalty to Australia and to the people of New South Wales instead of swearing allegiance to Elizabeth II her heirs and successors, and to revise the oaths taken by Executive Councillors. The Pledge of Loyalty Act was officially assented to by the Queen on 3 April 2006. The option to swear allegiance to the Queen was restored as an alternative option in June 2012.

Under the Australian Constitution, New South Wales ceded certain legislative and judicial powers to the Commonwealth, but retained independence in all other areas. The New South Wales Constitution says: &quot;The Legislature shall, subject to the provisions of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, have power to make laws for the peace, welfare, and good government of New South Wales in all cases whatsoever&quot;.

=== Parliament ===

The first responsible self-government of New South Wales was formed on 6 June 1856 with Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson appointed by Governor Sir William Denison as its first Colonial Secretary which in those days accounted also as the Premier. The Parliament of New South Wales is composed of the Sovereign and two houses: the Legislative Assembly (lower house), and the Legislative Council (upper house). Elections are held every four years on the fourth Saturday of March, the most recent being on 23 March 2019. At each election one member is elected to the Legislative Assembly from each of 93 electoral districts and half of the 42 members of the Legislative Council are elected by a statewide electorate.

=== Local government ===
New South Wales is divided into 128 local government areas. There is also the Unincorporated Far West Region which is not part of any local government area, in the sparsely inhabited Far West, and Lord Howe Island, which is also unincorporated but self-governed by the Lord Howe Island Board.

=== Emergency services ===
New South Wales is policed by the New South Wales Police Force, a statutory authority. Established in 1862, the New South Wales Police Force investigates Summary and Indictable offences throughout the State of New South Wales. The state has two fire services: the volunteer based New South Wales Rural Fire Service, which is responsible for the majority of the state, and the Fire and Rescue NSW, a government agency responsible for protecting urban areas. There is some overlap in due to suburbanisation. Ambulance services are provided through the New South Wales Ambulance. Rescue services (i.e. vertical, road crash, confinement) are a joint effort by all emergency services, with Ambulance Rescue, Police Rescue Squad and Fire Rescue Units contributing. Volunteer rescue organisations include Marine Rescue New South Wales, State Emergency Service (SES), Surf Life Saving NSW and Volunteer Rescue Association (VRA).

== Education ==
=== Primary and Secondary ===

The NSW school system comprises a kindergarten to year 12 system with primary schooling up to year 6 and secondary schooling between years 7 and 12. Schooling is compulsory from before 6 years old until the age of 17 (unless Year 10 is completed earlier). Between 1943 and 2009, schooling was only compulsory in NSW until age 15.

Primary and secondary schools include government and non-government schools. Government schools are further classified as comprehensive and selective schools. Non-government schools include Catholic schools, other denominational schools, and non-denominational independent schools.

Typically, a primary school provides education from kindergarten level to year 6. A secondary school, usually called a &quot;high school&quot;, provides education from years 7 to 12. Secondary colleges are secondary schools which only cater for years 11 and 12.

The NSW Education Standards Authority classifies the 13 years of primary and secondary schooling into six stages, beginning with Early Stage 1 (Kindergarten) and ending with Stage 6 (years 11 and 12).
==== Record of School Achievement ====
A Record of School Achievement (RoSA) is awarded by the NSW Education Standards Authority to students who have completed at least Year 10 but leave school without completing the Higher School Certificate. The RoSA was introduced in 2012 to replace the former School Certificate.

==== Higher School Certificate ====

The Higher School Certificate (HSC) is the usual Year 12 leaving certificate in NSW. The HSC is the most popular high school credential in Australia with 75,493 students studying one or more HSC courses in 2022. Most students complete the HSC prior to entering the workforce or going on to study at university or TAFE (although the HSC itself can be completed at TAFE). The HSC must be completed for a student to get an Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (formerly Universities Admission Index), which determines the student&#x27;s rank against fellow students who completed the Higher School Certificate.

=== Tertiary ===

Eleven universities primarily operate in New South Wales. Sydney is home to Australia&#x27;s first university, the University of Sydney founded in 1850. Other universities include the University of New South Wales, Macquarie University, University of Technology, Sydney and Western Sydney University. The Australian Catholic University has three of its seven campuses in Sydney, and the private University of Notre Dame Australia also operates a secondary campus in the city.

Outside Sydney, the leading universities are the University of Newcastle and the University of Wollongong. Armidale is home to the University of New England, and Charles Sturt University. Southern Cross University has campuses spread across cities in the state&#x27;s north coast.

The public universities are state government agencies; however, they are largely regulated by the federal government, which also administers their public funding. Admission to NSW universities is arranged together with universities in the Australian Capital Territory by another organisation, the Universities Admission Centre.

Primarily vocational training is provided up the level of advanced diplomas is provided by the state government&#x27;s ten Technical and Further Education (TAFE) institutes. These institutes run courses in 138 campuses throughout the state.

== Economy ==
NSW is the largest state economy in Australia, with service industries contributing almost 80% of the state&#x27;s economic activity and 90% of its employment. Business services which includes financial services; professional, scientific and technical services; property services; information media; and telecommunications, account for nearly a third of the state economy. Major merchandise exports include coal, copper, beef and aluminium. In recent years there has been strong growth in exports of education, tourism, and financial and business services.

Construction accounted for 8% of the NSW economy in 2020–21, while manufacturing contributed 6%, mining 2%, and agriculture, forestry and fishing just under 2%.

Coal and related products are the state&#x27;s biggest merchandise export. Its value to the state&#x27;s economy is over A$5 billion, accounting for about 19% of all merchandise exports from NSW. Tourism is worth over $18.1 billion to the New South Wales economy and employs 3.1% of the workforce.

=== Agriculture ===
Agriculture accounts for just under 2% of the NSW economy. NSW has the second-highest value of agricultural production of the Australian states. is the most extensive crop in the state by hectare amounting to 39% of the continent&#x27;s harvest. The most important wheat-growing areas are the Central West, Orana, New England, North-West and Riverina.

Barley, cotton and canola are also important broadacre crops. Most cotton production is in the New England, Orana, North West and Far West regions. However, the southern regions of the state now produce almost one-third of the state&#x27;s crop by value.NSW produces about 20% of Australia&#x27;s fruit and nuts, and about 12% of its vegetables by value. The major regions for fruit and nut production are the Riverina, Coffs Harbour-Grafton and the Murray. About of vineyards lie across the eastern region of the state, with the Hunter Valley and the Riverina being major wine producing regions.

Cattle, sheep and pigs are the predominant livestock of NSW. The state has over one-third of the country&#x27;s sheep, and one-fifth of its cattle and pigs. Australia&#x27;s largest and most valuable Thoroughbred horse breeding area is centred on Scone in the Hunter Valley.

== Transport ==

Passage through New South Wales is vital for cross-continent transport. Rail and road traffic from Brisbane (Queensland) to Perth (Western Australia), or to Melbourne (Victoria) must pass through New South Wales.

=== Railways ===

The majority of railways in New South Wales are currently operated by the state government. Some lines began as branch-lines of railways starting in other states. For instance, Balranald near the Victorian border was connected by a rail line coming up from Victoria and into New South Wales. Another line beginning in Adelaide crossed over the border and stopped at Broken Hill.

Railways management are conducted by Sydney Trains and NSW TrainLink which maintain rolling stock. Sydney Trains operates trains within Sydney while NSW TrainLink operates outside Sydney, intercity, country and interstate services.

Both Sydney Trains and NSW TrainLink have their main terminus at Sydney&#x27;s Central station. NSW TrainLink regional and long-distance services consist of XPT services to Grafton, Casino, Brisbane, Melbourne and Dubbo, as well as Xplorer services to Canberra, Griffith, Broken Hill, Armidale and Moree. NSW TrainLink intercity trains operate on the Blue Mountains Line, Central Cost &amp; Newcastle Line, South Coast Line, Southern Highlands Line and Hunter Line.

=== Roads ===
Major roads are the concern of both federal and state governments. The latter maintains these through the Transport for NSW agency.

The main roads in New South Wales are
* Hume Highway linking Sydney to Melbourne, Victoria
* Princes Highway linking Sydney to Melbourne via the Tasman Sea coast
* Pacific Highway linking Sydney to Brisbane, Queensland via the Pacific coast
* New England Highway running from the Pacific Highway, at Newcastle to Brisbane by an inland route
* Federal Highway running from the Hume Highway south of Goulburn to Canberra, Australian Capital Territory
* Sturt Highway running from the Hume Highway near Gundagai to Adelaide, South Australia
* Newell Highway linking rural Victoria with Queensland, passing through the centre of New South Wales
* Great Western Highway linking Sydney with Bathurst, as Route 32 it continues west as the Mitchell Highway then as the Barrier Highway to Adelaide via Broken Hill

Other roads are usually the concern of the TfNSW or the local government authority.

=== Air ===

Sydney Airport located in the Sydney suburb of Mascot is the principal airport for not just the state but the whole nation. It is a hub for Australia&#x27;s national airline Qantas.

Other airlines serving regional New South Wales include: NSW Rural and Regional Air Transport Operators
*FlyPelican
*Jetstar
*Rex Airlines
*Virgin Australia
*Corporate Air

=== Ferries ===

Transdev Sydney Ferries operates Sydney Ferries services within Sydney Harbour and the Parramatta River, while Newcastle Transport has a ferry service within Newcastle. All other ferry services are privately operated.

Spirit of Tasmania ran a commercial ferry service between Sydney and Devonport, Tasmania. This service was terminated in 2006.

Private boat services operated between South Australia, Victoria and New South Wales along the Murray and Darling Rivers but these only exist now as the occasional tourist paddle-wheeler service.

== National parks ==
New South Wales has more than 780 national parks and reserves covering more than 8% of the state. These parks range from rainforests, waterfalls, rugged bush to marine wonderlands and outback deserts, including World Heritage sites.

The Royal National Park on the southern outskirts of Sydney became Australia&#x27;s first national park when proclaimed on 26 April 1879. Originally named simply &#x27;National Park&#x27; until 1955, this park was the second national park to be established in the world after Yellowstone National Park in the U.S. Kosciuszko National Park is the largest park in state encompassing New South Wales&#x27; alpine region.

The National Parks Association was formed in 1957 to create a system of national parks all over New South Wales which led to the formation of the National Parks and Wildlife Service in 1967. This government agency is responsible for developing and maintaining the parks and reserve system, and conserving natural and cultural heritage, in the state of New South Wales. These parks preserve special habitats, plants and wildlife, such as the Wollemi National Park where the Wollemi Pine grows and areas sacred to Australian Aboriginals such as Mutawintji National Park in western New South Wales.

== Sport ==

The most popular sports by participation in the state are soccer and tennis. The National Rugby League, which is based in Sydney, is the dominant professional spectator sport. In rugby league, the state is represented by the New South Wales Blues in the State of Origin series. The state hosts 10 of the 17 NRL teams: the Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs, Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks, Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles, Newcastle Knights, Parramatta Eels, Penrith Panthers, St George Illawarra Dragons, South Sydney Rabbitohs, Sydney Roosters, and Wests Tigers. Other rugby league competitions in the state include the NSW Cup, the Sydney A-Grade, and regional competitions administered by the NSWRL&#x27;s Country Rugby League division.

The main summer sport is cricket and the Sydney Cricket Ground hosts the &#x27;New Year&#x27; cricket Test match in January each year. The NSW Blues play in the One-Day Cup and Sheffield Shield competitions. Sydney Sixers and Sydney Thunder both play in the Big Bash League.

The state is represented in the Australian Football League by the Sydney Swans, who won the AFL premiership in 2005, and the Greater Western Sydney Giants who entered the competition in 2012.

The state is represented by five teams in soccer&#x27;s A-League: Sydney FC, Western Sydney Wanderers (2014 Asian champions), Central Coast Mariners, Newcastle Jets and Macarthur FC.

Other teams in major national competitions include the Sydney Kings and Illawarra Hawks in the National Basketball League, Sydney Uni Flames in the Women&#x27;s National Basketball League, New South Wales Waratahs in Super Rugby and New South Wales Swifts in Super Netball.

Sydney was the host of the 1938 British Empire Games and 2000 Summer Olympics. The Stadium Australia hosts major events including the NRL Grand Final, State of Origin, rugby union and soccer internationals.

The annual Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race begins in Sydney Harbour on Boxing Day. Bathurst hosts the annual Bathurst 1000 as part of the Supercars Championship at Mount Panorama Circuit.

The equine sports of campdrafting and polocrosse were developed in New South Wales and competitions are now held across Australia. Polocrosse is now played in many overseas countries.

Other professional teams include:
* Baseball: Sydney Blue Sox
* Ice hockey: Newcastle Northstars, Sydney Bears, Sydney Ice Dogs
* Motor racing: Brad Jones Racing, Team Sydney

== Culture ==

As Australia&#x27;s most populous state, New South Wales is home to a number of cultural institutions of importance to the nation. In music, New South Wales is home to the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, Australia&#x27;s busiest and largest orchestra. Australia&#x27;s largest opera company, Opera Australia, is headquartered in Sydney. Both of these organisations perform a subscription series at the Sydney Opera House. Other major musical bodies include the Australian Chamber Orchestra. Sydney is host to the Australian Ballet for its Sydney season (the ballet is headquartered in Melbourne). Apart from the Sydney Opera House, major musical performance venues include the City Recital Hall and the Sydney Town Hall.

New South Wales is home to several major museums and art galleries, including the Australian Museum, the Powerhouse Museum, the Museum of Sydney, the Art Gallery of New South Wales and the Museum of Contemporary Art.
Sydney is home to five Arts teaching organisations, which have all produced world-famous students: The National Art School, The College of Fine Arts, the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA), the Australian Film, Television &amp; Radio School and the Conservatorium of Music (now part of the University of Sydney).

New South Wales is the setting and shooting location of many Australian films, including &quot;Mad Max 2&quot;, which was shot near the mining town of Broken Hill. The state has also attracted international productions, both as a setting, such as in &quot;&quot;, and as a stand-in for other locations, as seen in &quot;The Matrix&quot; franchise, &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; and &quot;Unbroken&quot;. 20th Century Fox operates Fox Studios Australia in Sydney. Screen NSW, which controls the state film industry, generates approximately $100 million into the New South Wales economy each year.

== Sister states ==
New South Wales in recent history has pursued bilateral partnerships with other federated states/provinces and metropolises through establishing a network of sister state relationships.
The state currently has 7 sister states:
* Guangdong, China (since 1979)
* Tokyo, Japan (since 1984)
* Ehime, Japan (since 1999)
* North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany (since 1989)
* Seoul, South Korea (since 1991)
* Jakarta, Indonesia (since 1994)
* California, United States (since 1997)

== See also ==

* Geology of New South Wales
* Index of Australia-related articles
* Outline of Australia
* Outline of New South Wales
* Postage stamps and postal history of New South Wales
* Selection (Australian history)
* Squattocracy

== Notes ==

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* NSW Parliament
* Official NSW Tourism website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="0" end="15" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="41" end="44" title="New South Wales" label="NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="51" end="56" title="States and territories of Australia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330629" start="64" end="74" title="Eastern states of Australia" label="east coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78" end="88" title=":Australia" label=":Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="101" end="111" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="126" end="134" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="153" end="168" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82931" start="204" end="209" title="Coral Sea" label="Coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="214" end="224" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="243" end="271" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15577" start="276" end="296" title="Jervis Bay Territory" label="Jervis Bay Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="301" end="309" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="367" end="373" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="633" end="658" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="Colony of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="684" end="696" title="penal colony" label="penal colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872203" start="752" end="771" title="Australian mainland" label="Australian mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987495" start="781" end="797" title="Western Australia border" label="western boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134894" start="805" end="824" title="129th meridian east" label="129th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="890" end="912" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="914" end="930" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="936" end="950" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592887" start="977" end="1020" title="Territorial evolution of Australia" label="most of the colony&amp;#x27;s area was detached"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="1038" end="1054" title="British colonies" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="1090" end="1125" title="states and territories of Australia" label="states and territories of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162123" start="1131" end="1148" title="Swan River Colony" label="Swan River Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q286845" start="1167" end="1194" title="Colony of Western Australia" label="Colony of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214867" start="1328" end="1345" title="federal territory" label="federal territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15577" start="1419" end="1439" title="Jervis Bay Territory" label="Jervis Bay Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="1541" end="1551" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329367" start="1552" end="1558" title="List of Indigenous Australian group names" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29325204" start="1715" end="1724" title="Wodiwodi" label="Wodi wodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710757" start="1760" end="1768" title="Tharawal people" label="Dharawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q954186" start="1876" end="1888" title="Campbelltown, New South Wales" label="Campbelltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q823277" start="1890" end="1906" title="Shoalhaven River" label="Shoalhaven River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324945" start="1911" end="1920" title="Moss Vale" label="Moss Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q825302" start="1938" end="1947" title="Illawarra" label="Illawarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767841" start="1954" end="1971" title="Bundjalung people" label="Bundjalung people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010637" start="2016" end="2038" title="Northern Rivers" label="northern coastal areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q957298" start="2154" end="2163" title="Wiradjuri" label="Wiradjuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q175823" start="2165" end="2174" title="Gamilaraay" label="Gamilaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601713" start="2176" end="2180" title="Yuin" label="Yuin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339282" start="2182" end="2189" title="Ngarigo" label="Ngarigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623385" start="2191" end="2198" title="Gweagal" label="Gweagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790305" start="2204" end="2213" title="Ngiyampaa" label="Ngiyampaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2265" end="2275" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074145" start="2331" end="2342" title="New Holland (Australia)" label="New Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178839" start="2603" end="2620" title="First voyage of James Cook" label="voyage to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="2690" end="2704" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="2736" end="2747" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="2855" end="2865" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="2904" end="2916" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756937" start="2979" end="2990" title="Sydney Cove" label="Sydney Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q332533" start="3029" end="3040" title="Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount Sydney" label="Lord Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="3116" end="3129" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="3221" end="3248" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349678" start="3312" end="3331" title="135th meridian east" label="135th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q21319" start="4024" end="4033" title="Parramatta" label="Paramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026964" start="4035" end="4042" title="Windsor, New South Wales" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028408" start="4047" end="4053" title="Camden, New South Wales" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353495" start="4328" end="4349" title="Castle Hill convict rebellion" label="Castle Hill Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371323" start="4556" end="4566" title="Rouse Hill, New South Wales" label="Rouse Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="4645" end="4662" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q667529" start="4876" end="4890" title="Blue Mountains (New South Wales)" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="5009" end="5029" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q682405" start="5269" end="5286" title="King George Sound (Western Australia)" label="King George Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148518" start="5526" end="5547" title="Colony of New Zealand" label="Colony of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="5580" end="5589" title="Squatting (Australian history)" label="squatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785309" start="6034" end="6054" title="Myall Creek massacre" label="Myall Creek massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="6782" end="6804" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="6883" end="6903" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="6920" end="6939" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q963153" start="6941" end="6966" title="William Wentworth" label="William Charles Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352111" start="7404" end="7416" title="Robertson Land Acts" label="land reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864928" start="8357" end="8367" title="Wheatbelt (Australia)" label="wheat belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467159" start="8603" end="8627" title="NSW Trades and Labor Council" label="Trades and Labor Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508513" start="8659" end="8681" title="NSW Labor Party" label="Labor Electoral League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453449" start="8776" end="8792" title="Free Trade Party" label="Free Trade Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="8801" end="8820" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="8827" end="8838" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q106349266" start="8881" end="8925" title="Womanhood Suffrage League of New South Wales" label="Womanhood Suffrage League of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440163" start="8987" end="9017" title="Federal Council of Australasia" label="Federal Council of Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="9145" end="9158" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607143" start="9285" end="9297" title="Henry Parkes" label="Henry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="9323" end="9333" title="Federation of Australia" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161519" start="9342" end="9361" title="Tenterfield Oration" label="Tenterfield Oration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="9449" end="9462" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172341" start="9852" end="9858" title="Corowa Conference" label="Corowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="9932" end="9943" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="10800" end="10819" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Imperial Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248778" start="11140" end="11151" title="Progressive Party (1901)" label="Progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366660" start="11155" end="11169" title="Liberal Reform Party (Australia)" label="Liberal Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031242" start="11246" end="11259" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in Australia" label="right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568707" start="11692" end="11706" title="William Holman" label="William Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516976" start="11848" end="11859" title="Nationalist Party (Australia)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599048" start="12427" end="12443" title="Great Depression in Australia" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q933146" start="12675" end="12684" title="Jack Lang (Australian politician)" label="Jack Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23362" start="13034" end="13047" title="James Scullin" label="James Scullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379015" start="13217" end="13233" title="Philip Game" label="Sir Phillip Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899412" start="13348" end="13363" title="Bertram Stevens (politician)" label="Bertram Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719529" start="13436" end="13450" title="Alexander Mair" label="Alexander Mair"/>
<link wikidata="Q735387" start="14113" end="14127" title="William McKell" label="William McKell"/>
<link wikidata="Q249179" start="14918" end="14933" title="Bennelong Point" label="Bennelong Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q180398" start="14969" end="14979" title="Jørn Utzon" label="Jørn Utzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="15014" end="15032" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="15159" end="15172" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="15177" end="15190" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q768144" start="15208" end="15220" title="Robert Askin" label="Robert Askin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015808" start="15495" end="15516" title="New England New State Movement" label="secessionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467315" start="15524" end="15535" title="New England (Australia)" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="15692" end="15701" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429468" start="15868" end="15880" title="Neville Wran" label="Neville Wran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885621" start="16136" end="16151" title="Barrie Unsworth" label="Barrie Unsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339751" start="16262" end="16274" title="Nick Greiner" label="Nick Greiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007670" start="16468" end="16509" title="Independent Commission Against Corruption (New South Wales)" label="Independent Commission Against Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700035" start="16981" end="16991" title="John Fahey (politician)" label="John Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q541217" start="17059" end="17067" title="Bob Carr" label="Bob Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191545" start="17862" end="17874" title="Morris Iemma" label="Morris Iemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011892" start="17927" end="17952" title="2007 New South Wales state election" label="March 2007 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q181670" start="17979" end="17990" title="Nathan Rees" label="Nathan Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q442238" start="18044" end="18061" title="Kristina Keneally" label="Kristina Keneally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011890" start="18183" end="18202" title="2011 New South Wales state election" label="2011 state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803998" start="18207" end="18227" title="Barry O&amp;#x27;Farrell" label="Barry O&amp;#x27;Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845925" start="18429" end="18439" title="Mike Baird" label="Mike Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566385" start="18535" end="18553" title="Gladys Berejiklian" label="Gladys Berejiklian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104719764" start="18725" end="18742" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New South Wales" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290616" start="18911" end="18928" title="Dominic Perrottet" label="Dominic Perrottet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82931" start="19084" end="19089" title="Coral Sea" label="Coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="19094" end="19104" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="19111" end="19139" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15577" start="19148" end="19168" title="Jervis Bay Territory" label="Jervis Bay Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="19355" end="19361" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="19363" end="19372" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="19377" end="19387" title="Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="19497" end="19508" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489775" start="19543" end="19563" title="Gulaga National Park" label="Gulaga National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069056" start="19571" end="19582" title="South Coast (New South Wales)" label="South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q788099" start="19609" end="19631" title="subtropical rainforest" label="subtropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q825302" start="19651" end="19660" title="Illawarra" label="Illawarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q820286" start="19715" end="19725" title="Shoalhaven" label="Shoalhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q753512" start="19727" end="19738" title="Eurobodalla" label="Eurobodalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q752512" start="19747" end="19761" title="Sapphire Coast" label="Sapphire Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944411" start="19780" end="19793" title="Central Coast, New South Wales" label="Central Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083808" start="19838" end="19853" title="Mid North Coast" label="Mid North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010637" start="19858" end="19873" title="Northern Rivers" label="Northern Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q604283" start="19991" end="20004" title="Coffs Harbour" label="Coffs Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q35001" start="20006" end="20013" title="Lismore, New South Wales" label="Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343021" start="20015" end="20020" title="Nowra, New South Wales" label="Nowra"/>
<link wikidata="Q606153" start="20025" end="20039" title="Port Macquarie" label="Port Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="20126" end="20146" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="20282" end="20297" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717779" start="20303" end="20311" title="Northern Tablelands, New South Wales" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944426" start="20313" end="20320" title="Central Tablelands" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066906" start="20325" end="20344" title="Southern Tablelands" label="Southern Tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128623" start="20350" end="20368" title="Southern Highlands (New South Wales)" label="Southern Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492285" start="20377" end="20394" title="South West Slopes (New South Wales)" label="South West Slopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178167" start="20481" end="20497" title="Mount Kosciuszko" label="Mount Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486264" start="20503" end="20522" title="Skiing in Australia" label="Skiing in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q648058" start="20547" end="20554" title="Kiandra" label="Kiandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="20640" end="20655" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q606169" start="20763" end="20771" title="Armidale" label="Armidale"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="20773" end="20781" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348677" start="20783" end="20789" title="Bowral" label="Bowral"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="20791" end="20799" title="Goulburn, New South Wales" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009627" start="20801" end="20809" title="Inverell" label="Inverell"/>
<link wikidata="Q580973" start="20811" end="20817" title="Orange, New South Wales" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q606385" start="20819" end="20829" title="Queanbeyan" label="Queanbeyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434796" start="20834" end="20842" title="Tamworth, New South Wales" label="Tamworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="20926" end="20936" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q116479" start="20957" end="20977" title="Flindersia" label="Flindersia australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19733" start="21101" end="21120" title="Tremella mesenterica" label="Witch&amp;#x27;s Butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19733" start="21128" end="21148" title="Tremella mesenterica" label="Tremella mesenterica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569312" start="21162" end="21187" title="Southeast Australia temperate savanna" label="western slopes and plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="21382" end="21390" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939640" start="21402" end="21430" title="Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area" label="Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="21487" end="21493" title="Albury, New South Wales" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q706105" start="21495" end="21500" title="Dubbo" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14217100" start="21502" end="21510" title="Griffith, New South Wales" label="Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q459600" start="21515" end="21526" title="Wagga Wagga" label="Wagga Wagga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002118" start="21545" end="21555" title="Deniliquin" label="Deniliquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q956807" start="21557" end="21563" title="Leeton, New South Wales" label="Leeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q605513" start="21568" end="21574" title="Parkes, New South Wales" label="Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q270734" start="21785" end="21796" title="Broken Hill" label="Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828437" start="21922" end="21931" title="Tottenham, New South Wales" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="21995" end="21999" title="arid" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="22003" end="22012" title="semi arid" label="semi arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="22358" end="22371" title="coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="22402" end="22409" title="Oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="22426" end="22443" title="humid subtropical" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="22491" end="22501" title="Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580925" start="22622" end="22629" title="Dorrigo, New South Wales" label="Dorrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="22686" end="22706" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="22746" end="22756" title="cold front" label="cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569653" start="22776" end="22794" title="southern Australia" label="southern Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35001" start="22823" end="22830" title="Lismore, New South Wales" label="Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="22903" end="22911" title="tropical cyclone" label="cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919970" start="22976" end="22987" title="Southeast Australian foehn" label="foehn winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="23053" end="23058" title="rain shadow" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="23070" end="23078" title="westerlies" label="westerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="23112" end="23126" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="23156" end="23172" title="foehn wind" label="clear conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="23180" end="23187" title="leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492285" start="23403" end="23420" title="South West Slopes" label="South West Slopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069118" start="23422" end="23434" title="Central West (New South Wales)" label="Central West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="23443" end="23451" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010637" start="23479" end="23495" title="Northern Rivers" label="northeast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018689" start="23517" end="23528" title="New South Wales North Coast" label="North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="23540" end="23550" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717779" start="23607" end="23626" title="Northern Tablelands" label="Northern Tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="23897" end="23902" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="23908" end="23916" title="snowfall" label="snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789805" start="23969" end="23976" title="Lithgow, New South Wales" label="Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q580973" start="24042" end="24048" title="Orange, New South Wales" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129726" start="24050" end="24055" title="Cooma" label="Cooma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348059" start="24057" end="24063" title="Oberon, New South Wales" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q606169" start="24068" end="24076" title="Armidale" label="Armidale"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="24106" end="24126" title="subtropical highland" label="subtropical highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="24298" end="24308" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="24345" end="24360" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24381" end="24397" title="Oceanic climate#Subpolar variety (Cfc, Cwc)" label="subpolar oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="24407" end="24413" title="alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q667529" start="24482" end="24496" title="Blue Mountains (New South Wales)" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066906" start="24498" end="24517" title="Southern Tablelands" label="Southern Tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944426" start="24522" end="24540" title="Central Tablelands" label="Central Tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q973323" start="24739" end="24747" title="Menindee, New South Wales" label="Menindee"/>
<link wikidata="Q988298" start="24831" end="24845" title="Charlotte Pass, New South Wales" label="Charlotte Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="25611" end="25633" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="25635" end="25657" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379636" start="25662" end="25685" title="Torres Strait Islanders" label="Torres Strait Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="25815" end="25823" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="25832" end="25838" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="25847" end="25856" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="25865" end="25875" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="25887" end="25892" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927208" start="26069" end="26086" title="Catholic Church in Australia" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="26099" end="26110" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759174" start="26715" end="26731" title="Margaret Beazley" label="Margaret Beazley"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="27024" end="27046" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster government"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875673" start="27248" end="27259" title="Chris Minns" label="Chris Minns"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="27267" end="27278" title="Labor Party of Australia" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767311" start="27425" end="27446" title="Constitution Act 1902" label="Constitution Act 1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="27546" end="27569" title="Constitution of Australia" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204434" start="27657" end="27683" title="Pledge of Loyalty Act 2006" label="Pledge of Loyalty Act 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="27924" end="27936" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="28657" end="28668" title="Responsible government" label="responsible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500792" start="28735" end="28765" title="Stuart Donaldson" label="Sir Stuart Alexander Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q594881" start="28788" end="28807" title="William Denison" label="Sir William Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096918" start="28821" end="28839" title="Chief Secretary (British Empire)" label="Colonial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="28882" end="28889" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365521" start="28895" end="28924" title="Parliament of New South Wales" label="Parliament of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="28974" end="28994" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="29018" end="29037" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876212" start="29126" end="29137" title="2019 New South Wales state election" label="most recent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032154" start="29245" end="29264" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly electoral districts" label="electoral districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q648607" start="29420" end="29442" title="Local government areas of New South Wales" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179144" start="29462" end="29492" title="Unincorporated Far West Region" label="Unincorporated Far West Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066749" start="29567" end="29575" title="Far West, New South Wales" label="Far West"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="29581" end="29597" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="29613" end="29627" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011763" start="29739" end="29767" title="New South Wales Police Force" label="New South Wales Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604698" start="29771" end="29790" title="statutory authority" label="statutory authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011777" start="29985" end="30019" title="New South Wales Rural Fire Service" label="New South Wales Rural Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451532" start="30081" end="30100" title="Fire and Rescue NSW" label="Fire and Rescue NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741948" start="30255" end="30280" title="New South Wales Ambulance" label="New South Wales Ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011790" start="30534" end="30557" title="New South Wales State Emergency Service" label="State Emergency Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368464" start="30565" end="30585" title="Surf Life Saving Australia" label="Surf Life Saving NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941046" start="30590" end="30618" title="Volunteer Rescue Association" label="Volunteer Rescue Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447787" start="31145" end="31162" title="Selective school (New South Wales)" label="selective schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="31471" end="31489" title="College" label="Secondary colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220497" start="31555" end="31588" title="New South Wales Education Standards Authority" label="NSW Education Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220497" start="31847" end="31880" title="New South Wales Education Standards Authority" label="NSW Education Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758242" start="31969" end="31994" title="Higher School Certificate (New South Wales)" label="Higher School Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475496" start="32050" end="32068" title="School Certificate (New South Wales)" label="School Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274997" start="32421" end="32425" title="TAFE" label="TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824747" start="32528" end="32562" title="Australian Tertiary Admission Rank" label="Australian Tertiary Admission Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894445" start="32573" end="32601" title="Universities Admission Index" label="Universities Admission Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="32848" end="32868" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q734764" start="32917" end="32946" title="University of New South Wales" label="University of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q741082" start="32948" end="32968" title="Macquarie University" label="Macquarie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145731" start="32970" end="33002" title="University of Technology, Sydney" label="University of Technology, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141452" start="33007" end="33032" title="Western Sydney University" label="Western Sydney University"/>
<link wikidata="Q781371" start="33038" end="33068" title="Australian Catholic University" label="Australian Catholic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887921" start="33128" end="33162" title="University of Notre Dame Australia" label="University of Notre Dame Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q531285" start="33259" end="33282" title="University of Newcastle, Australia" label="University of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350021" start="33291" end="33315" title="University of Wollongong" label="University of Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814435" start="33341" end="33366" title="University of New England, Australia" label="University of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066188" start="33372" end="33396" title="Charles Sturt University" label="Charles Sturt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278780" start="33398" end="33423" title="Southern Cross University" label="Southern Cross University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="33731" end="33759" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770557" start="33789" end="33819" title="University and college admissions" label="Universities Admission Centre."/>
<link wikidata="Q3274997" start="33944" end="33975" title="Technical and Further Education" label="Technical and Further Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069118" start="35409" end="35421" title="Central West (New South Wales)" label="Central West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099450" start="35423" end="35428" title="Orana (New South Wales)" label="Orana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467315" start="35430" end="35441" title="New England (New South Wales)" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="35458" end="35466" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="35999" end="36012" title="Hunter Region" label="Hunter Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155625" start="36021" end="36029" title="Riverina" label="Riverina"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="36267" end="36279" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026207" start="36314" end="36319" title="Scone, New South Wales" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="36484" end="36489" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q805508" start="36769" end="36778" title="Balranald" label="Balranald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660181" start="37009" end="37022" title="Sydney Trains" label="Sydney Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955406" start="37027" end="37040" title="NSW TrainLink" label="NSW TrainLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585639" start="37284" end="37299" title="Central railway station, Sydney" label="Central station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177184" start="37362" end="37365" title="New South Wales XPT" label="XPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592524" start="37378" end="37385" title="Grafton railway station, New South Wales" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048896" start="37387" end="37393" title="Casino railway station" label="Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361491" start="37395" end="37403" title="Roma Street railway station" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q801455" start="37405" end="37414" title="Southern Cross railway station" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873016" start="37419" end="37424" title="Dubbo railway station" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177181" start="37437" end="37444" title="New South Wales Xplorer" label="Xplorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q800608" start="37457" end="37465" title="Canberra railway station" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874010" start="37467" end="37475" title="Griffith railway station" label="Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871640" start="37477" end="37488" title="Broken Hill railway station" label="Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793432" start="37490" end="37498" title="Armidale railway station" label="Armidale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875738" start="37503" end="37508" title="Moree railway station" label="Moree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929552" start="37556" end="37575" title="Blue Mountains Line" label="Blue Mountains Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428218" start="37577" end="37610" title="Central Coast &amp;amp; Newcastle Line" label="Central Cost &amp;amp; Newcastle Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428155" start="37612" end="37628" title="South Coast Line" label="South Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428064" start="37630" end="37653" title="Southern Highlands Line" label="Southern Highlands Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944651" start="37658" end="37669" title="Hunter Line" label="Hunter Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834923" start="37792" end="37809" title="Transport for NSW" label="Transport for NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="37859" end="37871" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="37890" end="37899" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="37912" end="37927" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540426" start="37983" end="37998" title="Pacific Highway (Australia)" label="Pacific Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="38017" end="38025" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538677" start="38062" end="38081" title="New England Highway" label="New England Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q977654" start="38162" end="38177" title="Federal Highway, Australia" label="Federal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="38217" end="38225" title="Goulburn" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="38229" end="38237" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q916940" start="38270" end="38283" title="Sturt Highway" label="Sturt Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733575" start="38319" end="38327" title="Gundagai" label="Gundagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="38331" end="38339" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q916928" start="38359" end="38373" title="Newell Highway" label="Newell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="38462" end="38483" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="38504" end="38512" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939508" start="38551" end="38567" title="Mitchell Highway" label="Mitchell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q808922" start="38580" end="38595" title="Barrier Highway" label="Barrier Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q270734" start="38612" end="38623" title="Broken Hill" label="Broken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841602" start="38681" end="38707" title="Local government in New South Wales" label="local government authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="38723" end="38737" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916103" start="38749" end="38776" title="Mascot, New South Wales" label="the Sydney suburb of Mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="38897" end="38903" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073577" start="39011" end="39021" title="FlyPelican" label="FlyPelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q767627" start="39023" end="39030" title="Jetstar" label="Jetstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q788906" start="39032" end="39044" title="Rex Airlines" label="Rex Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q727074" start="39046" end="39062" title="Virgin Australia" label="Virgin Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172398" start="39064" end="39077" title="Corporate Air" label="Corporate Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927194" start="39096" end="39119" title="Transdev Sydney Ferries" label="Transdev Sydney Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162795" start="39129" end="39152" title="Sydney Ferries" label="Sydney Ferries services"/>
<link wikidata="Q648392" start="39183" end="39199" title="Parramatta River" label="Parramatta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128502" start="39207" end="39226" title="Newcastle Transport" label="Newcastle Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704194" start="39315" end="39333" title="Spirit of Tasmania" label="Spirit of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q705705" start="39384" end="39403" title="Devonport, Tasmania" label="Devonport, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="39872" end="39886" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q113523" start="39899" end="39918" title="Royal National Park" label="Royal National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="40171" end="40196" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="40209" end="40233" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872274" start="40460" end="40495" title="National Parks and Wildlife Service (New South Wales)" label="National Parks and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811861" start="40755" end="40776" title="Wollemi National Park" label="Wollemi National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981878" start="40787" end="40799" title="Wollemia" label="Wollemi Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164871" start="40857" end="40881" title="Mutawintji National Park" label="Mutawintji National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="40982" end="40988" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="41005" end="41026" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590280" start="41149" end="41170" title="New South Wales rugby league team" label="New South Wales Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942390" start="41178" end="41200" title="State of Origin series" label="State of Origin series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="41231" end="41234" title="National Rugby League" label="NRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936583" start="41246" end="41275" title="Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs" label="Canterbury-Bankstown Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003720" start="41277" end="41303" title="Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks" label="Cronulla-Sutherland Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286027" start="41305" end="41331" title="Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles" label="Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339101" start="41333" end="41350" title="Newcastle Knights" label="Newcastle Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366024" start="41352" end="41367" title="Parramatta Eels" label="Parramatta Eels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374818" start="41369" end="41385" title="Penrith Panthers" label="Penrith Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495259" start="41387" end="41414" title="St George Illawarra Dragons" label="St George Illawarra Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325289" start="41416" end="41438" title="South Sydney Rabbitohs" label="South Sydney Rabbitohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573367" start="41440" end="41455" title="Sydney Roosters" label="Sydney Roosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567556" start="41461" end="41473" title="Wests Tigers" label="Wests Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q870460" start="41532" end="41539" title="NSW Cup" label="NSW Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41545" end="41559" title="List of NSWRL Conference Clubs in Sydney by Competition" label="Sydney A-Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177407" start="41620" end="41640" title="Country Rugby League" label="Country Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q856393" start="41693" end="41714" title="Sydney Cricket Ground" label="Sydney Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="41754" end="41764" title="Test cricket" label="Test match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177241" start="41791" end="41800" title="New South Wales cricket team" label="NSW Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990959" start="41813" end="41824" title="Australian domestic limited-overs cricket tournament" label="One-Day Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470981" start="41829" end="41845" title="Sheffield Shield" label="Sheffield Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660147" start="41860" end="41873" title="Sydney Sixers" label="Sydney Sixers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660178" start="41878" end="41892" title="Sydney Thunder" label="Sydney Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905035" start="41910" end="41925" title="Big Bash League" label="Big Bash League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="41960" end="41986" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272176" start="41994" end="42006" title="Sydney Swans" label="Sydney Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119600" start="42053" end="42082" title="Greater Western Sydney Giants" label="Greater Western Sydney Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="42163" end="42169" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219586" start="42177" end="42185" title="A-League" label="A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q330143" start="42187" end="42196" title="Sydney FC" label="Sydney FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q999035" start="42198" end="42222" title="Western Sydney Wanderers FC" label="Western Sydney Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630188" start="42224" end="42244" title="2014 AFC Champions League" label="2014 Asian champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q762294" start="42247" end="42269" title="Central Coast Mariners FC" label="Central Coast Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q732929" start="42271" end="42285" title="Newcastle Jets FC" label="Newcastle Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q59773416" start="42290" end="42302" title="Macarthur FC" label="Macarthur FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174892" start="42360" end="42372" title="Sydney Kings" label="Sydney Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307447" start="42377" end="42392" title="Hawks (NBL)" label="Illawarra Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="42400" end="42426" title="National Basketball League (Australia)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506848" start="42428" end="42445" title="Sydney Uni Flames" label="Sydney Uni Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378848" start="42453" end="42492" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q534417" start="42494" end="42518" title="New South Wales Waratahs" label="New South Wales Waratahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="42522" end="42533" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011800" start="42538" end="42560" title="New South Wales Swifts" label="New South Wales Swifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185313" start="42564" end="42577" title="Suncorp Super Netball" label="Super Netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q919154" start="42607" end="42632" title="1938 British Empire Games" label="1938 British Empire Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="42637" end="42657" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q295886" start="42663" end="42680" title="Stadium Australia" label="Stadium Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050828" start="42714" end="42729" title="NRL Grand Final" label="NRL Grand Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942390" start="42731" end="42746" title="State of Origin series" label="State of Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890261" start="42799" end="42826" title="Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race" label="Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="42867" end="42875" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983921" start="42893" end="42906" title="Bathurst 1000" label="Bathurst 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="42922" end="42944" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950645" start="42948" end="42970" title="Mount Panorama Circuit" label="Mount Panorama Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12054124" start="42994" end="43006" title="campdrafting" label="campdrafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428502" start="43011" end="43021" title="polocrosse" label="polocrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045441" start="43194" end="43202" title="Australian Baseball League" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506808" start="43204" end="43219" title="Sydney Blue Sox" label="Sydney Blue Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="43222" end="43232" title="Ice hockey" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q931815" start="43234" end="43254" title="Newcastle Northstars" label="Newcastle Northstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q536331" start="43256" end="43268" title="Sydney Bears" label="Sydney Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544685" start="43270" end="43285" title="Sydney Ice Dogs" label="Sydney Ice Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="43288" end="43300" title="Supercars Championship" label="Motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954043" start="43302" end="43319" title="Brad Jones Racing" label="Brad Jones Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695465" start="43321" end="43332" title="Tekno Autosports" label="Team Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506501" start="43521" end="43546" title="Sydney Symphony Orchestra" label="Sydney Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916790" start="43636" end="43651" title="Opera Australia" label="Opera Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823966" start="43805" end="43833" title="Australian Chamber Orchestra" label="Australian Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872164" start="43857" end="43874" title="Australian Ballet" label="Australian Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="43956" end="43974" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123393" start="44021" end="44038" title="City Recital Hall" label="City Recital Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192985" start="44047" end="44063" title="Sydney Town Hall" label="Sydney Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q769416" start="44148" end="44165" title="Australian Museum" label="Australian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107035" start="44171" end="44188" title="Powerhouse Museum" label="Powerhouse Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q910232" start="44194" end="44210" title="Museum of Sydney" label="Museum of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q705551" start="44216" end="44246" title="Art Gallery of New South Wales" label="Art Gallery of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q690242" start="44255" end="44281" title="Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney" label="Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815371" start="44472" end="44478" title="National Institute of Dramatic Art" label="(NIDA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510091" start="44539" end="44562" title="Sydney Conservatorium of Music" label="Conservatorium of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125262" start="44699" end="44708" title="Mad Max 2" label="Mad Max 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="44924" end="44934" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q892735" start="44958" end="44974" title="The Great Gatsby (2013 film)" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146380" start="44991" end="44999" title="Unbroken (film)" label="Unbroken"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="45007" end="45023" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q919514" start="45033" end="45054" title="Fox Studios Australia" label="Fox Studios Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011711" start="45066" end="45076" title="New South Wales Film and Television Office" label="Screen NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="45378" end="45390" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="sister state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="45449" end="45458" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="45481" end="45486" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376" start="45509" end="45514" title="Ehime Prefecture" label="Ehime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="45537" end="45559" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="45584" end="45589" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="45618" end="45625" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="45652" end="45662" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535385" start="45710" end="45736" title="Geology of New South Wales" label="Geology of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514129" start="45739" end="45774" title="Index of Australia-related articles" label="Index of Australia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112191" start="45777" end="45797" title="Outline of Australia" label="Outline of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130298950" start="45800" end="45826" title="Outline of New South Wales" label="Outline of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233866" start="45829" end="45881" title="Postage stamps and postal history of New South Wales" label="Postage stamps and postal history of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447718" start="45884" end="45914" title="Selection (Australian history)" label="Selection (Australian history)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424449" start="45917" end="45929" title="Squattocracy" label="Squattocracy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21655" wikidata="Q83320" url="?curid=21655" title="Nitric acid">
<text>Nitric acid is an inorganic compound with the formula . It is a highly corrosive mineral acid. The compound is colorless, but samples tend to acquire a yellow cast over time due to decomposition into oxides of nitrogen. Most commercially available nitric acid has a concentration of 68% in water. When the solution contains more than 86% , it is referred to as &quot;fuming nitric acid&quot;. Depending on the amount of nitrogen dioxide present, fuming nitric acid is further characterized as red fuming nitric acid at concentrations above 86%, or white fuming nitric acid at concentrations above 95%.

Nitric acid is the primary reagent used for nitration – the addition of a nitro group, typically to an organic molecule. While some resulting nitro compounds are shock- and thermally-sensitive explosives, a few are stable enough to be used in munitions and demolition, while others are still more stable and used as synthetic dyes and medicines (e.g. metronidazole). Nitric acid is also commonly used as a strong oxidizing agent.

== History ==

=== Medieval alchemy ===
The discovery of mineral acids such as nitric acid is generally believed to go back to 13th-century European alchemy. The conventional view is that nitric acid was first described in pseudo-Geber&#x27;s &quot;De inventione veritatis&quot; (&quot;On the Discovery of Truth&quot;, after ).

However, according to Eric John Holmyard and Ahmad Y. al-Hassan, the nitric acid also occurs in various earlier Arabic works such as the (&quot;Chest of Wisdom&quot;) attributed to Jabir ibn Hayyan (8th century) or the attributed to the Fatimid caliph al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah (985–1021).

The recipe in the attributed to Jabir has been translated as follows:Take five parts of pure flowers of nitre, three parts of Cyprus vitriol and two parts of Yemen alum. Powder them well, separately, until they are like dust and then place them in a flask. Plug the latter with a palm fibre and attach a glass receiver to it. Then invert the apparatus and heat the upper portion (i.e. the flask containing the mixture) with a gentle fire. There will flow down by reason of the heat an oil like cow&#x27;s butter.

Nitric acid is also found in post-1300 works falsely attributed to Albert the Great and Ramon Llull (both 13th century). These works describe the distillation of a mixture containing niter and green vitriol, which they call &quot;eau forte&quot; (aqua fortis).

=== Modern era ===
In the 17th century, Johann Rudolf Glauber devised a process to obtain nitric acid by distilling potassium nitrate with sulfuric acid. In 1776 Antoine Lavoisier cited Joseph Priestley&#x27;s work to point out that it can be converted from nitric oxide (which he calls &quot;nitrous air&quot;), &quot;combined with an approximately equal volume of the purest part of common air, and with a considerable quantity of water.&quot; In 1785 Henry Cavendish determined its precise composition and showed that it could be synthesized by passing a stream of electric sparks through moist air. In 1806, Humphry Davy reported the results of extensive distilled water electrolysis experiments concluding that nitric acid was produced at the anode from dissolved atmospheric nitrogen gas. He used a high voltage battery and non-reactive electrodes and vessels such as gold electrode cones that doubled as vessels bridged by damp asbestos.

The industrial production of nitric acid from atmospheric air began in 1905 with the Birkeland–Eyde process, also known as the arc process. This process is based upon the oxidation of atmospheric nitrogen by atmospheric oxygen to nitric oxide with a very high temperature electric arc. Yields of up to approximately 4–5% nitric oxide were obtained at 3000 °C, and less at lower temperatures. The nitric oxide was cooled and oxidized by the remaining atmospheric oxygen to nitrogen dioxide, and this was subsequently absorbed in water in a series of packed column or plate column absorption towers to produce dilute nitric acid. The first towers bubbled the nitrogen dioxide through water and non-reactive quartz fragments. About 20% of the produced oxides of nitrogen remained unreacted so the final towers contained an alkali solution to neutralize the rest. The process was very energy intensive and was rapidly displaced by the Ostwald process once cheap ammonia became available.

Another early production method was invented by French engineer Albert Nodon around 1913. His method produced nitric acid from electrolysis of calcium nitrate converted by bacteria from nitrogenous matter in peat bogs. An earthenware pot surrounded by limestone was sunk into the peat and staked with tarred lumber to make a compartment for the carbon anode around which the nitric acid is formed. Nitric acid was pumped out from an earthenware pipe that was sunk down to the bottom of the pot. Fresh water was pumped into the top through another earthenware pipe to replace the fluid removed. The interior was filled with coke. Cast iron cathodes were sunk into the peat surrounding it. Resistance was about 3 ohms per cubic meter and the power supplied was around 10 volts. Production from one deposit was 800 tons per year.

Once the Haber process for the efficient production of ammonia was introduced in 1913, nitric acid production from ammonia using the Ostwald process overtook production from the Birkeland–Eyde process. This method of production is still in use today.

== Physical and chemical properties ==
Commercially available nitric acid is an azeotrope with water at a concentration of 68% . This solution has a boiling temperature of 120.5 °C (249 °F) at 1 atm. It is known as &quot;concentrated nitric acid&quot;. The azeotrope of nitric acid and water is a colourless liquid at room temperature.

Two solid hydrates are known: the monohydrate or oxonium nitrate and the trihydrate .

An older density scale is occasionally seen, with concentrated nitric acid specified as 42 Baumé.

===Contamination with nitrogen dioxide===

Nitric acid is subject to thermal or light decomposition and for this reason it was often stored in brown glass bottles:
This reaction may give rise to some non-negligible variations in the vapor pressure above the liquid because the nitrogen oxides produced dissolve partly or completely in the acid.

The nitrogen dioxide () and/or dinitrogen tetroxide () remains dissolved in the nitric acid coloring it yellow or even red at higher temperatures. While the pure acid tends to give off white fumes when exposed to air, acid with dissolved nitrogen dioxide gives off reddish-brown vapors, leading to the common names &quot;red fuming nitric acid&quot; and &quot;white fuming nitric acid&quot;. Nitrogen oxides () are soluble in nitric acid.

===Fuming nitric acid===

Commercial-grade fuming nitric acid contains 98% and has a density of 1.50 g/cm3. This grade is often used in the explosives industry. It is not as volatile nor as corrosive as the anhydrous acid and has the approximate concentration of 21.4 M.

Red fuming nitric acid, or RFNA, contains substantial quantities of dissolved nitrogen dioxide () leaving the solution with a reddish-brown color. Due to the dissolved nitrogen dioxide, the density of red fuming nitric acid is lower at 1.490 g/cm3.

An &quot;inhibited&quot; fuming nitric acid, either white inhibited fuming nitric acid (IWFNA), or red inhibited fuming nitric acid (IRFNA), can be made by the addition of 0.6 to 0.7% hydrogen fluoride (HF). This fluoride is added for corrosion resistance in metal tanks. The fluoride creates a metal fluoride layer that protects the metal.

===Anhydrous nitric acid===
White fuming nitric acid, pure nitric acid or WFNA, is very close to anhydrous nitric acid. It is available as 99.9% nitric acid by assay, or about 24 molar. One specification for white fuming nitric acid is that it has a maximum of 2% water and a maximum of 0.5% dissolved . Anhydrous nitric acid is a colorless, low-viscosity (mobile) liquid with a density of 1.512–3 g/cm3 that solidifies at to form white crystals. Its dynamic viscosity under standard conditions is 0.76 cP. As it decomposes to and water, it obtains a yellow tint. It boils at . It is usually stored in a glass shatterproof amber bottle with twice the volume of head space to allow for pressure build up, but even with those precautions the bottle must be vented monthly to release pressure.

===Structure and bonding===

The two terminal N–O bonds are nearly equivalent and relatively short, at 1.20 and 1.21 Å. This can be explained by theories of resonance; the two major canonical forms show some double bond character in these two bonds, causing them to be shorter than N–O single bonds. The third N–O bond is elongated because its O atom is bonded to H atom, with a bond length of 1.41 Å in the gas phase. The molecule is slightly aplanar (the  and NOH planes are tilted away from each other by 2°) and there is restricted rotation about the N–OH single bond.

==Reactions==

===Acid-base properties===
Nitric acid is normally considered to be a strong acid at ambient temperatures. There is some disagreement over the value of the acid dissociation constant, though the p&quot;K&quot;a value is usually reported as less than −1. This means that the nitric acid in diluted solution is fully dissociated except in extremely acidic solutions. The p&quot;K&quot;a value rises to 1 at a temperature of 250 °C.

Nitric acid can act as a base with respect to an acid such as sulfuric acid:
:;Equilibrium constant: &quot;K&quot; ≈ 22
The nitronium ion, , is the active reagent in aromatic nitration reactions. Since nitric acid has both acidic and basic properties, it can undergo an autoprotolysis reaction, similar to the self-ionization of water:

===Reactions with metals===
Nitric acid reacts with most metals, but the details depend on the concentration of the acid and the nature of the metal. Dilute nitric acid behaves as a typical acid in its reaction with most metals. Magnesium, manganese, and zinc liberate :
:

Nitric acid can oxidize non-active metals such as copper and silver. With these non-active or less electropositive metals the products depend on temperature and the acid concentration. For example, copper reacts with dilute nitric acid at ambient temperatures with a 3:8 stoichiometry:
The nitric oxide produced may react with atmospheric oxygen to give nitrogen dioxide. With more concentrated nitric acid, nitrogen dioxide is produced directly in a reaction with 1:4 stoichiometry:

Upon reaction with nitric acid, most metals give the corresponding nitrates. Some metalloids and metals give the oxides; for instance, Sn, As, Sb, and Ti are oxidized into , , , and  respectively.

Some precious metals, such as pure gold and platinum-group metals do not react with nitric acid, though pure gold does react with &quot;aqua regia&quot;, a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and hydrochloric acid. However, some less noble metals (Ag, Cu, ...) present in some gold alloys relatively poor in gold such as colored gold can be easily oxidized and dissolved by nitric acid, leading to colour changes of the gold-alloy surface. Nitric acid is used as a cheap means in jewelry shops to quickly spot low-gold alloys (&lt; 14 karats) and to rapidly assess the gold purity.

Being a powerful oxidizing agent, nitric acid reacts with many non-metallic compounds, sometimes explosively. Depending on the acid concentration, temperature and the reducing agent involved, the end products can be variable. Reaction takes place with all metals except the noble metals series and certain alloys. As a general rule, oxidizing reactions occur primarily with the concentrated acid, favoring the formation of nitrogen dioxide (). However, the powerful oxidizing properties of nitric acid are thermodynamic in nature, but sometimes its oxidation reactions are rather kinetically non-favored. The presence of small amounts of nitrous acid () greatly increases the rate of reaction.

Although chromium (Cr), iron (Fe), and aluminium (Al) readily dissolve in dilute nitric acid, the concentrated acid forms a metal-oxide layer that protects the bulk of the metal from further oxidation. The formation of this protective layer is called passivation. Typical passivation concentrations range from 20% to 50% by volume. Metals that are passivated by concentrated nitric acid are iron, cobalt, chromium, nickel, and aluminium.

===Reactions with non-metals===
Being a powerful oxidizing acid, nitric acid reacts with many organic materials, and the reactions may be explosive. The hydroxyl group will typically strip a hydrogen from the organic molecule to form water, and the remaining nitro group takes the hydrogen&#x27;s place. Nitration of organic compounds with nitric acid is the primary method of synthesis of many common explosives, such as nitroglycerin and trinitrotoluene (TNT). As very many less stable byproducts are possible, these reactions must be carefully thermally controlled, and the byproducts removed to isolate the desired product.

Reaction with non-metallic elements, with the exceptions of nitrogen, oxygen, noble gases, silicon, and halogens other than iodine, usually oxidizes them to their highest oxidation states as acids with the formation of nitrogen dioxide for concentrated acid and nitric oxide for dilute acid.
:

Concentrated nitric acid oxidizes , , and  into , , and , respectively. Although it reacts with graphite and amorphous carbon, it does not react with diamond; it can separate diamond from the graphite that it oxidizes.

===Xanthoproteic test===
Nitric acid reacts with proteins to form yellow nitrated products. This reaction is known as the xanthoproteic reaction. This test is carried out by adding concentrated nitric acid to the substance being tested, and then heating the mixture. If proteins that contain amino acids with aromatic rings are present, the mixture turns yellow. Upon adding a base such as ammonia, the color turns orange. These color changes are caused by nitrated aromatic rings in the protein. Xanthoproteic acid is formed when the acid contacts epithelial cells. Respective local skin color changes are indicative of inadequate safety precautions when handling nitric acid.

==Production==
Industrial nitric acid production uses the Ostwald process. The combined Ostwald and Haber processes are extremely efficient, requiring only air and natural gas feedstocks.

The Ostwald process&#x27; technical innovation is the proper conditions under which anhydrous ammonia burns to nitric oxide (NO) instead of dinitrogen (). The nitric oxide is then oxidized, often with atmospheric oxygen, to nitrogen dioxide ():
The dioxide then disproportionates in water to nitric acid and the nitric oxide feedstock:
The net reaction is maximal oxidation of ammonia:
Dissolved nitrogen oxides are either stripped (in the case of white fuming nitric acid) or remain in solution to form red fuming nitric acid.

Commercial grade nitric acid solutions are usually between 52% and 68% nitric acid by mass, the maximum distillable concentration. Further dehydration to 98% can be achieved with concentrated . Historically, higher acid concentrations were also produced by dissolving additional nitrogen dioxide in the acid, but the last plant in the United States ceased using that process in 2012.

More recently, electrochemical means have been developed to produce anhydrous acid from concentrated nitric acid feedstock.

===Laboratory synthesis===
Laboratory-scale nitric acid syntheses abound. Most take inspiration from the industrial techniques.

A wide variety of nitrate salts metathesize with sulfuric acid () — for example, sodium nitrate:
Distillation at nitric acid&#x27;s 83 °C boiling point then separates the solid metal-salt residue. The resulting acid solution is the 68.5% azeotrope, and can be further concentrated (as in industry) with either sulfuric acid or magnesium nitrate.

Alternatively, thermal decomposition of copper(II) nitrate gives nitrogen dioxide and oxygen gases; these are then passed through water or hydrogen peroxide as in the Ostwald process:
:or

==Uses==
The main industrial use of nitric acid is for the production of fertilizers. Nitric acid is neutralized with ammonia to give ammonium nitrate. This application consumes 75–80% of the 26 million tonnes produced annually (1987). The other main applications are for the production of explosives, nylon precursors, and specialty organic compounds.

===Precursor to organic nitrogen compounds===

In organic synthesis, industrial and otherwise, the nitro group is a versatile functional group. A mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids introduces a nitro substituent onto various aromatic compounds by electrophilic aromatic substitution. Many explosives, such as TNT, are prepared this way:

Either concentrated sulfuric acid or oleum absorbs the excess water.

The nitro group can be reduced to give an amine group, allowing synthesis of aniline compounds from various nitrobenzenes:

===Use as an oxidant===
The precursor to nylon, adipic acid, is produced on a large scale by oxidation of &quot;KA oil&quot;—a mixture of cyclohexanone and cyclohexanol—with nitric acid.

===Rocket propellant===
Nitric acid has been used in various forms as the oxidizer in liquid-fueled rockets. These forms include red fuming nitric acid, white fuming nitric acid, mixtures with sulfuric acid, and these forms with HF inhibitor. IRFNA (inhibited red fuming nitric acid) was one of three liquid fuel components for the BOMARC missile.

===Niche uses===

====Metal processing====

Nitric acid can be used to convert metals to oxidized forms, such as converting copper metal to cupric nitrate. It can also be used in combination with hydrochloric acid as aqua regia to dissolve noble metals such as gold (as chloroauric acid). These salts can be used to purify gold and other metals beyond 99.9% purity by processes of recrystallization and selective precipitation. Its ability to dissolve certain metals selectively or be a solvent for many metal salts makes it useful in gold parting processes.

====Analytical reagent====
In elemental analysis by ICP-MS, ICP-AES, GFAA, and Flame AA, dilute nitric acid (0.5–5.0%) is used as a matrix compound for determining metal traces in solutions. Ultrapure trace metal grade acid is required for such determination, because small amounts of metal ions could affect the result of the analysis.

It is also typically used in the digestion process of turbid water samples, sludge samples, solid samples as well as other types of unique samples which require elemental analysis via ICP-MS, ICP-OES, ICP-AES, GFAA and flame atomic absorption spectroscopy. Typically these digestions use a 50% solution of the purchased mixed with Type 1 DI Water.

In electrochemistry, nitric acid is used as a chemical doping agent for organic semiconductors, and in purification processes for raw carbon nanotubes.

====Woodworking====
In a low concentration (approximately 10%), nitric acid is often used to artificially age pine and maple. The color produced is a grey-gold very much like very old wax- or oil-finished wood (wood finishing).

====Etchant and cleaning agent====
The corrosive effects of nitric acid are exploited for some specialty applications, such as etching in printmaking, pickling stainless steel or cleaning silicon wafers in electronics.

A solution of nitric acid, water and alcohol, nital, is used for etching metals to reveal the microstructure. ISO 14104 is one of the standards detailing this well known procedure.

Nitric acid is used either in combination with hydrochloric acid or alone to clean glass cover slips and glass slides for high-end microscopy applications. It is also used to clean glass before silvering when making silver mirrors.

Commercially available aqueous blends of 5–30% nitric acid and 15–40% phosphoric acid are commonly used for cleaning food and dairy equipment primarily to remove precipitated calcium and magnesium compounds (either deposited from the process stream or resulting from the use of hard water during production and cleaning). The phosphoric acid content helps to passivate ferrous alloys against corrosion by the dilute nitric acid.

Nitric acid can be used as a spot test for alkaloids like LSD, giving a variety of colours depending on the alkaloid.

==== Nuclear fuel reprocessing ====
Nitric acid plays a key role in PUREX and other nuclear fuel reprocessing methods, where it can dissolve many different actinides. The resulting nitrates are converted to various complexes that can be reacted and extracted selectively in order to separate the metals from each other.

==Safety==
Nitric acid is a corrosive acid and a powerful oxidizing agent. The major hazard posed by it is chemical burns, as it carries out acid hydrolysis with proteins (amide) and fats (ester), which consequently decomposes living tissue (e.g. skin and flesh). Concentrated nitric acid stains human skin yellow due to its reaction with the keratin. These yellow stains turn orange when neutralized. Systemic effects are unlikely, and the substance is not considered a carcinogen or mutagen.

The standard first-aid treatment for acid spills on the skin is, as for other corrosive agents, irrigation with large quantities of water. Washing is continued for at least 10–15 minutes to cool the tissue surrounding the acid burn and to prevent secondary damage. Contaminated clothing is removed immediately and the underlying skin washed thoroughly.

Being a strong oxidizing agent, nitric acid can react violently with many compounds.

===Use in acid attacks===
Nitric acid is one of the most common types of acid used in acid attacks.

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
* National Pollutant Inventory – Nitric Acid Fact Sheet
*Calculators: surface tensions , and densities, molarities and molalities of aqueous nitric acid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="0" end="11" title="Nitric acid" label="Nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="18" end="36" title="inorganic compound" label="inorganic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="71" end="80" title="corrosive" label="corrosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q408683" start="81" end="93" title="mineral acid" label="mineral acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="200" end="218" title="nitrogen oxide" label="oxides of nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="420" end="436" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q901644" start="493" end="515" title="red fuming nitric acid" label="red fuming nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="548" end="572" title="Nitric acid" label="white fuming nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q909607" start="647" end="656" title="nitration" label="nitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q422772" start="677" end="688" title="nitro group" label="nitro group"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="706" end="722" title="organic molecule" label="organic molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q422772" start="745" end="759" title="nitro compound" label="nitro compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="796" end="805" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q169569" start="954" end="967" title="metronidazole" label="metronidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="1009" end="1031" title="oxidizing agent" label="strong oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q408683" start="1091" end="1104" title="mineral acids" label="mineral acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1183" end="1190" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q906862" start="1257" end="1269" title="pseudo-Geber" label="pseudo-Geber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784497" start="1385" end="1403" title="Eric John Holmyard" label="Eric John Holmyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695499" start="1408" end="1426" title="Ahmad Y. al-Hassan" label="Ahmad Y. al-Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119147" start="1475" end="1487" title="Islamicate alchemy" label="Arabic works"/>
<link wikidata="Q167852" start="1544" end="1560" title="Jabir ibn Hayyan" label="Jabir ibn Hayyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="1615" end="1636" title="al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="1738" end="1759" title="sodium nitrate" label="pure flowers of nitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q107184" start="1776" end="1790" title="Copper(II) sulfate" label="Cyprus vitriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q190527" start="1814" end="1818" title="alum" label="alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="2209" end="2227" title="Pseudepigrapha" label="falsely attributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q60059" start="2231" end="2247" title="Albert the Great" label="Albert the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="2252" end="2263" title="Ramon Llull" label="Ramon Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="2357" end="2370" title="Iron(II) sulfate" label="green vitriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57330" start="2466" end="2487" title="Johann Rudolf Glauber" label="Johann Rudolf Glauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="2588" end="2605" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="2612" end="2628" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131733" start="2880" end="2895" title="Henry Cavendish" label="Henry Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="2994" end="3009" title="electric arc" label="electric sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="3024" end="3027" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="3038" end="3050" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383908" start="3457" end="3479" title="Birkeland–Eyde process" label="Birkeland–Eyde process"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3921" end="3934" title="Packed bed#Packed column" label="packed column"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683516" start="3938" end="3950" title="plate column" label="plate column"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="4980" end="4984" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="5194" end="5207" title="Haber process" label="Haber process"/>
<link wikidata="Q591214" start="5318" end="5333" title="Ostwald process" label="Ostwald process"/>
<link wikidata="Q325401" start="5517" end="5526" title="azeotrope" label="azeotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q899679" start="5952" end="5957" title="Baumé scale" label="Baumé"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="6029" end="6036" title="Heat" label="thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q901644" start="7018" end="7040" title="Red fuming nitric acid" label="Red fuming nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="7452" end="7469" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="7503" end="7523" title="corrosion resistance" label="corrosion resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="7789" end="7794" title="molarity" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="7914" end="7923" title="Anhydrous" label="Anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="7956" end="7965" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="8559" end="8568" title="Resonance (chemistry)" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="8584" end="8599" title="Resonance (chemistry)" label="canonical forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q258652" start="8610" end="8621" title="double bond" label="double bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059835" start="8688" end="8699" title="single bond" label="single bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q863695" start="8781" end="8792" title="bond length" label="bond length"/>
<link wikidata="Q422772" start="8859" end="8859" title="nitro group" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1128023" start="8927" end="8946" title="Conformational isomerism" label="restricted rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="9061" end="9072" title="strong acid" label="strong acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="9186" end="9201" title="acid dissociation constant" label="p&amp;quot;K&amp;quot;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="9484" end="9497" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="9501" end="9521" title="Equilibrium constant" label="Equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q418329" start="9546" end="9559" title="nitronium ion" label="nitronium ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q909607" start="9588" end="9606" title="aromatic nitration" label="aromatic nitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638091" start="9732" end="9756" title="self-ionization of water" label="self-ionization of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="9949" end="9953" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="9988" end="9997" title="Magnesium" label="Magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="9999" end="10008" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="10014" end="10018" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="10028" end="10028" title="Hydrogen" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="10083" end="10089" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="10094" end="10100" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="10323" end="10335" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="10372" end="10378" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="10387" end="10403" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="10585" end="10593" title="nitrates" label="nitrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596" start="10600" end="10610" title="metalloids" label="metalloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="10615" end="10621" title="metals" label="metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="10631" end="10637" title="oxides" label="oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="10653" end="10655" title="Tin" label="Sn"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="10657" end="10659" title="Arsenic" label="As"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="10661" end="10663" title="Antimony" label="Sb"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="10669" end="10671" title="Titanium" label="Ti"/>
<link wikidata="Q129163" start="10690" end="10690" title="Tin(IV) oxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q411256" start="10692" end="10692" title="Arsenic pentoxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q419889" start="10694" end="10694" title="Antimony pentoxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="10700" end="10700" title="Titanium dioxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="10721" end="10735" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="10751" end="10755" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="10852" end="10862" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="10912" end="10929" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="10964" end="10966" title="Silver" label="Ag"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="10968" end="10970" title="Copper" label="Cu"/>
<link wikidata="Q309191" start="10993" end="11003" title="gold alloy" label="gold alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309191" start="11037" end="11049" title="colored gold" label="colored gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="11196" end="11203" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="11251" end="11257" title="karat (purity)" label="karats"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="11466" end="11480" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q585302" start="11573" end="11584" title="noble metal" label="noble metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="11605" end="11610" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="11805" end="11818" title="thermodynamic" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="11879" end="11890" title="chemical kinetics" label="kinetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q211891" start="11937" end="11949" title="nitrous acid" label="nitrous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="12003" end="12011" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="12018" end="12022" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="12033" end="12042" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="12245" end="12256" title="passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="12385" end="12389" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="12391" end="12397" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="12399" end="12407" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="12409" end="12415" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="12421" end="12430" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115647" start="12482" end="12496" title="oxidizing acid" label="oxidizing acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="12586" end="12594" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="12855" end="12868" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="12873" end="12888" title="trinitrotoluene" label="trinitrotoluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="13140" end="13149" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="13153" end="13160" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="13166" end="13173" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="13233" end="13248" title="Oxidation number" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="13324" end="13336" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="13391" end="13391" title="Iodine" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q457515" start="13393" end="13393" title="White phosphorus" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7076759" start="13399" end="13399" title="Octasulfur" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q408822" start="13405" end="13405" title="Iodic acid" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="13407" end="13407" title="Phosphoric acid" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="13413" end="13413" title="Sulfuric acid" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="13626" end="13633" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q899096" start="13699" end="13721" title="xanthoproteic reaction" label="xanthoproteic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="13869" end="13879" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q210390" start="13886" end="13894" title="aromaticity" label="aromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="13967" end="13974" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938483" start="14074" end="14092" title="Xanthoproteic acid" label="Xanthoproteic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="14126" end="14141" title="epithelial cell" label="epithelial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q591214" start="14314" end="14329" title="Ostwald process" label="Ostwald process"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="14356" end="14369" title="Haber process" label="Haber process"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="14432" end="14441" title="feedstock" label="feedstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="14539" end="14546" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="14556" end="14568" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="14585" end="14595" title="dinitrogen" label="dinitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q287919" start="14646" end="14664" title="atmospheric oxygen" label="atmospheric oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="14669" end="14685" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="14728" end="14733" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q901644" start="14949" end="14971" title="red fuming nitric acid" label="red fuming nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325401" start="15070" end="15103" title="azeotrope" label="maximum distillable concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="15113" end="15124" title="desiccation" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="15166" end="15166" title="sulfuric acid" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="15309" end="15322" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="15631" end="15638" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="15662" end="15675" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="15694" end="15708" title="sodium nitrate" label="sodium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="15710" end="15722" title="Distillation" label="Distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="15923" end="15936" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411014" start="15940" end="15957" title="magnesium nitrate" label="magnesium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q286064" start="16000" end="16018" title="copper(II) nitrate" label="copper(II) nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="16099" end="16116" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="16222" end="16232" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="16283" end="16299" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="16553" end="16570" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="16629" end="16645" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q898422" start="16705" end="16716" title="substituent" label="substituent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="16730" end="16747" title="aromatic compound" label="aromatic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q597833" start="16752" end="16787" title="electrophilic aromatic substitution" label="electrophilic aromatic substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="16814" end="16817" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="16936" end="16943" title="reduction reaction" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="16955" end="16966" title="amine group" label="amine group"/>
<link wikidata="Q186414" start="16990" end="16997" title="aniline" label="aniline"/>
<link wikidata="Q407290" start="17021" end="17033" title="nitrobenzene" label="nitrobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="17078" end="17083" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q357415" start="17085" end="17096" title="adipic acid" label="adipic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409178" start="17175" end="17188" title="cyclohexanone" label="cyclohexanone"/>
<link wikidata="Q423282" start="17193" end="17205" title="cyclohexanol" label="cyclohexanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="17299" end="17307" title="oxidizer" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="17311" end="17331" title="liquid-fueled rocket" label="liquid-fueled rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q901644" start="17485" end="17507" title="red fuming nitric acid" label="red fuming nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q781894" start="17557" end="17563" title="BOMARC" label="BOMARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q286064" start="17714" end="17728" title="cupric nitrate" label="cupric nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="17770" end="17787" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="17791" end="17801" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="17835" end="17839" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q411357" start="17844" end="17860" title="chloroauric acid" label="chloroauric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q61847" start="17955" end="17972" title="Recrystallization (chemistry)" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="17977" end="18000" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="selective precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578951" start="18109" end="18121" title="gold parting" label="gold parting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533665" start="18164" end="18182" title="elemental analysis" label="elemental analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q900680" start="18186" end="18192" title="ICP-MS" label="ICP-MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q261552" start="18194" end="18201" title="ICP-AES" label="ICP-AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q900680" start="18656" end="18662" title="ICP-MS" label="ICP-MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q261552" start="18664" end="18671" title="ICP-OES" label="ICP-OES"/>
<link wikidata="Q261552" start="18673" end="18680" title="ICP-AES" label="ICP-AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q655346" start="18697" end="18727" title="atomic absorption spectroscopy" label="atomic absorption spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877" start="18824" end="18840" title="electrochemistry" label="electrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933714" start="18893" end="18914" title="organic semiconductor" label="organic semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="18955" end="18970" title="carbon nanotube" label="carbon nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="19084" end="19088" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="19093" end="19098" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="19185" end="19199" title="wood finishing" label="wood finishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="19330" end="19337" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q577889" start="19354" end="19378" title="Pickling (metal)" label="pickling stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812878" start="19469" end="19474" title="nital" label="nital"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="19908" end="19923" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q908630" start="20207" end="20221" title="iron alloys" label="ferrous alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="20311" end="20319" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="20326" end="20329" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q386477" start="20455" end="20460" title="PUREX" label="PUREX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208852" start="20471" end="20496" title="nuclear fuel reprocessing" label="nuclear fuel reprocessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="20543" end="20551" title="actinide" label="actinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="20736" end="20745" title="corrosive" label="corrosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="20746" end="20750" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="20766" end="20781" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141836" start="20815" end="20828" title="chemical burn" label="chemical burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="20849" end="20864" title="acid hydrolysis" label="acid hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="20870" end="20877" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188777" start="20880" end="20885" title="amide" label="amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="20897" end="20902" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="20935" end="20948" title="tissue (biology)" label="living tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="20955" end="20959" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13119823" start="20964" end="20969" title="flesh" label="flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="21004" end="21014" title="human skin" label="human skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="21051" end="21058" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540534" start="21729" end="21741" title="acid attacks" label="acid attacks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21663" wikidata="Q80968" url="?curid=21663" title="Nihilism">
<text>In philosophy, nihilism (; ) is any viewpoint, or a family of views, that rejects generally accepted or fundamental aspects of human existence, namely knowledge, morality, or meaning. There have been different nihilist positions, including that human values are baseless, that life is meaningless, that knowledge is impossible, or that some other highly regarded concepts are in fact meaningless or pointless. The term was popularized by Ivan Turgenev and more specifically by his character Bazarov in the novel &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot;. 

Scholars of nihilism may regard it as merely a label that has been applied to various separate philosophies, or as a distinct historical concept arising out of nominalism, skepticism, and philosophical pessimism, as well as possibly out of Christianity itself. Contemporary understanding of the idea stems largely from the Nietzschean &#x27;crisis of nihilism&#x27;, from which derive the two central concepts: the destruction of higher values and the opposition to the affirmation of life. Definitions by philosophers such as Crosby (1998) and Deleuze (1962) focus on extreme critiques of nihilism like those asserted by Nietzsche. Earlier forms of nihilism, however, may be more selective in negating specific hegemonies of social, moral, political and aesthetic thought.

The term is sometimes used in association with &quot;anomie&quot; to explain the general mood of despair at a perceived pointlessness of existence or arbitrariness of human principles and social institutions. Nihilism has also been described as conspicuous in or constitutive of certain historical periods. For example, Jean Baudrillard and others have characterized postmodernity as a nihilistic epoch or mode of thought. Likewise, some theologians and religious figures have stated that postmodernity and many aspects of modernity represent nihilism by a negation of religious principles. Nihilism has, however, been widely ascribed to both religious and irreligious viewpoints.

In popular use, the term commonly refers to forms of existential nihilism, according to which life is without intrinsic value, meaning, or purpose. Other prominent positions within nihilism include the rejection of all normative and ethical views (), the rejection of all social and political institutions (), the stance that no knowledge can or does exist (), and a number of metaphysical positions, which assert that non-abstract objects do not exist (), that composite objects do not exist (), or even that life itself does not exist.

== Etymology, terminology and definition ==

The etymological origin of &quot;nihilism&quot; is the Latin root word , meaning &#x27;nothing&#x27;, which is similarly found in the related terms &quot;annihilate&quot;, meaning &#x27;to bring to nothing&#x27;, and &quot;nihility&quot;, meaning &#x27;nothingness&#x27;. The term &quot;nihilism&quot; emerged in several places in Europe during the 18th century, notably in the German form , though was also in use during the Middle Ages to denote certain forms of heresy. The concept itself first took shape within Russian and German philosophy, which respectively represented the two major currents of discourse on nihilism prior to the 20th century. The term likely entered English from either the German , Late Latin , or French .

Early examples of the term&#x27;s use are found in German publications. In 1733, German writer Friedrich Leberecht Goetz used it as a literary term in combination with &quot;noism&quot; (). In the period surrounding the French Revolution, the term was also a pejorative for certain value-destructive trends of modernity, namely the negation of Christianity and European tradition in general. Nihilism first entered philosophical study within a discourse surrounding Kantian and post-Kantian philosophies, notably appearing in the writings of Swiss esotericist Jacob Hermann Obereit in 1787 and German philosopher Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi in 1799. As early as 1824, the term began to take on a social connotation with German journalist Joseph von Görres attributing it to a negation of existing social and political institutions. The Russian form of the word, (), entered publication in 1829 when Nikolai Nadezhdin used it synonymously with skepticism. In Russian journalism the word continued to have significant social connotations.

From the time of Jacobi, the term almost fell completely out of use throughout Europe until it was revived by Russian author Ivan Turgenev, who brought the word into popular use with his 1862 novel &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot;, leading many scholars to believe he coined the term. The nihilist characters of the novel define themselves as those who &quot;deny &quot;, who do &quot;not take any principle on faith, whatever reverence that principle may be enshrined in&quot;, and who regard &quot;at the present time, negation is the most useful of all&quot;. Despite Turgenev&#x27;s own anti-nihilistic leanings, many of his readers likewise took up the name of &quot;nihilist&quot;, thus ascribing the Russian nihilist movement its name. &quot;Nihilism&quot; was further discussed by German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, who used the term to describe the Western world&#x27;s disintegration of traditional morality. For Nietzsche, nihilism applied to both the modern trends of value-destruction expressed in the &#x27;death of God&#x27;, as well as what he saw as the life-denying morality of Christianity. Under Nietzsche&#x27;s profound influence, the term was then further treated within French philosophy and continental philosophy more broadly, while the influence of nihilism in Russia arguably continued well into the Soviet era.

Religious scholars such as Altizer have stated that nihilism must necessarily be understood in relation to religion, and that the study of core elements of its character requires fundamentally theological consideration.

== History ==
=== Buddhism ===
The concept of nihilism was discussed by the Buddha (563 BC to 483 BC), as recorded in the Theravada and Mahayana &quot;Tripiṭaka&quot;. The &quot;Tripiṭaka&quot;, originally written in Pali, refers to nihilism as &quot;natthikavāda&quot; and the nihilist view as &quot;micchādiṭṭhi&quot;. Various &quot;sutras&quot; within it describe a multiplicity of views held by different sects of ascetics while the Buddha was alive, some of which were viewed by him to be morally nihilistic. In the &quot;Doctrine of Nihilism&quot; in the &quot;Apannaka Sutta&quot;, the Buddha describes moral nihilists as holding the following views:

* The act of giving produces no beneficial results;
* Good and bad actions produce no results;
* After death, beings are not reborn into the present world or into another world;
* There is no one in the world who, through direct knowledge, can confirm that beings are reborn into this world or into another world.

The Buddha further states that those who hold these views will fail to see the virtue in good mental, verbal, and bodily conduct and the corresponding dangers in misconduct, and will therefore tend towards the latter.

==== Nirvana and nihilism ====
The culmination of the path that the Buddha taught was &quot;nirvana&quot;, &quot;a place of nothingness...nonpossession and...non-attachment...[which is] the total end of death and decay.&quot; Ajahn Amaro, an ordained Buddhist monk of more than 40 years, observes that in English &quot;nothingness&quot; can sound like nihilism. However, the word could be emphasized in a different way, so that it becomes &quot;no-thingness&quot;, indicating that nirvana is not a thing you can find, but rather a state where you experience the reality of non-grasping.

In the &quot;Alagaddupama Sutta&quot;, the Buddha describes how some individuals feared his teaching because they believe that their &quot;self&quot; would be destroyed if they followed it. He describes this as an anxiety caused by the false belief in an unchanging, everlasting &quot;self&quot;. All things are subject to change and taking any impermanent phenomena to be a &quot;self&quot; causes suffering. Nonetheless, his critics called him a nihilist who teaches the annihilation and extermination of an existing being. The Buddha&#x27;s response was that he only teaches the cessation of suffering. When an individual has given up craving and the conceit of &#x27;I am&#x27; their mind is liberated, they no longer come into any state of &#x27;being&#x27; and are no longer born again.

The &quot;Aggi-Vacchagotta Sutta&quot; records a conversation between the Buddha and an individual named Vaccha that further elaborates on this. In the sutta, Vaccha asks the Buddha to confirm one of the following, with respect to the existence of the Buddha after death:

* After death a Buddha reappears somewhere else;
* After death a Buddha does not reappear;
* After death a Buddha both does and does not reappear;
* After death a Buddha neither does nor does not reappear.

To all four questions, the Buddha answers that the terms &quot;reappears somewhere else,&quot; &quot;does not reappear,&quot; &quot;both does and does not reappear,&quot; and &quot;neither does nor does not reappear,&quot; do not apply. When Vaccha expresses puzzlement, the Buddha asks Vaccha a counter question to the effect of: if a fire were to go out and someone were to ask you whether the fire went north, south, east or west, how would you reply? Vaccha replies that the question does not apply and that an extinguished fire can only be classified as &#x27;out&#x27;.

Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu elaborates on the classification problem around the words &#x27;reappear,&#x27; etc. with respect to the Buddha and Nirvana by stating that a &quot;Person who has attained the goal [nirvana] is thus indescribable because [they have] abandoned all things by which [they] could be described.&quot; The Suttas themselves describe the liberated mind as &#x27;untraceable&#x27; or as &#x27;consciousness without feature&#x27;, making no distinction between the mind of a liberated being that is alive and the mind of one that is no longer alive.

Despite the Buddha&#x27;s explanations to the contrary, Buddhist practitioners may, at times, still approach Buddhism in a nihilistic manner. Ajahn Amaro illustrates this by retelling the story of a Buddhist monk, Ajahn Sumedho, who in his early years took a nihilistic approach to Nirvana. A distinct feature of Nirvana in Buddhism is that an individual attaining it is no longer subject to rebirth. Ajahn Sumedho, during a conversation with his teacher Ajahn Chah, comments that he is &quot;Determined above all things to fully realize Nirvana in this lifetime...deeply weary of the human condition and...[is] determined not to be born again.&quot; To this, Ajahn Chah replies: &quot;What about the rest of us, Sumedho? Don&#x27;t you care about those who&#x27;ll be left behind?&quot; Ajahn Amaro comments that Ajahn Chah could detect that his student had a nihilistic aversion to life rather than true detachment.

=== Jacobi ===

The term &quot;nihilism&quot; was first introduced to philosophy by Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi (1743–1819), who used the term to characterize rationalism, and in particular Spinoza&#x27;s determinism and the Aufklärung, in order to carry out a &quot;reductio ad absurdum&quot; according to which all rationalism (philosophy as criticism) reduces to nihilism—and thus it should be avoided and replaced with a return to some type of faith and revelation. Bret W. Davis writes, for example:The first philosophical development of the idea of nihilism is generally ascribed to Friedrich Jacobi, who in a famous letter criticized Fichte&#x27;s idealism as falling into nihilism. According to Jacobi, Fichte&#x27;s absolutization of the ego (the &#x27;absolute I&#x27; that posits the &#x27;not-I&#x27;) is an inflation of subjectivity that denies the absolute transcendence of God. A related but oppositional concept is &quot;fideism&quot;, which sees reason as hostile and inferior to faith.

=== Kierkegaard ===

Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855) posited an early form of nihilism, which he referred to as &quot;leveling&quot;. He saw leveling as the process of suppressing individuality to a point where an individual&#x27;s uniqueness becomes non-existent and nothing meaningful in one&#x27;s existence can be affirmed:

Kierkegaard, an advocate of a philosophy of life, generally argued against levelling and its nihilistic consequences, although he believed it would be &quot;genuinely educative to live in the age of levelling [because] people will be forced to face the judgement of [levelling] alone.&quot; George Cotkin asserts Kierkegaard was against &quot;the standardization and levelling of belief, both spiritual and political, in the nineteenth century,&quot; and that Kierkegaard &quot;opposed tendencies in mass culture to reduce the individual to a cipher of conformity and deference to the dominant opinion.&quot; In his day, tabloids (like the Danish magazine &quot;Corsaren&quot;) and apostate Christianity were instruments of levelling and contributed to the &quot;reflective apathetic age&quot; of 19th-century Europe. Kierkegaard argues that individuals who can overcome the levelling process are stronger for it, and that it represents a step in the right direction towards &quot;becoming a true self.&quot; As we must overcome levelling, Hubert Dreyfus and Jane Rubin argue that Kierkegaard&#x27;s interest, &quot;in an increasingly nihilistic age, is in &quot;how&quot; we can recover the sense that our lives are meaningful.&quot;

=== Russian nihilism ===

From the period 1860–1917, Russian nihilism was both a nascent form of and broad cultural movement which overlapped with certain revolutionary tendencies of the era, for which it was often wrongly characterized as a form of political terrorism. Russian nihilism centered on the dissolution of existing values and ideals, incorporating theories of hard determinism, atheism, materialism, positivism, and rational egoism, while rejecting metaphysics, sentimentalism, and aestheticism. Leading philosophers of this school of thought included Nikolay Chernyshevsky and Dmitry Pisarev.

The intellectual origins of the Russian nihilist movement can be traced back to 1855 and perhaps earlier, where it was principally a philosophy of extreme moral and epistemological skepticism. However, it was not until 1862 that the name &quot;nihilism&quot; was first popularized, when Ivan Turgenev used the term in his celebrated novel &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot; to describe the disillusionment of the younger generation towards both the progressives and traditionalists that came before them, as well as its manifestation in the view that negation and value-destruction were most necessary to the present conditions. The movement very soon adopted the name, despite the novel&#x27;s initial harsh reception among both the conservatives and younger generation.

Though philosophically both nihilistic and skeptical, Russian nihilism did not unilaterally negate ethics and knowledge as may be assumed, nor did it espouse meaninglessness unequivocally. Even so, contemporary scholarship has challenged the equating of Russian nihilism with mere skepticism, instead identifying it as a fundamentally movement. As passionate advocates of negation, the nihilists sought to liberate the Promethean might of the Russian people which they saw embodied in a class of prototypal individuals, or &quot;new types&quot; in their own words. These individuals, according to Pisarev, in freeing themselves from all authority become exempt from moral authority as well, and are distinguished above the &quot;rabble&quot; or common masses.

Later interpretations of nihilism were heavily influenced by works of anti-nihilistic literature, such as those of Fyodor Dostoevsky, which arose in response to Russian nihilism. &quot;In contrast to the corrupted nihilists [of the real world], who tried to numb their nihilistic sensitivity and forget themselves through self-indulgence, Dostoevsky&#x27;s figures voluntarily leap into nihilism and try to be themselves within its boundaries.&quot;, writes contemporary scholar Nishitani. &quot;The nihility expressed in , or , provides a principle whose sincerity they try to live out to the end. They search for and experiment with ways for the self to justify itself after God has disappeared.&quot;

=== Nietzsche ===

Nihilism is often associated with the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, who provided a detailed diagnosis of nihilism as a widespread phenomenon of Western culture. Though the notion appears frequently throughout Nietzsche&#x27;s work, he uses the term in a variety of ways, with different meanings and connotations.

With regard to Nietzsche&#x27;s development of thought, it has been noted in research that although he dealt with &quot;nihilistic&quot; themes from 1869 onwards (&quot;pessimism, with nirvana and with nothingness and non-being&quot;), a conceptual use of nihilism occurred for the first time in handwritten notes in the middle of 1880 (&quot;KSA&quot; 9.127-128). This was the time of a then popular scientific work that reconstructed the so-called &quot;Russian nihilism&quot; on the basis of Russian newspaper reports on nihilistic incidents (N. Karlowitsch: Die Entwicklung des Nihilismus. Berlin 1880). This collection of material, published in three editions, was not only known to a broad German readership, but its influence on Nietzsche can also be proven.

Karen L. Carr describes Nietzsche&#x27;s characterization of nihilism as &quot;a condition of tension, as a disproportion between what we want to value (or need) and how the world appears to operate.&quot; When we find out that the world does not possess the objective value or meaning that we want it to have or have long since believed it to have, we find ourselves in a crisis. Nietzsche asserts that with the decline of Christianity and the rise of physiological decadence, nihilism is in fact characteristic of the modern age, though he implies that the rise of nihilism is still incomplete and that it has yet to be overcome. Though the problem of nihilism becomes especially explicit in Nietzsche&#x27;s notebooks (published posthumously), it is mentioned repeatedly in his published works and is closely connected to many of the problems mentioned there.

Nietzsche characterized &quot;nihilism&quot; as emptying the world and especially human existence of meaning, purpose, comprehensible truth, or essential value. This observation stems in part from Nietzsche&#x27;s perspectivism, or his notion that &quot;knowledge&quot; is always by someone of some thing: it is always bound by perspective, and it is never mere fact. Rather, there are interpretations through which we understand the world and give it meaning. Interpreting is something we can not go without; in fact, it is a condition of subjectivity. One way of interpreting the world is through morality, as one of the fundamental ways that people make sense of the world, especially in regard to their own thoughts and actions. Nietzsche distinguishes a morality that is strong or healthy, meaning that the person in question is aware that he constructs it himself, from weak morality, where the interpretation is projected on to something external.

Nietzsche discusses Christianity, one of the major topics in his work, at length in the context of the problem of nihilism in his notebooks, in a chapter entitled &quot;European Nihilism.&quot; Here he states that the Christian moral doctrine provides people with intrinsic value, belief in God (which justifies the evil in the world) and a basis for objective knowledge. In this sense, in constructing a world where objective knowledge is possible, Christianity is an antidote against a primal form of nihilism, against the despair of meaninglessness. However, it is exactly the element of truthfulness in Christian doctrine that is its undoing: in its drive towards truth, Christianity eventually finds itself to be a construct, which leads to its own dissolution. It is therefore that Nietzsche states that we have outgrown Christianity &quot;not because we lived too far from it, rather because we lived too close.&quot; As such, the self-dissolution of Christianity constitutes yet another form of nihilism. Because Christianity was an interpretation that posited itself as &quot;the&quot; interpretation, Nietzsche states that this dissolution leads beyond skepticism to a distrust of &quot;all&quot; meaning.

Stanley Rosen identifies Nietzsche&#x27;s concept of nihilism with a situation of meaninglessness, in which &quot;everything is permitted.&quot; According to him, the loss of higher metaphysical values that exist in contrast to the base reality of the world, or merely human ideas, gives rise to the idea that all human ideas are therefore valueless. Rejecting idealism thus results in nihilism, because only similarly transcendent ideals live up to the previous standards that the nihilist still implicitly holds. The inability for Christianity to serve as a source of valuating the world is reflected in Nietzsche&#x27;s famous aphorism of the madman in &quot;The Gay Science&quot;. The death of God, in particular the statement that &quot;we killed him&quot;, is similar to the &quot;self&quot;-dissolution of Christian doctrine: due to the advances of the sciences, which for Nietzsche show that man is the product of evolution, that Earth has no special place among the stars and that history is not progressive, the Christian notion of God can no longer serve as a basis for a morality.

One such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche calls &quot;passive nihilism&quot;, which he recognizes in the pessimistic philosophy of Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer&#x27;s doctrine, which Nietzsche also refers to as Western Buddhism, advocates separating oneself from will and desires in order to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterizes this attitude as a &quot;will to nothingness&quot;, whereby life turns away from itself, as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This mowing away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although in this, the nihilist appears inconsistent: this &quot;will to nothingness&quot; is still a form of valuation or willing. He describes this as &quot;an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists&quot;:

Nietzsche&#x27;s relation to the problem of nihilism is a complex one. He approaches the problem of nihilism as deeply personal, stating that this predicament of the modern world is a problem that has &quot;become conscious&quot; in him. According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism is &quot;overcome&quot; that a culture can have a true foundation upon which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure.

He states that there is at least the possibility of another type of nihilist in the wake of Christianity&#x27;s self-dissolution, one that does &quot;not&quot; stop after the destruction of all value and meaning and succumb to the following nothingness. This alternate, &#x27;active&#x27; nihilism on the other hand destroys to level the field for constructing something new. This form of nihilism is characterized by Nietzsche as &quot;a sign of strength,&quot; a willful destruction of the old values to wipe the slate clean and lay down one&#x27;s own beliefs and interpretations, contrary to the passive nihilism that resigns itself with the decomposition of the old values. This willful destruction of values and the overcoming of the condition of nihilism by the constructing of new meaning, this active nihilism, could be related to what Nietzsche elsewhere calls a &quot;free spirit&quot; or the &quot;Übermensch&quot; from &quot;Thus Spoke Zarathustra&quot; and &quot;The Antichrist&quot;, the model of the strong individual who posits his own values and lives his life as if it were his own work of art. It may be questioned, though, whether &quot;active nihilism&quot; is indeed the correct term for this stance, and some question whether Nietzsche takes the problems nihilism poses seriously enough.

==== Heideggerian interpretation of Nietzsche ====
Martin Heidegger&#x27;s interpretation of Nietzsche influenced many postmodern thinkers who investigated the problem of nihilism as put forward by Nietzsche. Only recently has Heidegger&#x27;s influence on Nietzschean nihilism research faded. As early as the 1930s, Heidegger was giving lectures on Nietzsche&#x27;s thought. Given the importance of Nietzsche&#x27;s contribution to the topic of nihilism, Heidegger&#x27;s influential interpretation of Nietzsche is important for the historical development of the term &quot;nihilism&quot;.

Heidegger&#x27;s method of researching and teaching Nietzsche is explicitly his own. He does not specifically try to present Nietzsche &quot;as&quot; Nietzsche. He rather tries to incorporate Nietzsche&#x27;s thoughts into his own philosophical system of Being, Time and &quot;Dasein&quot;. In his &quot;Nihilism as Determined by the History of Being&quot; (1944–46), Heidegger tries to understand Nietzsche&#x27;s nihilism as trying to achieve a victory through the devaluation of the, until then, highest values. The principle of this devaluation is, according to Heidegger, the will to power. The will to power is also the principle of every earlier &quot;valuation&quot; of values. How does this devaluation occur and why is this nihilistic? One of Heidegger&#x27;s main critiques on philosophy is that philosophy, and more specifically metaphysics, has forgotten to discriminate between investigating the notion of &quot;a&quot; being (&quot;seiende&quot;) and &quot;Being&quot; (&quot;Sein&quot;). According to Heidegger, the history of Western thought can be seen as the history of metaphysics. Moreover, because metaphysics has forgotten to ask about the notion of Being (what Heidegger calls &quot;Seinsvergessenheit&quot;), it is a history about the destruction of Being. That is why Heidegger calls metaphysics nihilistic. This makes Nietzsche&#x27;s metaphysics not a victory over nihilism, but a perfection of it.

Heidegger, in his interpretation of Nietzsche, has been inspired by Ernst Jünger. Many references to Jünger can be found in Heidegger&#x27;s lectures on Nietzsche. For example, in a letter to the rector of Freiburg University of November 4, 1945, Heidegger, inspired by Jünger, tries to explain the notion of &quot;God is dead&quot; as the &quot;reality of the Will to Power.&quot; Heidegger also praises Jünger for defending Nietzsche against a too biological or anthropological reading during the Nazi era.

Heidegger&#x27;s interpretation of Nietzsche influenced a number of important postmodernist thinkers. Gianni Vattimo points at a back-and-forth movement in European thought, between Nietzsche and Heidegger. During the 1960s, a Nietzschean &#x27;renaissance&#x27; began, culminating in the work of Mazzino Montinari and Giorgio Colli. They began work on a new and complete edition of Nietzsche&#x27;s collected works, making Nietzsche more accessible for scholarly research. Vattimo explains that with this new edition of Colli and Montinari, a critical reception of Heidegger&#x27;s interpretation of Nietzsche began to take shape. Like other contemporary French and Italian philosophers, Vattimo does not want, or only partially wants, to rely on Heidegger for understanding Nietzsche. On the other hand, Vattimo judges Heidegger&#x27;s intentions authentic enough to keep pursuing them. Philosophers who Vattimo exemplifies as a part of this back and forth movement are French philosophers Deleuze, Foucault and Derrida. Italian philosophers of this same movement are Cacciari, Severino and himself. Jürgen Habermas, Jean-François Lyotard and Richard Rorty are also philosophers who are influenced by Heidegger&#x27;s interpretation of Nietzsche.

==== Deleuzean interpretation of Nietzsche ====
Gilles Deleuze&#x27;s interpretation of Nietzsche&#x27;s concept of nihilism is different—in some sense diametrically opposed—to the usual definition (as outlined in the rest of this article). Nihilism is one of the main topics of Deleuze&#x27;s early book &quot;Nietzsche and Philosophy&quot; (1962). There, Deleuze repeatedly interprets Nietzsche&#x27;s nihilism as &quot;the enterprise of denying life and depreciating existence&quot;. Nihilism thus defined is therefore not the denial of higher values, or the denial of meaning, but rather the depreciation of life in the name of such higher values or meaning. Deleuze therefore (with, he claims, Nietzsche) says that Christianity and Platonism, and with them the whole of metaphysics, are intrinsically Nihilist.

=== Postmodernism ===
Postmodern and poststructuralist thought has questioned the very grounds on which Western cultures have based their &#x27;truths&#x27;: absolute knowledge and meaning, a &#x27;decentralization&#x27; of authorship, the accumulation of positive knowledge, historical progress, and certain ideals and practices of humanism and the Enlightenment. 

==== Derrida ====
Jacques Derrida, whose deconstruction is perhaps most commonly labeled nihilistic, did not himself make the nihilistic move that others have claimed. Derridean deconstructionists argue that this approach rather frees texts, individuals or organizations from a restrictive truth, and that deconstruction opens up the possibility of other ways of being. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, for example, uses deconstruction to create an ethics of opening up Western scholarship to the voice of the subaltern and to philosophies outside of the canon of western texts. Derrida himself built a philosophy based upon a &#x27;responsibility to the other&#x27;. Deconstruction can thus be seen not as a denial of truth, but as a denial of our ability to know truth. That is to say, it makes an epistemological claim, compared to nihilism&#x27;s ontological claim.

==== Lyotard ====
Lyotard argues that, rather than relying on an objective truth or method to prove their claims, philosophers legitimize their truths by reference to a story about the world that can not be separated from the age and system the stories belong to—referred to by Lyotard as &quot;meta-narratives.&quot; He then goes on to define the postmodern condition as characterized by a rejection both of these meta-narratives and of the process of legitimation by meta-narratives. This concept of the instability of truth and meaning leads in the direction of nihilism, though Lyotard stops short of embracing the latter.

In lieu of meta-narratives we have created new language-games in order to legitimize our claims which rely on changing relationships and mutable truths, none of which is privileged over the other to speak to ultimate truth. 

==== Baudrillard ====
Postmodern theorist Jean Baudrillard wrote briefly of nihilism from the postmodern viewpoint in &quot;Simulacra and Simulation&quot;. He stuck mainly to topics of interpretations of the real world over the simulations of which the real world is composed. The uses of meaning were an important subject in Baudrillard&#x27;s discussion of nihilism:

== Ethics and value theory ==
Various forms of nihilism belong to the fields of ethics and value theory, questioning the existence of values, morality, and the meaning of life.

=== Existential nihilism ===

Existential nihilism asserts that life is meaningless. It is not limited to the idea that some people fail to find meaning in their lives but makes the broader claim that human existence in general or the world as a whole lacks a higher purpose. This view suggests that it is not possible to live a genuinely meaningful life, that there is no higher reason to continue living, and that all efforts, achievements, happiness, and suffering are ultimately pointless. 

Existential nihilism has diverse practical implications since people usually act with a purpose in mind, sometimes with the explicit goal of making their lives meaningful. As a result, the belief that there is no higher meaning or purpose can bring about indifference, a lack of motivation, and anxiety. In extreme cases, this can result in depression and despair or trigger an existential crisis. Some philosophers, such as Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), highlight the connection to boredom, arguing that the lack of engagement and goals experienced in this mood makes life appear pointless.

Various possible reactions to existential nihilism have been proposed. Inspired by Indian philosophy, Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860) suggested a pessimistic and ascetic response, advocating detachment from the world by renouncing desires and stopping to affirm life. Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) proposed using the disruptive force of nihilism to re-interpret or re-evaluate all established ideals and values in an attempt to overcome nihilism and replace it with an affirmative attitude toward life. Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) suggested that people should freely create their own values despite the cosmic lack of meaning. After considering the possibility of committing suicide, Albert Camus (1913–1960) argued instead for a defiant attitude in which individuals rebel against meaninglessness. Other responses include a destructive attitude aiming to violently tear down political authorities and social institutions, attempts to undermine nihilism by identifying genuine sources of meaning, and a passive resignation or quiet acceptance.

Various arguments for and against existential nihilism are discussed in the academic discourse. Arguments from a cosmological perspective assert that human existence is a minor and insignificant aspect of the universe as a whole, which is indifferent to human concerns and aspirations. This outlook aligns with an atheistic view, stating that, without a God, there is no source of higher values that transcend the natural world. Another viewpoint highlights the pervasiveness of senseless suffering, violence, and death while emphasizing the transient nature of human achievements and happiness. A different perspective from biology argues that life is driven by blind natural selection on a large scale and the satisfaction of innate needs on an individual scale, neither of which aims at a higher purpose. Subjectivists, by contrast, focus on the subjective nature of all value experiences, asserting that they lack any objective ground.

Opponents of existential nihilism have responded with counterarguments to these statements. For example, some reject the pessimistic outlook that life is primarily characterized by suffering, violence, and death, claiming instead that these negative phenomena are counterbalanced by positive phenomena such as happiness and love. Many non-nihilistic theories of the meaning of life are examined in the academic discourse. Supernaturalistic views focus on God or the soul as sources of meaning. Naturalistic views, by contrast, assert that subjective or objective values are inherent in the physical world. They include the discussion of fields where humans actively find meaning, such as exercising freedom, committing oneself to a cause, pursuing altruism, and engaging in positive social relationships.

=== Moral nihilism ===

Unlike existential nihilism, moral nihilism focuses specifically on moral phenomena rather than a higher meaning or purpose. In its broadest form, it is the metaethical view that there are no moral facts. Also called &quot;amoralism&quot; and &quot;error theory&quot;, it denies the objective existence of morality, arguing that the theories and practices categorized under this label rest on misguided assumptions without any substantial link to reality. On a practical level, some moral nihilists, such as Friedrich Nietzsche, conclude from this observation that anything is permitted, suggesting that people are allowed to act however they want without any social restrictions, reflecting a form of anarchism. Other moral nihilists reject this conclusion and argue that the denial of morality affects not only moral obligations, or what people are required to do, but also moral permissions, or what people are allowed to do.

One motivation for denying the existence of morality rests on the idea that moral properties are odd compared to other properties, like shape and size. This view is sometimes combined with the claim that scientific inquiry does not reveal objective moral facts or that humans lack a source of moral knowledge. A related argument for moral nihilism focuses on the conventional aspects of moral evaluations and the difficulties in resolving moral disagreements. Another line of thought emphasizes the evolutionary origin of morality, viewing it as a mere product of natural selection without a deeper metaphysical foundation.

Moral realists have raised various objections to moral nihilism. Naturalists argue that moral facts belong to the natural world and can be empirically observed. Non-naturalists assert that moral phenomena are different from natural phenomena, but are real nonetheless. Another perspective highlights the deep gap between moral nihilism and the fields of common sense and moral experience. Some viewpoints emphasize the negative practical consequences of abandoning moral beliefs or assert that moral nihilism is incoherent because it rests on a misunderstanding of moral language.

The term &quot;moral nihilism&quot; is sometimes used with a different meaning. In one sense, it is the same as moral subjectivism, arguing that moral evaluations are purely subjective and lack rational objective justification. As a result, moral judgments are seen as expressions of arbitrary individual preferences, which vary between individuals, making moral disagreements rationally unresolvable. In another sense, moral nihilism refers to ethical egoism, the theory that morality is determined by self-interest. This view denies that the well-being of others has moral implications unless it has external consequences for one&#x27;s own well-being.

== Epistemology ==

=== Relativism ===

Epistemological or epistemic nihilism is a family of views that challenge the existence or universal nature of knowledge. Some versions embrace relativism, denying that objectivity is possible. For example, truth-relativism asserts that truth is relative to the perspectives of specific individuals, groups, historical epochs, or cultural contexts. According to this view, statements like &quot;the sun rises in the east&quot; and &quot;killing is wrong&quot; are true in some perspectives and false in others. This theory not only claims that different people have different opinions but additionally asserts that no independent framework exists to assess which opinion is ultimately correct. As a result, there is no absolute truth on which observers from different perspectives can agree.

A related form of relativistic nihilism focuses on meaning rather than truth. It argues that different people rely on incompatible conceptual schemes to make sense of the world. In the absence of a universal framework, genuine communication and shared understanding are deemed impossible since each viewpoint has its own interpretation of reality. Without a common ground, these incommensurable belief systems are arbitrary constructions, limiting reason to operations within a specific system without the ability to reconcile them.

One argument for relativism emphasizes the diversity of human viewpoints and the frequent inability to resolve disagreements and reach a shared understanding. Another argument asserts that theories are usually underdetermined by the data supporting them. As a result, there are different equally valid interpretations without an objective standard to resolve their differences. An influential criticism argues that relativism undermines itself: if all truths are relative to a viewpoint, then relativism itself is only true for some viewpoints and false for others. Another objection suggests that the absence of absolute epistemic standards has odd consequences, for example, that people should not argue if they disagree or that they should generally suspend their judgments.

Nietzsche was an influential proponent of relativistic nihilism. He saw belief systems as expressions of the will to power, intended to assert dominance rather than represent reality. In postmodern philosophy, epistemological nihilism is associated with antifoundationalism, arguing that there is no ultimate rational ground of knowledge or action. It challenges universal frameworks, termed &quot;grand metanarratives&quot;, that claim to provide such a ground.

=== Skepticism ===

While relativist versions of epistemological nihilism allow that knowledge exists relative to a perspective, skeptic versions deny the existence of knowledge in general. Also called &quot;radical skepticism&quot;, this view argues that there is no foundation or justification of knowledge claims. Unlike more moderate forms of skepticism, it questions even the most reasonable knowledge claims grounded in basic common sense. A closely related form of epistemological nihilism, sometimes called &quot;alethiological nihilism&quot;, centers on truth rather than knowledge, stating that truth does not exist.

One argument in favor of radical skepticism asserts that absolute certainty is required for knowledge. It attempts to show that doubt can never be fully expelled. For example, the dream argument points out that, while dreaming, people usually cannot distinguish between the illusionary dream and factual reality. Based on this observation, it argues that there is no knowledge since an individual can never be certain that they are not currently dreaming. A related approach assumes that a criterion is required to validate knowledge claims. Asserting that one cannot discern this criterion without already assuming some form of knowledge, it infers that knowledge is impossible.

Despite these arguments, radical skepticism is a rare position, accepted only by few philosophers and challenged by various criticisms. Its main influence stems from attempts by non-skeptical philosophers to prove that their theories overcome the challenge of skepticism. Some objections state that radical skepticism is incoherent or self-refuting. For example, if there is no knowledge then skeptics cannot know that there is no knowledge, making it questionable why anyone should believe their theories. Another counterargument asserts that the support for the existence of knowledge provided by common sense is more convincing than the abstract reasoning leading to skepticism.

Epistemological nihilism can lead to other forms of nihilism. For instance, the inability to discern the meaning of life can lead to the conclusion that there is no such meaning, resulting in existential nihilism. Moral skepticism, the view that there is no moral knowledge, can have a similar effect: the incapacity to distinguish right from wrong behavior can lead to the rejection of moral facts. Some theorists associate epistemological nihilism primarily with moral skepticism.

== Metaphysics ==

Metaphysical or ontological nihilism encompasses various views about the fundamental nature of reality. One version addresses the question of why there is anything at all. It suggests that, at least in principle, an empty world is possible. While this view acknowledges that the world contains concrete objects, it asserts that this is a contingent fact, meaning that there could have been nothing. In such a scenario, the universe would be entirely empty, without any people, animals, planets, and no other forms of matter or energy.

The subtraction argument is an influential argument for metaphysical nihilism. It proceeds from the premise that the world does not depend on the existence of any individual concrete object. For example, the world could still exist if a specific rock was removed. The argument concludes that an empty world is possible since it is the result of continuously reapplying this idea, subtracting objects at each step until an empty universe remains. Opponents of metaphysical nihilism assert that an empty world is impossible, meaning that something must exist. For example, one view suggests that there are necessary objects, possibly God, that are present even if nothing else is.

A more radical and controversial form of metaphysical nihilism denies the actual existence of objects. It states that there is no world, arguing that the experience of the universe is a mere illusion without an underlying reality. As a result, nothing at all is real. This view is sometimes interpreted as a form of solipsism, proposing that only the self exists and that the external world is merely an idea held by the self without a substantial reality.

=== Mereological nihilism ===

Mereological or compositional nihilism is the view that complex or composite objects do not exist. Composite objects are objects made up of proper parts. For example, a house is a composite object made up of parts like walls, windows, doors, etc. Each of these parts is itself a composite object made up of smaller parts, such as molecules and atoms. Mereological nihilists argue that only non-composite or simple objects exist, such as elementary particles. As a result, composite objects are understood as mere collections of simple objects. According to this view, there are no houses or tables, there are only elementary particles arranged house-wise or table-wise.

Mereological nihilism is sometimes proposed as a solution to avoid metaphysical paradoxes, like the Ship of Theseus or Sorites paradox. Another argument in favor of mereological nihilism comes from Ockham&#x27;s Razor, emphasizing the parsimony and simplicity of a minimal ontology that excludes everything except simple objects. Opponents of mereological nihilism highlight the counterintuitive consequences of denying the existence of ordinary objects, which contradict common sense. Other criticisms assert that mereological nihilism is unable to provide a coherent framework for how to understand collections of elementary particles or fails to explain phenomena like emergent properties.

=== Cosmic nihilism ===
Cosmic or cosmological nihilism is the view that reality is unintelligible and lacks inherent meaning. Closely related to epistemological and existential nihilism, it asserts that the world is blank, featureless, or chaotic, making it indifferent to human attempts to understand it. Cosmic nihilists often emphasize the vastness of the universe, arguing that it shows the insignificance of humans and their endeavors.

A broad form of cosmic nihilism states that reality as a whole is unintelligible. According to this view, the chaotic nature of the world makes it impossible to comprehend the universe on any level or find meaningful patterns in it, leading to a complete alienation of human understanding. For example, Max Stirner characterized the world as a &quot;metaphysical chaos&quot; without &quot;a comprehensive structure of objective meanings&quot;. In response to arguments stating that it is possible in certain cases to discern patterns and predict outcomes, some cosmic nihilists have proposed more narrow versions. One version acknowledges that humans can understand some aspects of reality, for example, through rigorous scientific study. Nonetheless, this view maintains that the universe remains impenetrable to comprehension and indifferent to human aspirations on other levels, lacking intelligible structures that correspond to objective values, moral principles, and a higher purpose.

== Other positions ==
In addition to the main nihilistic theories discussed in ethics, value theory, epistemology, and metaphysics, other types of nihilism are considered in the academic discourse. Some versions focus on cultural, political, or social phenomena, such as political nihilism, which is a negative outlook on existing political and social structures, similar to anarchism. It is historically associated with the Russian nihilist movement and advocates the destruction of political institutions, targeting also the traditional beliefs and social practices upholding them. Its revolutionary aim is to dismantle these established forms of order without proposing alternative structures to replace them. Similarly, national nihilism is a negative attitude towards one&#x27;s own country. In the field of law, legal nihilists assert that laws lack an inherent meaning or a moral foundation, viewing them as unjust or arbitrary constructs used to maintain control and exercise power. Religious or theological nihilism is associated with atheism and denies the existence of God. Some theorists identify this view as the root of other nihilist outlooks, such as existential and moral nihilism.

In the philosophy of language, semantic nihilism denies that linguistic meaning is possible, arguing that there is no genuine communication since language fails to describe reality. Logical nihilism is a theory about the relation between formal logic and natural language inference. It asserts that the logical consequence relation studied by logicians is unable to accurately reflect inferential practices in natural language.

Therapeutic or medical nihilism is the position that medical interventions are largely ineffective. Against the advances of modern medicine, it argues that the methodology of medical research is fundamentally flawed and further distorted by financial incentives, resulting in a systematic overestimation of the benefits of treatments.

== In culture, the arts, and media ==
=== Dada ===
The term &quot;Dada&quot; was first used by Richard Huelsenbeck and Tristan Tzara in 1916. The movement, which lasted from approximately 1916 to 1923, arose during World War I, an event that influenced the artists. The Dada Movement began in the old town of Zürich, Switzerland—known as the &quot;Niederdorf&quot; or &quot;Niederdörfli&quot;—in the Café Voltaire. The Dadaists claimed that Dada was not an art movement, but an anti-art movement, sometimes using found objects in a manner similar to found poetry.

This tendency toward devaluation of art has led many to claim that Dada was an essentially nihilistic movement. Given that Dada created its own means for interpreting its products, it is difficult to classify alongside most other contemporary art expressions. Due to perceived ambiguity, it has been classified as a nihilistic &quot;modus vivendi&quot;.

=== Literature ===
The term &quot;nihilism&quot; was actually popularized in 1862 by Ivan Turgenev in his novel &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot;, whose hero, Bazarov, was a nihilist and recruited several followers to the philosophy. He found his nihilistic ways challenged upon falling in love.

An early example of nihilistic thought comes from William Shakespeare in the character of Macbeth. In the final act of the play of the same name, he concludes his “tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow” monologue by describing life as “a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” 

Anton Chekhov portrayed nihilism when writing &quot;Three Sisters&quot;. The phrase &quot;what does it matter&quot; or variants of this are often spoken by several characters in response to events; the significance of some of these events suggests a subscription to nihilism by said characters as a type of coping strategy.

The philosophical ideas of the French author, the Marquis de Sade, are often noted as early examples of nihilistic principles.

=== Media ===
The frequently self-destructive and amoral tendencies of a nihilistic worldview can be seen in many of today&#x27;s media, including movies and TV shows. 

Patrick Bateman in Bret Easton Ellis&#x27;s 1991 novel &quot;American Psycho&quot; and 2000 film adaptation, displays both moral and existential nihilism. Throughout the film, Bateman does not shy away from murder or torture to accomplish his goals. As he realizes the evil in his deeds he tries to confess and take on the punishment for his acts of crime.

Phil Connors in the 1993 comedy film &quot;Groundhog Day&quot; develops existential nihilistic tendencies near the middle of the film. As he lives the same day an unspoken countless number of times he slips into a depression and attempts to take his own life in a variety of different ways. He will also resort to kidnapping Punxsutawney Phil, the groundhog to which he credits his looping days, and drives off a cliff, killing both of them.

Vincent, the main antagonist of the 2004 film &quot;Collateral&quot;, believes that life has no meaning because that human nature is intrinsically evil, and that deep down, people care only about themselves.

In the 2022 film &quot;Everything Everywhere All at Once&quot;, the lead antagonist, Jobu Tupaki, comes to an existential nihilistic conclusion that the infinite chaos of the multiverse means that there is no reason to continue to exist. She manifests her nihilism by creating a black hole-like &quot;everything bagel&quot; in which she will destroy herself and the rest of the multiverse. Her mother Evelyn is briefly persuaded by her logic but then refutes it in favor of a more positive outlook based on the value of human relationships and choice.

In the 2023 video game, &quot;,&quot; &#x27;Nihility&#x27; is a playable path, presided by the Aeon IX, on which characters who believe that ultimate fate of the multiverse is nothingness, and therefore, worthless, walk on. 

== See also ==

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Bibliography ==
=== Primary texts ===
* Brassier, Ray (2007) &quot;Nihil Unbound: Enlightenment and Extinction&quot;, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
* Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, &quot;Jacobi an Fichte&quot; (1799/1816), German Text (1799/1816), Appendix with Jacobi&#x27;s and Fichte&#x27;s complementary Texts, critical Apparatus, Commentary, and Italian Translation, Istituto Italiano per gli Studi Filosofici, Naples 2011, .
* Heidegger, Martin (1982), &quot;Nietzsche, Vols. I-IV&quot;, trans. F.A. Capuzzi, San Francisco: Harper &amp; Row.
* Kierkegaard, Søren (1998/1854), &quot;The Moment and Late Writings: Kierkegaard&#x27;s Writings, Vol. 23&quot;, ed. and trans. Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press. .
* Kierkegaard, Søren (1978/1846), &quot;The Two Ages : Kierkegaard&#x27;s Writings, Vol 14&quot;, ed. and trans. Howard V. Hong, and Edna H. Hong, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press. .
* Kierkegaard, Søren (1995/1850), &quot;Works of Love : Kierkegaard&#x27;s Writings, Vol 16&quot;, ed. and trans. Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press. .
* Nietzsche, Friedrich (2005/1886), &quot;Beyond Good and Evil&quot;, trans. Helen Zimmern.
* Nietzsche, Friedrich (1974/1887), &quot;The Gay Science&quot;, trans. Walter Kaufman, Vintage, .
* Nietzsche, Friedrich (1980), &quot;Sämtliche Werken. Kritische Studienausgabe&quot;, ed. C. Colli and M. Montinari, Walter de Gruyter. .
* Nietzsche, Friedrich (2008/1885), &quot;Thus Spake Zarathustra&quot;, trans. Thomas Common.
* Tartaglia, James (2016), &quot;Philosophy in a Meaningless Life: A System of Nihilism, Consciousness and Reality&quot;, London: Bloomsbury Publishing.

=== Secondary texts ===
* Arena, Leonardo Vittorio (1997), &quot;Del nonsense: tra Oriente e Occidente&quot;, Urbino: Quattroventi.
* Arena, Leonardo Vittorio (2012), &quot;Nonsense as the Meaning&quot;, ebook.
* Arena, Leonardo Vittorio (2015), &quot;On Nudity. An Introduction to Nonsense&quot;, Mimesis International.
* Barnett, Christopher (2011), &quot;Kierkegaard, pietism and holiness&quot;, Ashgate Publishing.
* Carr, Karen (1992), &quot;The Banalisation of Nihilism&quot;, State University of New York Press.
* Cunningham, Conor (2002), &quot;Genealogy of Nihilism: Philosophies of Nothing &amp; the Difference of Theology&quot;, New York, NY: Routledge.
* Dent, G., Wallace, M., &amp; Dia Center for the Arts. (1992). &quot;Black popular culture&quot; (Discussions in contemporary culture ; no. 8). Seattle: Bay Press.
* Dod, Elmar (2013), &quot;Der unheimlichste Gast. Die Philosophie des Nihilismus.&quot; Marburg: Tectum 2013.
* Dreyfus, Hubert L. (2004), &quot;Kierkegaard on the Internet: Anonymity vs. Commitment in the Present Age&quot;. Retrieved at December 1, 2009.
* Fraser, John (2001), &quot;Nihilism, Modernisn and Value&quot;, retrieved at December 2, 2009.
* Galimberti, Umberto (2008), &quot;L&#x27;ospite inquietante. Il nichilismo e i giovani&quot;, Milano: Feltrinelli. . 
* Gillespie, Michael Allen (1996), &quot;Nihilism Before Nietzsche&quot;, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
* Giovanni, George di (2008), &quot;Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi&quot;, &quot;The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;, Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Retrieved on December 1, 2009.
* Harper, Douglas, &quot;Nihilism&quot;, in: &quot;Online Etymology Dictionary&quot;, retrieved at December 2, 2009.
* Harries, Karsten (2010), &quot;Between nihilism and faith: a commentary on Either/or&quot;, Walter de Gruyter Press.
* Hibbs, Thomas S. (2000), &quot;Shows About Nothing: Nihilism in Popular Culture from The Exorcist to Seinfeld&quot;, Dallas, TX: Spence Publishing Company.
* Kopić, Mario (2001), &quot;S Nietzscheom o Europi&quot;, Zagreb: Jesenski i Turk.
* Korab-Karpowicz, W. J. (2005), &quot;Martin Heidegger (1889—1976)&quot;, in: &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;, retrieved at December 2, 2009.
* Kuhn, Elisabeth (1992), &quot;Friedrich Nietzsches Philosophie des europäischen Nihilismus&quot;, Walter de Gruyter.
* Irti, Natalino (2004), &quot;Nichilismo giuridico&quot;, Laterza, Roma-Bari.
* Löwith, Karl (1995), &quot;Martin Heidegger and European Nihilism&quot;, New York, NY: Columbia UP.
* Marmysz, John (2003), &quot;Laughing at Nothing: Humor as a Response to Nihilism&quot;, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
* Müller-Lauter, Wolfgang (2000), &quot;Heidegger und Nietzsche. Nietzsche-Interpretationen III&quot;, Berlin-New York.
* Parvez Manzoor, S. (2003), &quot;Modernity and Nihilism. Secular History and Loss of Meaning&quot;, retrieved at December 2, 2009.
* Rose, Eugene Fr. Seraphim (1995), &quot;Nihilism, The Root of the Revolution of the Modern Age&quot;, Forestville, CA: Fr. Seraphim Rose Foundation.
* Rosen, Stanley (2000), &quot;Nihilism: A Philosophical Essay&quot;, South Bend, Indiana: St. Augustine&#x27;s Press (2nd Edition).
* Severino, Emanuele (1982), &quot;Essenza del nichilismo&quot;, Milano: Adelphi. .
* Slocombe, Will (2006), &quot;Nihilism and the Sublime Postmodern: The (Hi)Story of a Difficult Relationship&quot;, New York, NY: Routledge.
* Tigani, Francesco (2010), &quot;Rappresentare Medea. Dal mito al nichilismo&quot;, Roma: Aracne. . 
* Tigani, Francesco (2014), &quot;Lo spettro del nulla e il corpo del nichilismo&quot;, in &quot;La nave di Teseo. Saggi sull&#x27;Essere, il mito e il potere&quot;, Napoli: Guida. . 
* Villet, Charles (2009), &quot;Towards Ethical Nihilism: The Possibility of Nietzschean Hope&quot;, Saarbrücken: Verlag Dr. Müller.
* Williams, Peter S. (2005), &quot;I Wish I Could Believe in Meaning: A Response to Nihilism&quot;, Damaris Publishing.

== External links ==
* 
* 
* Friedrich Nietzsche, &quot;Thus Spake Zarathustra&quot;, translated by Thomas Common
* &quot;Nihilism&quot; in the &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* &quot;Fathers and Sons&quot; by Ivan Turgenev
* &quot;Moral Skepticism&quot;, section &quot;Skeptical Hypotheses&quot; in the &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* &quot;In the Dust of This Planet&quot;, &quot;Radiolab&quot; podcast episode on nihilism and popular culture
* &quot;Nihilism&quot;, &quot;In Our Time&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Rob Hopkins, Raymond Tallis and Catherine Belsey (Nov. 16, 2000)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="3" end="13" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="15" end="23" title="Nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="151" end="160" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="162" end="170" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q223675" start="175" end="182" title="meaning of life" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q68012161" start="245" end="270" title="Moral nihilism" label="human values are baseless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420360" start="277" end="296" title="Existential nihilism" label="life is meaningless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="303" end="326" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="knowledge is impossible"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="438" end="451" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q29424" start="518" end="534" title="Fathers and Sons (novel)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q202253" start="704" end="714" title="nominalism" label="nominalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="716" end="726" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106718306" start="732" end="755" title="philosophical pessimism" label="philosophical pessimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="784" end="796" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290848" start="867" end="878" title="Nietzschean" label="Nietzschean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637535" start="1014" end="1033" title="affirmation of life" label="affirmation of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293925" start="1071" end="1077" title="Donald A. Crosby" label="Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="1089" end="1096" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q17930" start="1372" end="1378" title="anomie" label="anomie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="1416" end="1423" title="despair" label="despair"/>
<link wikidata="Q629962" start="1469" end="1482" title="arbitrariness" label="arbitrariness"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="1507" end="1526" title="social institutions" label="social institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="1606" end="1624" title="History by period" label="historical periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="1639" end="1655" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249769" start="1686" end="1699" title="postmodernity" label="postmodernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1757" end="1767" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="1842" end="1851" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="1976" end="1987" title="irreligious" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420360" start="2054" end="2074" title="existential nihilism" label="existential nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239172" start="2111" end="2126" title="intrinsic value (ethics)" label="intrinsic value"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877783" start="2128" end="2135" title="meaning (psychology)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q288156" start="2220" end="2229" title="normative" label="normative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="2234" end="2241" title="ethical" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="2284" end="2305" title="political institution" label="political institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2378" end="2390" title="metaphysical" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="2420" end="2440" title="physical object" label="non-abstract objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194916" start="2463" end="2480" title="Mereology" label="composite objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2640" end="2645" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154242" start="2838" end="2849" title="nothingness" label="nothingness"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2963" end="2969" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3011" end="3022" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="3050" end="3056" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102336" start="3101" end="3108" title="Russian philosophy" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203683" start="3113" end="3130" title="German philosophy" label="German philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3262" end="3269" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="3295" end="3305" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3311" end="3317" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3541" end="3558" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="3580" end="3590" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="3631" end="3640" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724007" start="3787" end="3794" title="Kantian" label="Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="3799" end="3811" title="post-Kantian" label="post-Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168004" start="3934" end="3959" title="Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi" label="Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215730" start="4057" end="4074" title="Joseph von Görres" label="Joseph von Görres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="4155" end="4162" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577704" start="4218" end="4235" title="Nikolai Nadezhdin" label="Nikolai Nadezhdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="4262" end="4272" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="4482" end="4495" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q29424" start="4561" end="4577" title="Fathers and Sons (novel)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494934" start="5060" end="5085" title="Russian nihilist movement" label="Russian nihilist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="5161" end="5180" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="5216" end="5229" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q192614" start="5379" end="5391" title="death of God" label="death of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5454" end="5466" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450620" start="5552" end="5569" title="French philosophy" label="French philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="5574" end="5596" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462252" start="5686" end="5696" title="Soviet era" label="Soviet era"/>
<link wikidata="Q144578" start="5726" end="5733" title="Thomas J. J. Altizer" label="Altizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="5892" end="5903" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="5992" end="6002" title="Gautama Buddha" label="the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="6042" end="6051" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="6056" end="6064" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="6071" end="6080" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Tripiṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="6137" end="6141" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q209680" start="6255" end="6260" title="sutra" label="sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q42927" start="7205" end="7212" title="nirvana" label="nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q154242" start="7237" end="7248" title="nothingness" label="nothingness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048984" start="7251" end="7264" title="Non-possession" label="nonpossession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045261" start="7271" end="7285" title="non-attachment" label="non-attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699496" start="7339" end="7350" title="Ajahn Amaro" label="Ajahn Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="7364" end="7377" title="Bhikkhu" label="Buddhist monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="8452" end="8457" title="being" label="being"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692196" start="8505" end="8527" title="Aggi-Vacchagotta Sutta" label="Aggi-Vacchagotta Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710407" start="9552" end="9570" title="Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu" label="Ṭhānissaro Bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="9871" end="9877" title="Buddhist texts" label="Suttas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005455" start="10327" end="10340" title="Ajahn Sumedho" label="Ajahn Sumedho"/>
<link wikidata="Q411930" start="10568" end="10578" title="Ajahn Chah" label="Ajahn Chah"/>
<link wikidata="Q168004" start="11116" end="11141" title="Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi" label="Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="11189" end="11200" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="11255" end="11265" title="Aufklärung" label="Aufklärung"/>
<link wikidata="Q14402006" start="11297" end="11317" title="reductio ad absurdum" label="reductio ad absurdum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="11478" end="11483" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="11488" end="11498" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="11671" end="11677" title="Fichte" label="Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="11685" end="11693" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q196667" start="11967" end="11974" title="fideism" label="fideism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="12056" end="12073" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008117" start="12151" end="12159" title="Leveling (philosophy)" label="leveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q679490" start="12392" end="12410" title="philosophy of life" label="philosophy of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="12862" end="12874" title="mass culture" label="mass culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="12983" end="12991" title="tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758504" start="13024" end="13032" title="Corsaren" label="Corsaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="13044" end="13052" title="Apostasy" label="apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="13053" end="13065" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="13136" end="13145" title="apathy" label="apathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q971585" start="13402" end="13416" title="Hubert Dreyfus" label="Hubert Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494934" start="13651" end="13667" title="Russian nihilism" label="Russian nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="13753" end="13766" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="13848" end="13867" title="political terrorism" label="political terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655508" start="13971" end="13987" title="hard determinism" label="hard determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="13989" end="13996" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="13998" end="14009" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="14011" end="14021" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621223" start="14027" end="14042" title="rational egoism" label="rational egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="14060" end="14071" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726864" start="14073" end="14087" title="sentimentality" label="sentimentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q256922" start="14093" end="14105" title="aestheticism" label="aestheticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192331" start="14163" end="14184" title="Nikolay Chernyshevsky" label="Nikolay Chernyshevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q378753" start="14189" end="14203" title="Dmitry Pisarev" label="Dmitry Pisarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673227" start="14361" end="14366" title="moral skepticism" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="14371" end="14397" title="epistemological skepticism" label="epistemological skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="14493" end="14506" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q29424" start="14551" end="14567" title="Fathers and Sons (novel)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="14649" end="14661" title="progressivism" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="14666" end="14681" title="traditionalist conservatism" label="traditionalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="15639" end="15654" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975610" start="15702" end="15708" title="rabble (social class)" label="rabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004222" start="15804" end="15830" title="anti-nihilistic literature" label="anti-nihilistic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="15849" end="15866" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993564" start="16213" end="16222" title="Keiji Nishitani" label="Nishitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="16515" end="16534" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q62273062" start="17549" end="17562" title="Karen L. Carr" label="Karen L. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="18002" end="18015" title="Physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q945895" start="18016" end="18025" title="decadence" label="decadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827332" start="18260" end="18269" title="Nachlass" label="notebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167187" start="18627" end="18640" title="perspectivism" label="perspectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="18953" end="18965" title="Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy)" label="subjectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="19633" end="19648" title="humanism" label="intrinsic value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="19671" end="19680" title="theodicee" label="justifies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="19720" end="19739" title="objectivity (philosophy)" label="objective knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="20532" end="20542" title="skepticism" label="skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496864" start="20586" end="20599" title="Stanley Rosen" label="Stanley Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="21216" end="21224" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061693" start="21248" end="21263" title="The Gay Science" label="The Gay Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="21508" end="21517" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="21537" end="21550" title="geocentrism" label="special place"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="21576" end="21583" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="21591" end="21602" title="progress (history)" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q484954" start="21802" end="21813" title="pessimism" label="pessimistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="21828" end="21840" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21906" end="21922" title="Western Buddhism#Buddhism and Western Intellectuals" label="Western Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154242" start="22062" end="22069" title="nothing" label="nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43484" start="23838" end="23848" title="Übermensch" label="Übermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q199774" start="23866" end="23888" title="Thus Spoke Zarathustra" label="Thus Spoke Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q538396" start="23905" end="23919" title="The Antichrist (book)" label="The Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="24292" end="24308" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="24360" end="24370" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290848" start="24498" end="24509" title="Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Nietzschean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25088" end="25122" title="Heidegger#Philosophy" label="Being, Time and &amp;quot;Dasein&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q583998" start="25414" end="25427" title="will to power" label="will to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="25674" end="25685" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="25953" end="25964" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26040" end="26058" title=":de:Seinsvergessenheit" label="Seinsvergessenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q76727" start="26329" end="26341" title="Ernst Jünger" label="Ernst Jünger"/>
<link wikidata="Q192614" start="26576" end="26587" title="God is dead" label="God is dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="26760" end="26768" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi era"/>
<link wikidata="Q159648" start="26873" end="26887" title="Gianni Vattimo" label="Gianni Vattimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q321130" start="27068" end="27085" title="Mazzino Montinari" label="Mazzino Montinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525438" start="27090" end="27103" title="Giorgio Colli" label="Giorgio Colli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="27763" end="27770" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="27772" end="27780" title="Michel Foucault" label="Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="27785" end="27792" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q369756" start="27841" end="27849" title="Massimo Cacciari" label="Cacciari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334901" start="27851" end="27859" title="Emanuele Severino" label="Severino"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="27873" end="27888" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193257" start="27890" end="27911" title="Jean-François Lyotard" label="Jean-François Lyotard"/>
<link wikidata="Q215258" start="27916" end="27929" title="Richard Rorty" label="Richard Rorty"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="28069" end="28083" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="28758" end="28767" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q647114" start="28860" end="28870" title="Postmodern philosophy" label="Postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="28875" end="28892" title="poststructuralist" label="poststructuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="28942" end="28957" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="29171" end="29179" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="29184" end="29201" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="29223" end="29238" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="29246" end="29260" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q240851" start="29575" end="29601" title="Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak" label="Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641221" start="29710" end="29719" title="subaltern (postcolonialism)" label="subaltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="30000" end="30015" title="epistemological" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="30051" end="30062" title="ontological" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q193257" start="30089" end="30096" title="Jean-François Lyotard" label="Lyotard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="30136" end="30145" title="objectivity (philosophy)" label="objective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359754" start="30366" end="30381" title="Metanarrative" label="meta-narratives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249769" start="30419" end="30439" title="postmodernity" label="postmodern condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q366139" start="30524" end="30536" title="legitimation" label="legitimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q247592" start="30746" end="30759" title="language-game" label="language-game"/>
<link wikidata="Q182847" start="30967" end="30983" title="Jean Baudrillard" label="Jean Baudrillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q904403" start="31049" end="31073" title="Simulacra and Simulation" label="Simulacra and Simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="31375" end="31381" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187415" start="31386" end="31398" title="value theory" label="value theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="31437" end="31445" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q223675" start="31455" end="31470" title="meaning of life" label="meaning of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="32224" end="32236" title="Apathy" label="indifference"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32240" end="32258" title="Motivation#Amotivation_and_akrasia" label="lack of motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="32264" end="32271" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="32310" end="32320" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603358" start="32347" end="32365" title="existential crisis" label="existential crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="32394" end="32410" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q34255" start="32452" end="32459" title="boredom" label="boredom"/>
<link wikidata="Q331769" start="32527" end="32531" title="Mood (psychology)" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="32645" end="32662" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="32664" end="32683" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106718306" start="32708" end="32719" title="Philosophical pessimism" label="pessimistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="32724" end="32731" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313594" start="32782" end="32792" title="Renunciation" label="renouncing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="32830" end="32849" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492095" start="32913" end="32974" title="Transvaluation of values" label="re-interpret or re-evaluate all established ideals and values"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637535" start="33033" end="33065" title="Nietzschean affirmation" label="affirmative attitude toward life"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="33067" end="33083" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="33249" end="33261" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q796919" start="33576" end="33587" title="resignation" label="resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="33723" end="33735" title="cosmological" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="33819" end="33827" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="33924" end="33933" title="atheistic" label="atheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="34279" end="34296" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q190258" start="34345" end="34349" title="need" label="need"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="34459" end="34469" title="Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy)" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="34973" end="34990" title="Supernaturalistic" label="Supernaturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495350" start="35045" end="35057" title="Ethical naturalism" label="Naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="35250" end="35257" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="35299" end="35307" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="35334" end="35354" title="social relationships" label="social relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q56003" start="35538" end="35549" title="metaethics" label="metaethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="35889" end="35908" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="36083" end="36092" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36594" end="36600" title="Epistemology#Sources" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="36810" end="36819" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100314" start="36936" end="36950" title="Moral realism" label="Moral realists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403415" start="37097" end="37112" title="Ethical non-naturalism" label="Non-naturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="37290" end="37302" title="common sense" label="common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421730" start="37787" end="37834" title="Expressivism" label="expressions of arbitrary individual preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q616772" start="37963" end="37977" title="ethical egoism" label="ethical egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="38062" end="38072" title="well-being" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="38383" end="38394" title="Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy)" label="objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428820" start="38421" end="38437" title="Factual relativism" label="truth-relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="38451" end="38456" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q167187" start="38476" end="38488" title="Perspectivism" label="perspectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877777" start="39058" end="39065" title="Meaning (philosophy)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="39138" end="39155" title="conceptual scheme" label="conceptual scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q583467" start="39252" end="39272" title="Intersubjectivity" label="shared understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q408285" start="39386" end="39401" title="Commensurability (philosophy of science)" label="incommensurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845427" start="39652" end="39665" title="Disagreement (epistemology)" label="disagreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422049" start="39751" end="39766" title="Underdetermination" label="underdetermined"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448195" start="39967" end="39984" title="self-refuting idea" label="undermines itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q583998" start="40429" end="40442" title="will to power" label="will to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q647114" start="40507" end="40528" title="postmodern philosophy" label="postmodern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774361" start="40574" end="40593" title="antifoundationalism" label="antifoundationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359754" start="40718" end="40738" title="Metanarrative" label="grand metanarratives"/>
<link wikidata="Q34302" start="41540" end="41545" title="doubt" label="doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861080" start="41592" end="41606" title="dream argument" label="dream argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="41630" end="41635" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="41686" end="41694" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246962" start="41900" end="41911" title="Problem of the criterion" label="a criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673227" start="42990" end="43006" title="Moral skepticism" label="Moral skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="43374" end="43381" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274284" start="43421" end="43449" title="Why is there anything at all?" label="why there is anything at all"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="43573" end="43589" title="concrete objects" label="concrete objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359069" start="43617" end="43627" title="Contingency (philosophy)" label="contingent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823138" start="44801" end="44820" title="Metaphysical solipsism" label="a form of solipsism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="44842" end="44850" title="the self" label="the self"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194916" start="45124" end="45135" title="proper part" label="proper part"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="45421" end="45440" title="elementary particle" label="elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050837" start="45755" end="45770" title="Ship of Theseus" label="Ship of Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33519" start="45774" end="45789" title="Sorites paradox" label="Sorites paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="45853" end="45872" title="Ockham&amp;#x27;s Razor" label="Ockham&amp;#x27;s Razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q508291" start="45904" end="45914" title="simplicity" label="simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="45928" end="45936" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="46127" end="46139" title="common sense" label="common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="46327" end="46346" title="emergent properties" label="emergent properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044174" start="46433" end="46447" title="Intelligibility (philosophy)" label="unintelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="47095" end="47106" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="48159" end="48168" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494934" start="48209" end="48234" title="Russian nihilist movement" label="Russian nihilist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="48268" end="48289" title="political institution" label="political institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853326" start="48508" end="48525" title="national nihilism" label="national nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="48597" end="48600" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376080" start="48602" end="48617" title="Legal nihilism" label="legal nihilists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="48768" end="48773" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="48828" end="48835" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="48851" end="48867" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="48991" end="49013" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="49015" end="49023" title="Semantics" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="49222" end="49234" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="49239" end="49255" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="49287" end="49306" title="logical consequence" label="logical consequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="49369" end="49380" title="Inference" label="inferential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782524" start="49413" end="49424" title="Therapeutic nihilism" label="Therapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="49466" end="49486" title="medical intervention" label="medical intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="49537" end="49552" title="modern medicine" label="modern medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="49573" end="49584" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752427" start="49588" end="49604" title="medical research" label="medical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="49815" end="49819" title="Dadaism" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q76853" start="49844" end="49863" title="Richard Huelsenbeck" label="Richard Huelsenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="49868" end="49881" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="50058" end="50077" title="Zürich" label="Zürich, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q610106" start="50227" end="50235" title="anti-art" label="anti-art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315360" start="50299" end="50311" title="found poetry" label="found poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q917194" start="50647" end="50660" title="modus vivendi" label="modus vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="50754" end="50767" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q29424" start="50787" end="50803" title="Fathers and Sons (novel)" label="Fathers and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="51011" end="51030" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322723" start="51051" end="51058" title="Macbeth (character)" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820294" start="51125" end="51161" title="tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow" label="tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="51268" end="51281" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Anton Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q477823" start="51320" end="51333" title="Three Sisters (play)" label="Three Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="51643" end="51658" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q203927" start="51891" end="51906" title="Patrick Bateman" label="Patrick Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q241583" start="51910" end="51927" title="Bret Easton Ellis" label="Bret Easton Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466504" start="51952" end="51967" title="American Psycho" label="American Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405126" start="51983" end="51998" title="American Psycho (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q488655" start="52292" end="52305" title="Groundhog Day (film)" label="Groundhog Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q110203" start="52744" end="52754" title="Collateral (film)" label="Collateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q83808444" start="52924" end="52957" title="Everything Everywhere All at Once" label="Everything Everywhere All at Once"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="53180" end="53190" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208892" start="53202" end="53218" title="everything bagel" label="everything bagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297230" start="53907" end="53920" title="Ray Brassier" label="Brassier, Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="53995" end="54013" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q168004" start="54017" end="54043" title="Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi" label="Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="54297" end="54314" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Heidegger, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="54394" end="54410" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="54414" end="54432" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Kierkegaard, Søren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="54590" end="54616" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="" start="54660" end="54710" title="Two Ages: A Literary Review" label="The Two Ages : Kierkegaard&amp;#x27;s Writings, Vol 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294209" start="54853" end="54904" title="Works of Love" label="Works of Love : Kierkegaard&amp;#x27;s Writings, Vol 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="55008" end="55028" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche, Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601879" start="55083" end="55096" title="Helen Zimmern" label="Helen Zimmern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061693" start="55140" end="55155" title="The Gay Science" label="The Gay Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q62977" start="55170" end="55184" title="Walter Kaufmann (philosopher)" label="Walter Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560313" start="55186" end="55193" title="Vintage Books" label="Vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525438" start="55288" end="55296" title="Giorgio Colli" label="C. Colli"/>
<link wikidata="Q321130" start="55301" end="55313" title="Mazzino Montinari" label="M. Montinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q98818" start="55315" end="55332" title="Walter de Gruyter" label="Walter de Gruyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611223" start="55415" end="55428" title="Thomas Common" label="Thomas Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q112510243" start="55432" end="55448" title="James Tartaglia" label="Tartaglia, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="55560" end="55581" title="Bloomsbury Publishing" label="Bloomsbury Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261985" start="57576" end="57588" title="Mario Kopić" label="Kopić, Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q97941" start="58233" end="58256" title="Wolfgang Müller-Lauter" label="Müller-Lauter, Wolfgang"/>
<link wikidata="Q571831" start="59394" end="59411" title="Verlag Dr. Müller" label="Verlag Dr. Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="59684" end="59719" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="59760" end="59773" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="59860" end="59895" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856080" start="59950" end="59958" title="Radiolab" label="Radiolab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="60043" end="60054" title="In Our Time (radio series)" label="In Our Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="60062" end="60073" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21664" wikidata="Q42372" url="?curid=21664" title="Nebula">
<text>A nebula (; : nebulae, or nebulas) is a distinct luminescent part of interstellar medium, which can consist of ionized, neutral, or molecular hydrogen and also cosmic dust. Nebulae are often star-forming regions, such as in the Pillars of Creation in the Eagle Nebula. In these regions, the formations of gas, dust, and other materials &quot;clump&quot; together to form denser regions, which attract further matter and eventually become dense enough to form stars. The remaining material is then thought to form planets and other planetary system objects. 

Most nebulae are of vast size; some are hundreds of light-years in diameter. A nebula that is visible to the human eye from Earth would appear larger, but no brighter, from close by. The Orion Nebula, the brightest nebula in the sky and occupying an area twice the angular diameter of the full Moon, can be viewed with the naked eye but was missed by early astronomers. Although denser than the space surrounding them, most nebulae are far less dense than any vacuum created on Earth (10 to 10 molecules per cubic centimeter) – a nebular cloud the size of the Earth would have a total mass of only a few kilograms. Earth&#x27;s air has a density of approximately 10 molecules per cubic centimeter; by contrast, the densest nebulae can have densities of 10 molecules per cubic centimeter. Many nebulae are visible due to fluorescence caused by embedded hot stars, while others are so diffused that they can be detected only with long exposures and special filters. Some nebulae are variably illuminated by T Tauri variable stars.

Originally, the term &quot;nebula&quot; was used to describe any diffused astronomical object, including galaxies beyond the Milky Way. The Andromeda Galaxy, for instance, was once referred to as the &quot;Andromeda Nebula&quot; (and spiral galaxies in general as &quot;spiral nebulae&quot;) before the true nature of galaxies was confirmed in the early 20th century by Vesto Slipher, Edwin Hubble, and others. Edwin Hubble discovered that most nebulae are associated with stars and illuminated by starlight. He also helped categorize nebulae based on the type of light spectra they produced.

==Observational history==

Around 150 AD, Ptolemy recorded, in books VII–VIII of his &quot;Almagest&quot;, five stars that appeared nebulous. He also noted a region of nebulosity between the constellations Ursa Major and Leo that was not associated with any star. The first true nebula, as distinct from a star cluster, was mentioned by the Muslim Persian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in his &quot;Book of Fixed Stars&quot; (964). He noted &quot;a little cloud&quot; where the Andromeda Galaxy is located. He also cataloged the Omicron Velorum star cluster as a &quot;nebulous star&quot; and other nebulous objects, such as Brocchi&#x27;s Cluster. The supernovas that created the Crab Nebula, SN 1054, was observed by Arabic and Chinese astronomers in 1054.

In 1610, Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc discovered the Orion Nebula using a telescope. This nebula was also observed by Johann Baptist Cysat in 1618. However, the first detailed study of the Orion Nebula was not performed until 1659 by Christiaan Huygens, who also believed he was the first person to discover this nebulosity. 

In 1715, Edmond Halley published a list of six nebulae. This number steadily increased during the century, with Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux compiling a list of 20 (including eight not previously known) in 1746. From 1751 to 1753, Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille cataloged 42 nebulae from the Cape of Good Hope, most of which were previously unknown. Charles Messier then compiled a catalog of 103 &quot;nebulae&quot; (now called Messier objects, which included what are now known to be galaxies) by 1781; his interest was detecting comets, and these were objects that might be mistaken for them.

The number of nebulae was then greatly increased by the efforts of William Herschel and his sister, Caroline Herschel. Their &quot;Catalogue of One Thousand New Nebulae and Clusters of Stars&quot; was published in 1786. A second catalog of a thousand was published in 1789, and the third and final catalog of 510 appeared in 1802. During much of their work, William Herschel believed that these nebulae were merely unresolved clusters of stars. In 1790, however, he discovered a star surrounded by nebulosity and concluded that this was a true nebulosity rather than a more distant cluster.

Beginning in 1864, William Huggins examined the spectra of about 70 nebulae. He found that roughly a third of them had the emission spectrum of a gas. The rest showed a continuous spectrum and were thus thought to consist of a mass of stars. A third category was added in 1912 when Vesto Slipher showed that the spectrum of the nebula that surrounded the star Merope matched the spectra of the Pleiades open cluster. Thus, the nebula radiates by reflected star light.

In 1923, following the Great Debate, it became clear that many &quot;nebulae&quot; were in fact galaxies far from the Milky Way.

Slipher and Edwin Hubble continued to collect the spectra from many different nebulae, finding 29 that showed emission spectra and 33 that had the continuous spectra of star light. In 1922, Hubble announced that nearly all nebulae are associated with stars and that their illumination comes from star light. He also discovered that the emission spectrum nebulae are nearly always associated with stars having spectral classifications of B or hotter (including all O-type main sequence stars), while nebulae with continuous spectra appear with cooler stars. Both Hubble and Henry Norris Russell concluded that the nebulae surrounding the hotter stars are transformed in some manner.

==Formation==

There are a variety of formation mechanisms for the different types of nebulae. Some nebulae form from gas that is already in the interstellar medium while others are produced by stars. Examples of the former case are giant molecular clouds, the coldest, densest phase of interstellar gas, which can form by the cooling and condensation of more diffuse gas. Examples of the latter case are planetary nebulae formed from material shed by a star in late stages of its stellar evolution.

Star-forming regions are a class of emission nebula associated with giant molecular clouds. These form as a molecular cloud collapses under its own weight, producing stars. Massive stars may form in the center, and their ultraviolet radiation ionizes the surrounding gas, making it visible at optical wavelengths. The region of ionized hydrogen surrounding the massive stars is known as an H II region while the shells of neutral hydrogen surrounding the H II region are known as photodissociation region. Examples of star-forming regions are the Orion Nebula, the Rosette Nebula and the Omega Nebula. Feedback from star-formation, in the form of supernova explosions of massive stars, stellar winds or ultraviolet radiation from massive stars, or outflows from low-mass stars may disrupt the cloud, destroying the nebula after several million years. 

Other nebulae form as the result of supernova explosions; the death throes of massive, short-lived stars. The materials thrown off from the supernova explosion are then ionized by the energy and the compact object that its core produces. One of the best examples of this is the Crab Nebula, in Taurus. The supernova event was recorded in the year 1054 and is labeled SN 1054. The compact object that was created after the explosion lies in the center of the Crab Nebula and its core is now a neutron star.

Still other nebulae form as planetary nebulae. This is the final stage of a low-mass star&#x27;s life, like Earth&#x27;s Sun. Stars with a mass up to 8–10 solar masses evolve into red giants and slowly lose their outer layers during pulsations in their atmospheres. When a star has lost enough material, its temperature increases and the ultraviolet radiation it emits can ionize the surrounding nebula that it has thrown off. The Sun will produce a planetary nebula and its core will remain behind in the form of a white dwarf.
==Types==

===Classical types===
Objects named nebulae belong to four major groups. Before their nature was understood, galaxies (&quot;spiral nebulae&quot;) and star clusters too distant to be resolved as stars were also classified as nebulae, but no longer are.
* H II regions, large diffuse nebulae containing ionized hydrogen
* Planetary nebulae
* Supernova remnants (e.g., Crab Nebula)
* Dark nebulae
Not all cloud-like structures are nebulae; Herbig–Haro objects are an example.

===Flux Nebulae===

===Diffuse nebulae===

Most nebulae can be described as diffuse nebulae, which means that they are extended and contain no well-defined boundaries. Diffuse nebulae can be divided into emission nebulae, reflection nebulae and dark nebulae.

Visible light nebulae may be divided into emission nebulae, which emit spectral line radiation from excited or ionized gas (mostly ionized hydrogen); they are often called H II regions, H II referring to ionized hydrogen), and reflection nebulae which are visible primarily due to the light they reflect.

Reflection nebulae themselves do not emit significant amounts of visible light, but are near stars and reflect light from them. Similar nebulae not illuminated by stars do not exhibit visible radiation, but may be detected as opaque clouds blocking light from luminous objects behind them; they are called dark nebulae.

Although these nebulae have different visibility at optical wavelengths, they are all bright sources of infrared emission, chiefly from dust within the nebulae.

===Planetary nebulae===
Planetary nebulae are the remnants of the final stages of stellar evolution for mid-mass stars (varying in size between 0.5-~8 solar masses). Evolved asymptotic giant branch stars expel their outer layers outwards due to strong stellar winds, thus forming gaseous shells while leaving behind the star&#x27;s core in the form of a white dwarf. Radiation from the hot white dwarf excites the expelled gases, producing emission nebulae with spectra similar to those of emission nebulae found in star formation regions. They are H II regions, because mostly hydrogen is ionized, but planetary are denser and more compact than nebulae found in star formation regions.

Planetary nebulae were given their name by the first astronomical observers who were initially unable to distinguish them from planets, which were of more interest to them. The Sun is expected to spawn a planetary nebula about 12 billion years after its formation.

====Protoplanetary nebulae====

===Supernova remnants===

A supernova occurs when a high-mass star reaches the end of its life. When nuclear fusion in the core of the star stops, the star collapses. The gas falling inward either rebounds or gets so strongly heated that it expands outwards from the core, thus causing the star to explode. The expanding shell of gas forms a supernova remnant, a special diffuse nebula. Although much of the optical and X-ray emission from supernova remnants originates from ionized gas, a great amount of the radio emission is a form of non-thermal emission called synchrotron emission. This emission originates from high-velocity electrons oscillating within magnetic fields.

== Examples ==

*Ant Nebula
*Barnard&#x27;s Loop
*Boomerang Nebula
*Cat&#x27;s Eye Nebula
*Crab Nebula
*Eagle Nebula
*Eskimo Nebula
*Carina Nebula
*Fox Fur Nebula
*Helix Nebula
*Horsehead Nebula
*Engraved Hourglass Nebula
*Lagoon Nebula
*Orion Nebula
*Pelican Nebula
*Red Square Nebula
*Ring Nebula
*Rosette Nebula
*Tarantula Nebula
*Waterfall Nebula
===Catalogs===
*Gum catalog (emission nebulae)
*RCW Catalogue (emission nebulae)
*Sharpless catalog (emission nebulae)
*Messier Catalogue
*Caldwell Catalogue
*Abell Catalog of Planetary Nebulae
*Barnard Catalogue (dark nebulae)
*Lynds&#x27; Catalogue of Bright Nebulae
*Lynds&#x27; Catalogue of Dark Nebulae

==See also==
* H I region
* H II region
*List of largest nebulae
* List of diffuse nebulae
* Lists of nebulae
* Molecular cloud
* Magellanic Clouds
* Messier object
* Nebular hypothesis
* Orion molecular cloud complex
* Timeline of knowledge about the interstellar and intergalactic medium

== References ==
== External links ==
*Nebulae, SEDS Messier Pages
*Fusedweb.pppl.gov
*Historical pictures of nebulae, digital library of Paris Observatory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="2" end="8" title="Nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="14" end="21" title="Nebula" label="nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="26" end="33" title="Nebula" label="nebulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="69" end="88" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="142" end="150" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="160" end="171" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q573260" start="228" end="247" title="Pillars of Creation" label="Pillars of Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349" start="255" end="267" title="Eagle Nebula" label="Eagle Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="459" end="463" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="513" end="519" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="531" end="547" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="611" end="621" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="668" end="677" title="human eye" label="human eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="683" end="688" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="746" end="758" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="853" end="857" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="1019" end="1025" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1119" end="1124" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="1163" end="1171" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232" start="1564" end="1571" title="T Tauri star" label="T Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="1663" end="1682" title="astronomical object" label="astronomical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="1694" end="1702" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1714" end="1723" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="1729" end="1745" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="1823" end="1838" title="spiral galaxies" label="spiral galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="1959" end="1972" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="1974" end="1986" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2225" end="2232" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="2274" end="2282" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="2374" end="2387" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="2389" end="2399" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q8853" start="2404" end="2407" title="Leo (constellation)" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="2441" end="2445" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="2489" end="2501" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="2524" end="2549" title="Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world" label="Muslim Persian astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="2550" end="2571" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087785" start="2585" end="2604" title="Book of Fixed Stars" label="Book of Fixed Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="2664" end="2680" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q915499" start="2715" end="2730" title="Omicron Velorum Cluster" label="Omicron Velorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9290" start="2811" end="2833" title="Brocchi&amp;#x27;s Cluster" label="Brocchi&amp;#x27;s Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="2839" end="2849" title="supernovas" label="supernovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="2867" end="2878" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q32037" start="2880" end="2887" title="SN 1054" label="SN 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="2916" end="2935" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q440183" start="2955" end="2986" title="Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc" label="Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="3002" end="3014" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q123842" start="3067" end="3087" title="Johann Baptist Cysat" label="Johann Baptist Cysat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="3183" end="3201" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="3285" end="3298" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q123931" start="3388" end="3413" title="Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux" label="Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="3504" end="3529" title="Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille" label="Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="3560" end="3577" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="3618" end="3633" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="3697" end="3711" title="Messier object" label="Messier object"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="3800" end="3805" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="3932" end="3948" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q76948" start="3965" end="3982" title="Caroline Herschel" label="Caroline Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160681" start="4476" end="4491" title="William Huggins" label="William Huggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="4580" end="4597" title="emission spectrum" label="emission spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="4603" end="4606" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="4739" end="4752" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436" start="4817" end="4823" title="Merope (star)" label="Merope"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="4851" end="4859" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="4860" end="4872" title="open cluster" label="open cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="4949" end="4961" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="5044" end="5053" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="5068" end="5080" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q911809" start="5520" end="5545" title="O-type main sequence star" label="O-type main sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q273159" start="5629" end="5649" title="Henry Norris Russell" label="Henry Norris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="5884" end="5903" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="5972" end="5994" title="giant molecular clouds" label="giant molecular clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="6220" end="6237" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="6240" end="6259" title="Star-forming region" label="Star-forming region"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="6461" end="6482" title="ultraviolet radiation" label="ultraviolet radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="6483" end="6486" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="6541" end="6551" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="6630" end="6641" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187739" start="6720" end="6744" title="photodissociation region" label="photodissociation region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="6787" end="6799" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q108041" start="6805" end="6819" title="Rosette Nebula" label="Rosette Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11357" start="6828" end="6840" title="Omega Nebula" label="Omega Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="7129" end="7138" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="7371" end="7382" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="7387" end="7393" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32037" start="7460" end="7467" title="SN 1054" label="SN 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="7585" end="7597" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="7628" end="7645" title="planetary nebulae" label="planetary nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="7780" end="7789" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="7938" end="7959" title="ultraviolet radiation" label="ultraviolet radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="7973" end="7976" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="8116" end="8127" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="8249" end="8257" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="8291" end="8303" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="8395" end="8406" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="8461" end="8477" title="Planetary nebula" label="Planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="8481" end="8498" title="Supernova remnant" label="Supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="8522" end="8533" title="Dark nebula" label="Dark nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q50048" start="8578" end="8596" title="Herbig–Haro object" label="Herbig–Haro object"/>
<link wikidata="Q202265" start="8819" end="8834" title="emission nebula" label="emission nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q203958" start="8837" end="8854" title="reflection nebula" label="reflection nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="8860" end="8871" title="dark nebula" label="dark nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="8946" end="8959" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="8986" end="8989" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="9014" end="9022" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="9047" end="9058" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="9487" end="9498" title="dark nebula" label="dark nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="9606" end="9614" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="9638" end="9642" title="cosmic dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="9838" end="9861" title="asymptotic giant branch" label="asymptotic giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="10018" end="10029" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="10180" end="10194" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="10213" end="10224" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="10678" end="10687" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="10751" end="10765" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="10992" end="11009" title="supernova remnant" label="supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="11021" end="11035" title="diffuse nebula" label="diffuse nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="11070" end="11075" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="11160" end="11165" title="radio wave" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="11216" end="11236" title="synchrotron emission" label="synchrotron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="11282" end="11290" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="11311" end="11325" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q460957" start="11346" end="11356" title="Ant Nebula" label="Ant Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q808444" start="11358" end="11377" title="Barnard&amp;#x27;s Loop" label="Barnard&amp;#x27;s Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q860979" start="11379" end="11395" title="Boomerang Nebula" label="Boomerang Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829" start="11397" end="11418" title="Cat&amp;#x27;s Eye Nebula" label="Cat&amp;#x27;s Eye Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10934" start="11420" end="11431" title="Crab Nebula" label="Crab Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349" start="11433" end="11445" title="Eagle Nebula" label="Eagle Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q215543" start="11447" end="11460" title="Eskimo Nebula" label="Eskimo Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q50042" start="11462" end="11475" title="Carina Nebula" label="Carina Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049110" start="11477" end="11491" title="Fox Fur Nebula" label="Fox Fur Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q97017154" start="11493" end="11505" title="Helix Nebula" label="Helix Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14271" start="11507" end="11523" title="Horsehead Nebula" label="Horsehead Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047271" start="11525" end="11550" title="Engraved Hourglass Nebula" label="Engraved Hourglass Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11243" start="11552" end="11565" title="Lagoon Nebula" label="Lagoon Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="11567" end="11579" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q527158" start="11581" end="11595" title="Pelican Nebula" label="Pelican Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041356" start="11597" end="11614" title="Red Square Nebula" label="Red Square Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13969" start="11616" end="11627" title="Ring Nebula" label="Ring Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q108041" start="11629" end="11643" title="Rosette Nebula" label="Rosette Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q224145" start="11645" end="11661" title="Tarantula Nebula" label="Tarantula Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11663" end="11679" title="Waterfall Nebula" label="Waterfall Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721889" start="11696" end="11707" title="Gum catalog" label="Gum catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032780" start="11728" end="11741" title="RCW Catalogue" label="RCW Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565783" start="11762" end="11779" title="Sharpless catalog" label="Sharpless catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="11800" end="11817" title="Messier Catalogue" label="Messier Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q857461" start="11819" end="11837" title="Caldwell Catalogue" label="Caldwell Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205121" start="11839" end="11873" title="Abell Catalog of Planetary Nebulae" label="Abell Catalog of Planetary Nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247327" start="11875" end="11892" title="Barnard Catalogue" label="Barnard Catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411059" start="11909" end="11948" title="Lynds&amp;#x27; Catalogue of Bright Nebulae" label="Lynds&amp;#x27; Catalogue of Bright Nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q127432494" start="11950" end="11987" title="Lynds&amp;#x27; Catalogue of Dark Nebulae" label="Lynds&amp;#x27; Catalogue of Dark Nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q528404" start="12004" end="12014" title="H I region" label="H I region"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="12017" end="12028" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717832" start="12030" end="12053" title="List of largest nebulae" label="List of largest nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819102" start="12056" end="12079" title="List of diffuse nebulae" label="List of diffuse nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244324" start="12082" end="12098" title="Lists of nebulae" label="Lists of nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="12101" end="12116" title="Molecular cloud" label="Molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q50028" start="12119" end="12136" title="Magellanic Clouds" label="Magellanic Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="12139" end="12153" title="Messier object" label="Messier object"/>
<link wikidata="Q13599969" start="12156" end="12174" title="Nebular hypothesis" label="Nebular hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16742" start="12177" end="12206" title="Orion molecular cloud complex" label="Orion molecular cloud complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806090" start="12209" end="12278" title="Timeline of knowledge about the interstellar and intergalactic medium" label="Timeline of knowledge about the interstellar and intergalactic medium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21665" wikidata="Q1129353" url="?curid=21665" title="Natural theology">
<text>Natural theology, once also termed physico-theology, is a type of theology that seeks to provide arguments for theological topics (such as the existence of a deity) based on reason and the discoveries of science, the project of arguing for the existence of God on the basis of observed natural facts, and through natural phenomena viewed as divine, or complexities of nature seen as evidence of a divine plan (see predestination) or Will of God, which includes nature itself. Natural theologians have also offered their own explanations for some of the unsolved problems in science.

This distinguishes it from revealed theology, which is based on scripture and/or religious experiences, also from transcendental theology, which is based on &quot;a priori&quot; reasoning. It is thus a type of philosophy, with the aim of explaining the nature of the celestial motors, or gods, or of one supreme god, that are responsible for heavenly motion. Aristotle&#x27;s tractate on metaphysics claims to demonstrate the necessary existence of an unmoved prime mover.

For monotheistic religions, this principally involves arguments about the attributes or non-attributes of a deity, and especially the deity&#x27;s existence, using arguments that do not involve recourse to revelation.

The ideals of natural theology can be traced back to the Old Testament and Greek philosophy. Early sources evident of these ideals come from Jeremiah and the Wisdom of Solomon (c. 50 BC) and Plato&#x27;s dialogue Timaeus (c. 360 BC).

Marcus Terentius Varro (116–27 BCE) established a distinction between political theology (the social functions of religion), natural theology and mythical theology. His terminology became part of the Stoic tradition and then Christianity through Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas.

==Ancient Greece==

Besides Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Works and Days&quot; and Zarathushtra&#x27;s Gathas, Plato gives the earliest surviving account of a natural theology. In the &quot;Timaeus&quot;, written , in the preamble to the account of the origin of the cosmos, we read: &quot;We must first investigate concerning [the whole Cosmos] that primary question which has to be investigated at the outset in every case,— namely, whether it has always existed, having no beginning or generation, or whether it has come into existence, having begun from some beginning.&quot; The subsequent parts of the text argues for the necessity of a divine craftsman, who rationally constructed the cosmos out of pre-existing chaos (&quot;Timaeus&quot; 27d-30c) In the &quot;Laws&quot;, in answer to the question as to what arguments justify faith in the gods, Plato affirms: &quot;One is our dogma about the soul...the other is our dogma concerning the ordering of the motion of the stars&quot;.

==Ancient Rome==

Marcus Terentius Varro in his (lost) &quot;Antiquitates rerum humanarum et divinarum&quot; (&quot;Antiquities of Human and Divine Things&quot;, 1st century BCE) established a distinction between three kinds of theology: civil (political) (&quot;theologia civilis&quot;), natural (physical) (&quot;theologia naturalis&quot;) and mythical (&quot;theologia mythica&quot;). The theologians of civil theology are &quot;the people&quot;, asking how the gods relate to daily life and the state (imperial cult). The theologians of natural theology are the philosophers, asking about the nature of the gods, and the theologians of mythical theology are the poets, crafting mythology.

==Middle Ages==

From the 8th century CE, the Mutazilite school of Islam, compelled to defend their principles against the orthodox Islam of their day, used philosophy for support, and were among the first to pursue a rational Islamic theology, termed &quot;Ilm-al-Kalam&quot; (scholastic theology). The teleological argument was later presented by the early Islamic philosophers Alkindus and Averroes, while Avicenna presented both the cosmological argument and the ontological argument in &quot;The Book of Healing&quot; (1027).

Thomas Aquinas ( – 1274) presented several versions of the cosmological argument in his &quot;Summa Theologica&quot;, and of the teleological argument in his &quot;Summa contra Gentiles&quot;. He presented the ontological argument, but rejected it in favor of proofs that invoke cause and effect alone. His &quot;quinque viae&quot; (&quot;five ways&quot;) in those books attempted to demonstrate the existence of God in different ways, including (as way No. 5) the goal-directed actions seen in nature.

==Early modern==
Raymond of Sabunde&#x27;s (c. 1385–1436) &quot;Theologia Naturalis sive Liber Creaturarum&quot;, written 1434–1436, but published posthumously (1484), marks an important stage in the history of natural theology. John Ray (1627–1705) also known as John Wray, was an English naturalist, sometimes referred to as the father of English natural history. He published important works on plants, animals, and natural theology, with the objective &quot;to illustrate the glory of God in the knowledge of the works of nature or creation&quot;. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) established another term for natural theology as theodicy, defined exactly as &quot;the justification of God&quot;. He viewed the science in a positive light as it supported his personal ethical belief system.

William Derham (1657–1735) continued Ray&#x27;s tradition of natural theology in two of his own works, &quot;Physico-Theology&quot;, published during 1713, and &quot;Astro-Theology&quot;, 1714. These later influenced the work of William Paley.

== Nineteenth century ==
In &quot;An Essay on the Principle of Population&quot;, published during 1798, Thomas Malthus ended with two chapters on natural theology and population. Malthus—a devout Christian—argued that revelation would &quot;damp the soaring wings of intellect&quot;, and thus never let &quot;the difficulties and doubts of parts of the scripture&quot; interfere with his work.

William Paley, an important influence on Charles Darwin, gave a well-known rendition of the teleological argument for God. During 1802 he published &quot;Natural Theology, or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity collected from the Appearances of Nature&quot;. In this he described the Watchmaker analogy, for which he is probably best known. His book, which was one of the most-published books of the 19th and 20th centuries, presents a number of teleological and cosmological arguments for the existence of God. The book served as a template for many subsequent natural theologies during the 19th century.

The Bridgewater Treatises were eight works &quot;the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifested in the Creation&quot; published during the years 1833 to 1836. They were written by eight scientific authors appointed by the President of the Royal Society using an £8000 bequest from Francis Henry Egerton, 8th Earl of Bridgewater. The series, which was widely read, offered extensive discussion concerning the relationship between religion and science, and many of the authors offered observations on natural theology, although their views on the subject differed widely. Responding critically to one of the series, Charles Babbage published what he termed &quot;The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise: A Fragment&quot;.

Professor of chemistry and natural history Edward Hitchcock also studied and wrote on natural theology. He attempted to unify and reconcile science and religion, emphasizing geology. His major work of this type was &quot;The Religion of Geology and its Connected Sciences&quot; (1851).

The Gifford Lectures were established by the will of Adam Lord Gifford to &quot;promote and diffuse the study of Natural Theology in the widest sense of the term—in other words, the knowledge of God.&quot; The term &quot;natural theology&quot;, as used by Gifford, refers to theology supported by science and not dependent on the miraculous.

==Criticism==
The ideas of natural theology did not come without criticism. Many opposed the idea of natural theology, but some philosophers had a greater influence, including David Hume, Immanuel Kant, Søren Kierkegaard, and Charles Darwin. Karl Barth&#x27;s &quot;Church Dogmatics&quot; also heavily opposed the entirety of natural theology.

David Hume&#x27;s &quot;Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion&quot; played a major role in Hume&#x27;s standpoint on natural theology. Hume&#x27;s ideas heavily stem from the idea of natural belief. It was stated that, &quot;Hume&#x27;s doctrine of natural belief allows that certain beliefs are justifiably held by all men without regard to the quality of the evidence which may be produced in their favour&quot;. However, Hume&#x27;s argument also stems from the design argument. The design argument comes from people being labeled as morally good or evil. Hume&#x27;s argument claims that if we restrict ourselves to the idea of good and evil, that we must also assign this to the designer as well. Hume states, &quot;I will allow that pain or misery in man is compatible with infinite power and goodness in the Deity...A mere possible compatibility is not sufficient. You must prove these pure, unmixt, and uncontrollable attributes...&quot;. Hume argues for the idea of a morally perfect deity and requires evidence for anything besides that. Hume&#x27;s arguments against natural theology had a wide influence on many philosophers.

Charles Darwin&#x27;s criticism of the theory had a broader impact on scientists and commoners. Darwin&#x27;s theories showed that humans and animals developed through an evolutionary process. This implied that a chemical reaction was occurring; but it had no influence from the idea of God. However, Darwin&#x27;s ideas did not erase the question of how the original ideas of matter came to be.

===Faith and fideism===

Immanuel Kant and Søren Kierkegaard had similar ideas about natural theology. Kant&#x27;s ideas focused more on the natural dialect of reason, while Kierkegaard focused more on the dialect of understanding. Both men suggest that &quot;the natural dialect leads to the question of God&quot;. Kant argues for the idea that reason leads to the ideas of God as a regulative principle. Kierkegaard argues that the idea of understanding will ultimately lead itself to becoming faith. Both of these men argue that the idea of God cannot be based solely on the idea of reason, that the dialect and ideals will transcend into faith.

Karl Barth opposed the entirety of natural theology. Barth argued that &quot;by starting from such experience, rather that from the gracious revelation through Jesus Christ, we produce a concept of God that is the projection of the highest we know, a construct of human thinking, divorced from salvation history&quot;. Barth argues that God is restricted by the construct of human thinking if he is divorced from salvation. Barth also acknowledges that God is knowable because of his grace. Barth&#x27;s argument stems from the idea of faith rather than reason. Barth held that God can be known only through Jesus Christ, as revealed in scripture, and that any such attempts should be considered idolatry.
Søren Kierkegaard questioned the existence of God, rejecting all rational arguments for God&#x27;s existence (including the teleological argument) on the grounds that reason is inevitably accompanied by doubt. He proposed that the argument from design does not take into consideration future events which may serve to undermine the proof of God&#x27;s existence: the argument would never finish proving God&#x27;s existence. In the &quot;Philosophical Fragments&quot;, Kierkegaard writes:

Fideists may reject attempts to prove God&#x27;s existence.

==See also==

==References==
==Further reading==

* A Bridgewater Treatise for the 21st Century. Science. (Vol 301, p. 1051, 22 August 2003). A review by Robert T. Pennock of philosopher of science Michael Ruse&#x27;s book &quot;Darwin &amp; Design&quot;.
* Babbage, C., &quot;The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise&quot;; Murray, 1837 (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; )
* Bascom, John, &quot;Natural Theology&quot; (1880)
* John B. Cobb, &quot;A Christian Natural Theology&quot;, 1965 (online edition)
* Connolly, Brendan, &quot;The Natural Religion&quot;, 2008; 
* Hauerwas, Stanley, &quot;With the Grain of the Universe: The Church&#x27;s Witness and Natural Theology&quot; 
* Hernández Valencia, J.S. &quot;La teología natural de la tradición metafísica milesia, ABT 7 (2022), 139–162&quot; 
* Paley, W., &quot;Natural Theology. Or, Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity, Collected from the Appearances of Nature&quot;; Bridgewater Treatises, Faulder, 1803 (reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2009; )
* Polkinghorne, J. and Oord, T.J., &quot;The Polkinghorne Reader] : Science, Faith, and the Search for Meaning&quot; (SPCK and Templeton Foundation Press, 2010) 
* Topham, J. R. &quot;Reading the Book of Nature: How Eight Bestsellers Reconnected Christianity and the Sciences on the Eve of the Victorian Age&quot;, University of Chicago Press, 2022; 


==External links==
* Apollos.ws A Christian site surveying arguments for the existence of God and responses to common arguments against.
* Toward a new &quot;kalām&quot; cosmological argument
* Catholic Encyclopedia article Bridgewater Treatises
* &quot;Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion&quot; by David Hume
* Babbage, Charles &quot;The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise&quot; 2nd edn. 1838, London: John Murray.
* &quot;Natural Theology&quot; article in the &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1129353" start="0" end="16" title="Natural theology" label="Natural theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129353" start="35" end="51" title="Natural theology" label="physico-theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="66" end="74" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="143" end="163" title="existence of God" label="existence of a deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="174" end="180" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="204" end="211" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="414" end="428" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003236" start="433" end="444" title="Will of God" label="Will of God"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="553" end="581" title="Lists of unsolved problems#Natural sciences, engineering and medicine" label="unsolved problems in science"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="611" end="628" title="revealed theology" label="revealed theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="648" end="657" title="scripture" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q143210" start="665" end="686" title="religious experiences" label="religious experiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833875" start="698" end="721" title="transcendental theology" label="transcendental theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178161" start="747" end="755" title="A priori and a posteriori" label="a priori"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="872" end="876" title="gods" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="960" end="983" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="tractate on metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326055" start="1044" end="1055" title="Unmoved mover" label="prime mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="1062" end="1084" title="monotheism" label="monotheistic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390326" start="1132" end="1142" title="Cataphatic theology" label="attributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q938946" start="1146" end="1160" title="negative theology" label="non-attributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="1192" end="1214" title="existence of God" label="deity&amp;#x27;s existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="1264" end="1274" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1334" end="1347" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="1352" end="1368" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="1418" end="1426" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q202135" start="1435" end="1452" title="Wisdom of Solomon" label="Wisdom of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1468" end="1473" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="1490" end="1497" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="1512" end="1534" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Marcus Terentius Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q781421" start="1582" end="1600" title="political theology" label="political theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949162" start="1658" end="1675" title="mythical theology" label="mythical theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="1712" end="1717" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1737" end="1749" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1758" end="1776" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="1781" end="1795" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="1826" end="1832" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="1846" end="1860" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="1871" end="1883" title="Zarathushtra" label="Zarathushtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329536" start="1891" end="1897" title="Gathas" label="Gathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1899" end="1904" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="1978" end="1985" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q752285" start="2556" end="2560" title="Laws (dialogue)" label="Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="2797" end="2819" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Marcus Terentius Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417324" start="2840" end="2881" title="Antiquitates rerum humanarum et divinarum" label="Antiquitates rerum humanarum et divinarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q781421" start="3017" end="3034" title="political theology" label="civil (political)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949162" start="3125" end="3133" title="mythical theology" label="mythical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="3285" end="3298" title="imperial cult (Ancient Rome)" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="3345" end="3357" title="philosophy" label="philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="3445" end="3449" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="3461" end="3470" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="3519" end="3529" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazili" label="Mutazilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3540" end="3545" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12818349" start="3700" end="3716" title="Islamic theology" label="Islamic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="3738" end="3743" title="Kalam" label="Kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="3751" end="3770" title="Scholasticism" label="scholastic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q729193" start="3777" end="3798" title="teleological argument" label="teleological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274353" start="3826" end="3852" title="Early Islamic philosophy" label="early Islamic philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="3853" end="3861" title="Al-Kindi" label="Alkindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="3866" end="3874" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="3882" end="3890" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q949648" start="3910" end="3931" title="cosmological argument" label="cosmological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q373152" start="3940" end="3960" title="ontological argument" label="ontological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030940" start="3970" end="3989" title="The Book of Healing" label="The Book of Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="4005" end="4019" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q949648" start="4064" end="4085" title="cosmological argument" label="cosmological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="4099" end="4115" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q729193" start="4134" end="4155" title="teleological argument" label="teleological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q604274" start="4169" end="4190" title="Summa Contra Gentiles" label="Summa contra Gentiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q373152" start="4215" end="4235" title="ontological argument" label="ontological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192931" start="4318" end="4330" title="quinque viae" label="quinque viae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="4405" end="4421" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q947994" start="4526" end="4544" title="Raymond of Sabunde" label="Raymond of Sabunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q316949" start="4738" end="4746" title="John Ray" label="John Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="4791" end="4798" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="4858" end="4873" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="4907" end="4913" title="plants" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="4915" end="4921" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="5061" end="5086" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398235" start="5310" end="5324" title="William Derham" label="William Derham"/>
<link wikidata="Q851988" start="5589" end="5628" title="An Essay on the Principle of Population" label="An Essay on the Principle of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="5659" end="5673" title="Thomas Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="5773" end="5783" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q433739" start="5950" end="5963" title="William Paley" label="William Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354184" start="5991" end="6005" title="Religious views of Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q729193" start="6042" end="6063" title="teleological argument" label="teleological argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854518" start="6253" end="6271" title="Watchmaker analogy" label="Watchmaker analogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322363" start="6580" end="6601" title="Bridgewater Treatises" label="Bridgewater Treatises"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="6822" end="6835" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q454424" start="6864" end="6910" title="Francis Henry Egerton, 8th Earl of Bridgewater" label="Francis Henry Egerton, 8th Earl of Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q316752" start="6991" end="7032" title="relationship between religion and science" label="relationship between religion and science"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="7197" end="7212" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039193" start="7244" end="7286" title="Ninth Bridgewater Treatise" label="The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise: A Fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q322185" start="7338" end="7354" title="Edward Hitchcock" label="Edward Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q750883" start="7586" end="7602" title="Gifford Lectures" label="Gifford Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679116" start="7635" end="7652" title="Adam Gifford" label="Adam Lord Gifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="7857" end="7865" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="7912" end="7922" title="miraculous" label="miraculous"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="8101" end="8111" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="8113" end="8126" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="8128" end="8145" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="8151" end="8165" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="8167" end="8177" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412082" start="8191" end="8207" title="Church Dogmatics" label="Church Dogmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="8270" end="8280" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q965564" start="8294" end="8331" title="Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion" label="Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="9409" end="9423" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="9831" end="9844" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="9849" end="9866" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="10456" end="10466" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="10616" end="10628" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="11162" end="11179" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153168" start="11600" end="11623" title="Philosophical Fragments" label="Philosophical Fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q196667" start="11652" end="11660" title="Fideism" label="Fideists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350245" start="11867" end="11884" title="Robert T. Pennock" label="Robert T. Pennock"/>
<link wikidata="Q518293" start="11911" end="11923" title="Michael Ruse" label="Michael Ruse"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="12054" end="12080" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q980727" start="12144" end="12156" title="John B. Cobb" label="John B. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="12710" end="12736" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="13293" end="13314" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="13400" end="13410" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q259513" start="13561" end="13596" title="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
