<doc id="21383" wikidata="Q1033" url="?curid=21383" title="Nigeria">
<text>Nigeria, officially the Federal Republic of Nigeria, is a country in West Africa. It is situated between the Sahel to the north and the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean to the south. It covers an area of . With a population of more than 230 million, it is the most populous country in Africa, and the world&#x27;s sixth-most populous country. Nigeria borders Niger in the north, Chad in the northeast, Cameroon in the east, and Benin in the west. Nigeria is a federal republic comprising 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory, where its capital, Abuja, is located. The largest city in Nigeria by population is Lagos, one of the largest metropolitan areas in the world and the largest in Africa.

Nigeria has been home to several indigenous material cultures, pre-colonial states and kingdoms since the second millennium BC. The Nok culture, , marks one of the earliest known civilizations in the region. The Hausa Kingdoms inhabited the north, with the Edo Kingdom of Benin in the south and Igbo Kingdom of Nri in the southeast. In the southwest, the Yoruba Ife Empire was succeeded by the Oyo Empire. The present day territory of Nigeria was home to a vast array of city-states. In the early 19th century the Fula jihads culminated in the Sokoto Caliphate. The modern state originated with British colonialization in the 19th century, taking its present territorial shape with the merging of the Southern Nigeria Protectorate and the Northern Nigeria Protectorate in 1914. The British set up administrative and legal structures and incorporated traditional monarchs as a form of indirect rule. Nigeria became a formally independent federation on 1 October 1960. It experienced a civil war from 1967 to 1970, followed by a succession of military dictatorships and democratically elected civilian governments until achieving a stable government in the 1999 Nigerian presidential election.

Nigeria is a multinational state inhabited by more than 250 ethnic groups speaking 500 distinct languages, all identifying with a wide variety of cultures. The three largest ethnic groups are the Hausa in the north, Yoruba in the west, and Igbo in the east, together constituting over 60% of the total population. The official language is English, chosen to facilitate linguistic unity at the national level. Nigeria&#x27;s constitution ensures &quot;de jure&quot; freedom of religion, and it is home to some of the world&#x27;s largest Muslim and Christian populations. Nigeria is divided roughly in half between Muslims, who live mostly in the north part of the country, and Christians, who live mostly in the south; indigenous religions, such as those native to the Igbo and Yoruba ethnicities, are in the minority.

Nigeria is a regional power in Africa and a middle power in international affairs. Nigeria&#x27;s economy is the fourth-largest in Africa, the 53rd-largest in the world by nominal GDP, and 27th-largest by PPP. Nigeria is often referred to as the Giant of Africa by its citizens due to its large population and economy, and is considered to be an emerging market by the World Bank. Nigeria is a founding member of the African Union and a member of many international organizations, including the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, NAM, the Economic Community of West African States, Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and OPEC. It is also a member of the informal MINT group of countries and is one of the Next Eleven economies.

== Etymology ==

The name &quot;&quot; derives from the Niger River running through the country. This name was coined on 8 January 1897, by the British journalist Flora Shaw. The neighboring Republic of Niger takes its name from the same river. The origin of the name &quot;Niger&quot;, which originally applied to only the middle reaches of the Niger River, is uncertain. The word is likely an alteration of the Tuareg name &quot;egerew n-igerewen&quot; used by inhabitants along the middle reaches of the river around Timbuktu before 19th-century European colonialism. Before Flora Shaw suggested the name &quot;Nigeria&quot;, other proposed names included &quot;Royal Niger Company Territories&quot;, &quot;Central Sudan&quot;, &quot;Niger Empire&quot;, &quot;Niger Sudan&quot;, and &quot;Hausa Territories&quot;.

== History ==
=== Prehistory ===
Kainji Dam excavations showed ironworking by the 2nd century BC. The transition from Neolithic times to the Iron Age was accomplished without intermediate bronze production. Some have suggested the technology moved west from the Nile Valley. But the Iron Age in the Niger River valley and the forest region appears to predate the introduction of metallurgy in the upper savanna by more than 800 years, as well as predating it in the Nile Valley. More recent research suggests that iron metallurgy was developed independently in sub-Saharan Africa.

The Nok civilization thrived between 1,500 BC and AD 200. It produced life-sized terracotta figures that are some of the earliest known sculptures in sub-Saharan Africa and smelted iron by about 550 BC and possibly a few centuries earlier. Evidence of iron smelting has also been excavated at sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria: dating to 2000 BC at the site of Lejja and to 750 BC at the site of Opi.

===Early history ===

The &quot;Kano Chronicle&quot; highlights an ancient history dating to around 999 AD of the Hausa Sahelian city-state of Kano, with other major Hausa cities (or Hausa Bakwai) of Daura, Hadeija, Kano, Katsina, Zazzau, Rano, and Gobir all having recorded histories dating back to the 10th century. With the spread of Islam from the 7th century AD, the area became known as &quot;Sudan&quot; or as &quot;Bilad Al Sudan&quot; (English: Land of the Blacks). Since the populations were partially affiliated with the Arab Muslim culture of North Africa, they began trans-Saharan trade and were referred to by the Arabic speakers as &quot;Al-Sudan&quot; (meaning &quot;The Blacks&quot;) as they were considered an extended part of the Muslim world. There are early historical references by medieval Arab and Muslim historians and geographers which refer to the Kanem–Bornu Empire as the region&#x27;s major centre for Islamic civilization.

The Kingdom of Nri of the Igbo people consolidated in the 10th century and continued until it lost its sovereignty to the British in 1911. Nri was ruled by the Eze Nri, and the city of Nri is considered to be the foundation of Igbo culture. Nri and Aguleri, where the Igbo creation myth originates, are in the territory of the Umeuri clan. Members of the clan trace their lineages back to the patriarchal king-figure Eri. In West Africa, the oldest bronzes made using the lost wax process were from Igbo-Ukwu, a city under Nri influence.

The Yoruba kingdoms of Ife and Oyo in southwestern Nigeria became prominent in the 12th and 14th centuries, respectively. The oldest signs of human settlement at Ife&#x27;s current site date back to the 9th century, and its material culture includes terracotta and bronze figures.

=== Pre-colonial era ===

In the 16th century, Portuguese explorers were the first Europeans to begin important, direct trade with the peoples of southern Nigeria, at the port they named Lagos (formerly Eko) and in Calabar along the region Slave Coast. Europeans traded goods with peoples at the coast; coastal trade with Europeans also marked the beginnings of the Atlantic slave trade. The port of Calabar on the historical Bight of Biafra (now commonly referred to as the Bight of Bonny) became one of the largest slave-trading posts in West Africa in this era. Other major slaving ports were located in Badagry, Lagos on the Bight of Benin, and Bonny Island on the Bight of Biafra. The majority of those taken to these ports were captured in raids and wars. Usually, the captives were taken back to the conquerors&#x27; territory as forced labour; they were sometimes gradually acculturated and absorbed into the conquerors&#x27; society. Slave routes were established throughout Nigeria linking the hinterland areas with the major coastal ports. Some of the more prolific slave-trading kingdoms who participated in the Atlantic slave trade were linked with the Edo&#x27;s Benin Empire in the south, Oyo Empire in the southwest, and the Aro Confederacy in the southeast. Benin&#x27;s power lasted between the 15th and 19th centuries. Oyo, at its territorial zenith in the late 17th to early 18th centuries, extended its influence from western Nigeria to modern-day Togo.

In the north, the incessant fighting amongst the Hausa city-states and the decline of the Bornu Empire allowed the Fulani people to gain headway into the region. Until this point, the Fulani, a nomadic ethnic group, primarily traversed the semi-desert Sahelian region north of Sudan with cattle and avoided trade and intermingling with the Sudanic peoples. At the beginning of the 19th century, Usman dan Fodio led a successful jihad against the Hausa Kingdoms, founding the centralised Sokoto Caliphate. This empire, with Arabic as its official language, grew rapidly under his rule and that of his descendants, who sent out invading armies in every direction. The vast landlocked empire connected the east with the western Sudan region and made inroads down south conquering parts of the Oyo Empire (modern-day Kwara), and advanced towards the Yoruba heartland of Ibadan, to reach the Atlantic Ocean. The territory controlled by the empire included much of modern-day northern and central Nigeria. The sultan sent out emirs to establish suzerainty over the conquered territories and promote Islamic civilization; the emirs in turn became increasingly rich and powerful through trade and slavery. By the 1890s, the largest slave population in the world, about two million, was concentrated in the territories of the Sokoto Caliphate. The use of slave labour was extensive, especially in agriculture. By the time of its break-up in 1903 into various European colonies, the Sokoto Caliphate was one of the largest pre-colonial African states.

A changing legal imperative (the outlawing of the Atlantic slave trade in 1807) and economic imperative (a desire for political and social stability) led most European powers to support the widespread cultivation of agricultural products, such as the palm, for use in European industry. The slave trade continued after the ban, as illegal smugglers purchased slaves along the coast from native slavers. Britain&#x27;s West Africa Squadron sought to intercept the smugglers at sea. The rescued slaves were taken to Freetown, a colony in West Africa originally established by Lieutenant John Clarkson for the resettlement of slaves freed by Britain in North America after the American Revolutionary War.

=== British colonization ===
Britain intervened in the Lagos kingship power struggle by bombarding Lagos in 1851, deposing the slave-trade-friendly Oba Kosoko, helping to install the amenable Oba Akitoye and signing the Treaty between Great Britain and Lagos on 1January 1852. Britain annexed Lagos as a crown colony in August 1861 with the Lagos Treaty of Cession. British missionaries expanded their operations and travelled further inland. In 1864, Samuel Ajayi Crowther became the first African bishop of the Anglican Church.

In 1885, British claims to a West African sphere of influence received recognition from other European nations at the Berlin Conference. The following year, it chartered the Royal Niger Company under the leadership of Sir George Taubman Goldie. By the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the company had vastly succeeded in subjugating the independent southern kingdoms along the Niger River, the British conquered Benin in 1897, and, in the Anglo-Aro War (1901–1902), defeated other opponents. The defeat of these states opened up the Niger area to British rule. In 1900, the company&#x27;s territory came under the direct control of the British government and established the Southern Nigeria Protectorate as a British protectorate and part of the British Empire.

By 1902, the British had begun plans to move north into the Sokoto Caliphate. British General Lord Frederick Lugard was tasked by the Colonial Office to implement the agenda. Lugard used rivalries between many of the emirs in the southern reach of the caliphate and the central Sokoto administration to prevent any defence as he worked towards the capital. As the British approached the city of Sokoto, Sultan Muhammadu Attahiru I organized a quick defence of the city and fought the advancing British-led forces. The British force quickly won, sending Attahiru I and thousands of followers on a Mahdist &quot;hijra&quot;. In the northeast, the decline of the Bornu Empire gave rise to the British-controlled Borno Emirate which established Abubakar Garbai of Borno as ruler.

In 1903, the British victory in the Battle of Kano gave them a logistical edge in pacifying the heartland of the Sokoto Caliphate and parts of the former Bornu Empire. On 13 March 1903, at the grand market square of Sokoto, the last vizier of the caliphate officially conceded to British rule. The British appointed Muhammadu Attahiru II as the new caliph. Lugard abolished the caliphate but retained the title &quot;sultan&quot; as a symbolic position in the newly organized Northern Nigeria Protectorate. This remnant became known as &quot;Sokoto Sultanate Council&quot;. In June 1903, the British defeated the remaining northern forces of Attahiru. By 1906, all resistance to British rule had ended.

On 1 January 1914, the British formally united the Southern Nigeria Protectorate and the Northern Nigeria Protectorate into the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria. Administratively, Nigeria remained divided into the Northern and Southern Protectorates and Lagos Colony. Inhabitants of the southern region sustained more interaction, economic and cultural, with the British and other Europeans owing to the coastal economy. Christian missions established Western educational institutions in the protectorates. Under Britain&#x27;s policy of indirect rule and validation of Islamic legitimist tradition, the Crown did not encourage the operation of Christian missions in the northern, Islamic part of the country.

By the mid-20th century following World War II, a wave for independence was sweeping across Africa, in response to the growth of Nigerian nationalism and demands for independence, successive constitutions legislated by the British government moved Nigeria toward self-government on a representative and increasingly federal basis. By the eve of independence in 1960, regional differences in modern educational access were marked. The legacy, though less pronounced, continues to the present day. The balance between north and south was also expressed in Nigeria&#x27;s political life. For instance, northern Nigeria did not outlaw slavery until 1936 whilst in other parts of Nigeria, slavery was abolished soon after colonialism.
=== Independence and the Federal Republic ===
Nigeria gained a degree of self-rule in 1954, and full independence from the United Kingdom on 1 October 1960, as the Federation of Nigeria with Abubakar Tafawa Balewa as its Prime Minister, while retaining the British monarch, Elizabeth II, as nominal head of state and Queen of Nigeria. Nnamdi Azikiwe replaced the colonial governor-general in November 1960. At independence, the cultural and political differences were sharp among Nigeria&#x27;s dominant ethnic groups: the Hausa in the north, Igbo in the east, and Yoruba in the west. The Westminster system of government was retained, and thus the President&#x27;s powers were generally ceremonial. The parliamentary system of government had Abubakar Tafawa Balewa as Prime Minister and Nnamdi Azikiwe as the ceremonial president. The founding government was a coalition of conservative parties: the Northern People&#x27;s Congress led by Sir Ahmadu Bello, a party dominated by Muslim northerners, and the Igbo and Christian-dominated National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons led by Nnamdi Azikiwe. The opposition consisted of the comparatively liberal Action Group, which was largely dominated by the Yoruba and led by Obafemi Awolowo. An imbalance was created in the polity as a result of the 1961 plebiscite. Southern Cameroons opted to join the Republic of Cameroon while Northern Cameroons chose to join Nigeria. The northern part of the country became larger than the southern part.
=== Fall of the First Republic and Civil War ===
The disequilibrium and perceived corruption of the electoral and political process led to two military coups in 1966. The first coup was in January 1966 and was led mostly by soldiers under Majors Emmanuel Ifeajuna (of the Igbo tribe), Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu (Northerner of Eastern extraction) and Adewale Ademoyega (a Yoruba from the West). The coup plotters succeeded in assassinating Sir Ahmadu Bello and Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa alongside prominent leaders of the Northern Region and Premier Samuel Akintola of the Western Region, but the plotters struggled to form a central government. Senate President Nwafor Orizu handed over government control to the Army, under the command of another Igbo officer, Major General Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi. Later, the counter-coup of 1966, supported primarily by Northern military officers, facilitated the rise of Yakubu Gowon as military head of state. Tension rose between north and south; Igbos in northern cities suffered persecution and many fled to the Eastern Region.

In May 1967, Governor of the Eastern Region Lt. Colonel Emeka Ojukwu declared the region independent from the federation as a state called the Republic of Biafra, as a result of the continuous and systematically planned attacks against Igbos and those of Eastern extraction popularly known as 1966 pogroms. This declaration precipitated the Nigerian Civil War, which began as the official Nigerian government side attacked Biafra on 6 July 1967, at Garkem. The 30-month war, with a long blockade of Biafra and its isolation from trade and international relief, ended in January 1970. Estimates of the number of dead in the former Eastern Region during the 30-month civil war range from one to three million. Britain and the Soviet Union were the main military backers of the Nigerian government, with Nigeria utilizing air support from Egyptian pilots provided by Gamal Abdel Nasser, while France and Israel aided the Biafrans. The Congolese government, under President Joseph-Désiré Mobutu, took an early stand on the Biafran secession, voicing strong support for the Nigerian federal government and deploying thousands of troops to fight against the secessionists.

Following the war, Nigeria enjoyed an oil boom in the 1970s, during which the country joined OPEC and received huge oil revenues. Despite these revenues, the military government did little to improve the standard of living, help small and medium businesses, or invest in infrastructure. As oil revenues fueled the rise of federal subsidies to states, the federal government became the centre of political struggle and the threshold of power in the country. As oil production and revenue rose, the Nigerian government became increasingly dependent on oil revenues and international commodity markets for budgetary and economic concerns.
The coup in July 1975, led by Generals Shehu Musa Yar&#x27;Adua and Joseph Garba, ousted Gowon, who fled to Britain. The coup plotters wanted to replace Gowon&#x27;s autocratic rule with a triumvirate of three brigadier generals whose decisions could be vetoed by a Supreme Military Council. For this triumvirate, they convinced General Murtala Muhammed to become military head of state, with General Olusegun Obasanjo as his second-in-command, and General Theophilus Danjuma as the third. Together, the triumvirate introduced austerity measures to stem inflation, established a Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau, replaced all military governors with new officers, and launched &quot;Operation Deadwood&quot; through which they fired 11,000 officials from the civil service.

Colonel Buka Suka Dimka launched a February 1976 coup attempt, during which General Murtala Muhammed was assassinated. Dimka lacked widespread support among the military, and his coup failed, forcing him to flee. After the coup attempt, General Olusegun Obasanjo was appointed military head of state. Obasanjo vowed to continue Murtala&#x27;s policies. Aware of the danger of alienating northern Nigerians, Obasanjo brought General Shehu Yar&#x27;Adua as his replacement and second-in-command as Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters completing the military triumvirate, with Obasanjo as head of state and General Theophilus Danjuma as Chief of Army Staff, the three went on to re-establish control over the military regime and organized the military&#x27;s transfer of power programme: states creation and national delimitation, local government reforms and the constitutional drafting committee for a new republic.

=== Military dictatorship and Second Republic ===
The military carefully planned the return to civilian rule putting in place measures to ensure that political parties had broader support than witnessed during the first republic. In 1979, five political parties competed in a series of elections in which Alhaji Shehu Shagari of the National Party of Nigeria (NPN) was elected president. All five parties won representation in the National Assembly. On 1 October 1979, Shehu Shagari was sworn in as the first President and Commander-in-Chief of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. Obasanjo peacefully transferred power to Shagari, becoming the first head of state in Nigerian history to willingly step down.The Shagari government became viewed as corrupt by virtually all sectors of Nigerian society. In 1983, the inspectors of the state-owned Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation began to notice &quot;the slow poisoning of the waters of this country&quot;. In August 1983, Shagari and the NPN were returned to power in a landslide victory, with a majority of seats in the National Assembly and control of 12 state governments. But the elections were marred by violence, and allegations of widespread vote-rigging and electoral malfeasance led to legal battles over the results. There were also uncertainties, such as in the first republic, that political leaders may be unable to govern properly.

The 1983 military coup d&#x27;état was coordinated by key officers of the Nigerian military and led to the overthrow of the government and the installation of Major General Muhammadu Buhari as head of state. The military coup of Muhammadu Buhari shortly after the regime&#x27;s re-election in 1984 was generally viewed as a positive development. In 1985, Ibrahim Babangida overthrew Buhari in a coup d&#x27;état. In 1986, Babangida established the Nigerian Political Bureau which made recommendations for the transition to the Third Nigerian Republic. In 1989, Babangida started making plans for the transition to the Third Nigerian Republic. Babangida survived the 1990 Nigerian coup d&#x27;état attempt, then postponed a promised return to democracy to 1992.

==== 12 June and the crisis of the Third Republic ====

Babangida legalized the formation of political parties and formed the two-party system with the Social Democratic Party and National Republican Convention ahead of the 1992 general elections. He urged all Nigerians to join either of the parties, which Chief Bola Ige referred to as &quot;two leper hands&quot;. The 1993 presidential election held on 12 June was the first since the military coup of 1983. The results, though not officially declared by the National Electoral Commission, showed the duo of Moshood Abiola and Baba Gana Kingibe of the Social Democratic Party defeated Bashir Tofa and Sylvester Ugoh of the National Republican Convention by over 2.3 million votes. However, Babangida annulled the elections, leading to massive civilian protests that effectively shut down the country for weeks. In August 1993, Babangida finally kept his promise to relinquish power to a civilian government but not before appointing Ernest Shonekan head of an interim national government. Babangida&#x27;s regime has been considered the most corrupt and responsible for creating a culture of corruption in Nigeria.

Shonekan&#x27;s interim government, the shortest in the political history of the country, was overthrown in a coup d&#x27;état of 1993 led by General Sani Abacha, who used military force on a wide scale to suppress the continuing civilian unrest. In 1995, the government hanged environmentalist Ken Saro-Wiwa on trumped-up charges in the deaths of four Ogoni elders, which caused Nigerian&#x27;s suspension from the Commonwealth. Lawsuits under the American Alien Tort Statute against Royal Dutch Shell and Brian Anderson, the head of Shell&#x27;s Nigerian operation, settled out of court with Shell continuing to deny liability. Several hundred million dollars in accounts traced to Abacha were discovered in 1999. The regime came to an end in 1998 when the dictator died in the villa. He looted money to offshore accounts in Western European banks and defeated coup plots by arresting and bribing generals and politicians. His successor, General Abdulsalami Abubakar, adopted a new constitution on 5 May 1999, which provided for multiparty elections.

=== Return to democracy (1999–present) ===
On 29 May 1999, Abubakar handed over power to the winner of the 1999 presidential election, former military ruler General Olusegun Obasanjo, as President of Nigeria. Obasanjo had been in prison under the dictatorship of Abacha. Obasanjo&#x27;s inauguration heralded the beginning of the Fourth Nigerian Republic, ending a 39-year period of short-lived democracies, civil war and military dictatorship. Although the elections that brought Obasanjo to power and allowed him to run for a second term in the 2003 presidential elections were condemned as unfree and unfair, Nigeria made significant progress in democratization under Obasanjo.

In the 2007 general elections, Umaru Yar&#x27;Adua of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party came to power. The international community, which had observed the Nigerian elections to promote a free and fair process, condemned these elections as seriously flawed. Yar&#x27;Adua died on 5 May 2010, and Vice President Goodluck Jonathan had been sworn in by the Senate three months earlier as acting president to succeed Yar&#x27;Adua. Jonathan won the 2011 presidential election; the polls went smoothly and with relatively little violence or electoral fraud. Jonathan&#x27;s tenure saw an economic recovery that made Nigeria the leading economic power in Africa. The Jonathan administration also saw an increase in unparalleled corruption, with as many as 20 billion US dollars said to have been lost to the Nigerian state through the national oil company. Above all, however, Jonathan&#x27;s tenure saw the emergence of a wave of terror by the Boko Haram insurgency, such as the Gwoza massacre and Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping in 2014.

Ahead of the general election of 2015, a merger of the biggest opposition parties in Nigeria – the Action Congress of Nigeria, the Congress for Progressive Change, the All Nigeria Peoples Party, a faction of the All Progressives Grand Alliance and the new PDP (a faction of serving governors of the ruling People&#x27;s Democratic Party) – formed the All Progressives Congress led by current president Bola Ahmed Tinubu. At the time, it was the most expensive election ever to be held on the African continent (being surpassed only by the elections of 2019 and 2023). The new mega-opposition party chose as their candidate for the election former military dictator Muhammadu Buhari. Buhari&#x27;s campaign in 2015 was popular and built around his image as a staunch anti-corruption fighter—he won the election by over two million votes. Observers generally praised the election as being fair. The election marked the first time an incumbent president had lost re-election in Nigeria. In the 2019 presidential election, Buhari was re-elected.

Four major candidates, amongst other less popular candidates, vied for the presidency in the 2023 presidential election. For the first time since the return of democracy, no former military ruler ran for president, marking a strengthening of democracy and faith in the multiparty constitution. The election also saw the rise of metonymic supporters of the new candidates, the Obidient movement of Peter Obi, previously governor of Anambra State, widely appealed to young, urban voters and has his core base in the Southeast; and the Kwankwassiya of Rabiu Kwankwaso, former governor of Kano State in the Northwest. Bola Tinubu, of the ruling party, won the disputed election with 36.61% of the vote, but both runners-up claimed victory and litigation is ongoing in an election tribunal. Bola Tinubu&#x27;s inauguration was held on 29 May 2023. Problems with widespread kidnapping in Nigeria continued. On 29 May 2024, Tinubu signed into law an act readopting &quot;Nigeria, We Hail Thee&quot;, which was the country&#x27;s national anthem from 1960 to 1978, as its national anthem, replacing &quot;Arise, O Compatriots&quot;.

== Geography ==
Nigeria is located in western Africa on the Gulf of Guinea and has a total area of , making it the world&#x27;s 32nd-largest country. Its borders span , and it shares borders with Benin (), Niger (), Chad (), and Cameroon (including the separatist Ambazonia) . Its coastline is at least . Nigeria lies between latitudes 4° and 14°N, and longitudes 2° and 15°E. The highest point in Nigeria is Chappal Waddi at . The main rivers are the Niger and the Benue, which converge and empty into the Niger Delta. This is one of the world&#x27;s largest river deltas and the location of a large area of Central African mangroves.

Nigeria&#x27;s most expansive topographical region is that of the valleys of the Niger and Benue river valleys (which merge and form a Y-shape). To the southwest of the Niger is a &quot;rugged&quot; highland. To the southeast of the Benue are hills and mountains, which form the Mambilla Plateau, the highest plateau in Nigeria. This plateau extends through the border with Cameroon, where the montane land is part of the Bamenda Highlands of Cameroon.

The far south is defined by its tropical rainforest climate, where annual rainfall is per year. In the southeast stands the Obudu Plateau. Coastal plains are found in both the southwest and the southeast. Mangrove swamps are found along the coast.

The area near the border with Cameroon close to the coast is rich rainforest and part of the Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests ecoregion, an important centre for biodiversity. It is a habitat for the drill primate, which is found in the wild only in this area and across the border in Cameroon. The areas surrounding Calabar, Cross River State, also in this forest, are believed to contain the world&#x27;s largest diversity of butterflies. The area of southern Nigeria between the Niger and the Cross Rivers has lost most of its forest because of development and harvesting by increased population and has been replaced by grassland.

Everything in between the far south and the far north is savannah (insignificant tree cover, with grasses and flowers located between trees). Rainfall is more limited to between per year. The savannah zone&#x27;s three categories are Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, Sudan savannah, and Sahel savannah. Guinean forest-savanna mosaic is plains of tall grass interrupted by trees. Sudan savannah is similar but with shorter grasses and shorter trees. Sahel savannah consists of patches of grass and sand, found in the northeast.

=== Hydrology ===
Nigeria is divided into two main catchment areas – that of Lake Chad and that of the Niger. The Niger catchment area covers about 63% of the country. The main tributary of the Niger is the Benue, whose tributaries extend beyond Cameroon into Cameroon into Chad and the Sharie catchment area. In the Sahel region, rain is less than per year, and the Sahara Desert is encroaching. In the dry northeast corner of the country lies Lake Chad, on a shared water boundary delimitation with Niger, Chad and Cameroon.

The Chad Basin is fed from the north-eastern quarter of Nigeria. The Bauchi Plateau forms the watershed between the Niger/Benue and Komadugu Yobe river systems. The flat plains of north-eastern Nigeria are geographically part of the Chad Basin, where the course of the El Beid River forms the border with Cameroon, from the Mandara Mountains to Lake Chad. The Komadugu Yobe river system gives rise to the internationally important Hadejia-Nguru wetlands and Ox-bow lakes around Lake Nguru in the rainy season. Other rivers of the northeast include the Ngadda and the Yedseram, both of which flow through the Sambisa swamps, thus forming a river system. The river system of the northeast is also a major river system. In addition, Nigeria has numerous coastal rivers.

Over the last million years, Lake Chad in the far north-east of Nigeria has dried up several times for a few thousand years and just as often growing to many times its current size. In recent decades its surface area has been reduced considerably, which may also be due to humans taking water from the inlets to irrigate agricultural land.

===Vegetation===
Nigeria is covered by three types of vegetation: forests (where there is significant tree cover), savannahs (insignificant tree cover, with grasses and flowers located between trees), and montane land (least common and mainly found in the mountains near the Cameroon border). Both the forest zone and the savannah zone are divided into three parts.

Some of the forest zone&#x27;s most southerly portion, especially around the Niger River and Cross River deltas, is mangrove swamp. North of this is a freshwater swamp, containing different vegetation from the saltwater mangrove swamps, and north of that is a rainforest.

The savannah zone&#x27;s three categories are divided into Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, made up of plains of tall grass which are interrupted by trees, the most common across the country; Sudan savannah, with short grasses and short trees; and Sahel savannah patches of grass and sand, found in the northeast.

=== Environmental issues ===
Waste management including sewage treatment, the linked processes of deforestation and soil degradation, and climate change or global warming are the major environmental problems in Nigeria. Waste management presents problems in a megacity like Lagos and other major Nigerian cities which are linked with economic development, population growth and the inability of municipal councils to manage the resulting rise in industrial and domestic waste. This waste management problem is also attributable to unsustainable environmental management lifestyles of Kubwa community in the Federal Capital Territory, where there are habits of indiscriminate disposal of waste, dumping of waste along or into the canals, sewerage systems that are channels for water flows, and the like. Haphazard industrial planning, increased urbanisation, poverty and lack of competence of the municipal government are seen as the major reasons for high levels of waste pollution in major cities of the country. Some of the solutions have been disastrous to the environment, resulting in untreated waste being dumped in places where it can pollute waterways and groundwater.

In 2005, Nigeria had the highest rate of deforestation in the world, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. That year, 12.2%, the equivalent of 11,089,000 hectares, had been forested in the country. Between 1990 and 2000, Nigeria lost an average of 409,700 hectares of forest every year equal to an average annual deforestation rate of 2.4%. Between 1990 and 2005, in total Nigeria lost 35.7% of its forest cover or around 6,145,000 hectares. Nigeria had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.2/10, ranking it 82nd globally out of 172 countries.

In the year 2010, thousands of people were inadvertently exposed to lead-containing soil from informal gold mining within the northern state of Zamfara. While estimates vary, it is thought that upwards of 400 children died of acute lead poisoning, making this perhaps the largest lead poisoning fatality outbreak ever encountered.

Nigeria&#x27;s Delta region is one of the most polluted regions in the world due to serious oil spills and other environmental problems caused by its oil industry. The heavy contamination of the air, ground and water with toxic pollutants is often used as an example of ecocide. In additional to the environmental damage it has caused conflict in the Delta region.

Illegal oil refineries, in which local operators convert stolen crude oil into petrol and diesel, are considered particularly &quot;dirty, dangerous and lucrative&quot;. Safety and environmental aspects are usually ignored. Refining petroleum also inevitably produces heavy oil, which is &quot;cracked&quot; into lighter fuel components in regular plants at great technical expense. Illegal refineries do not have these technical possibilities and &quot;dispose&quot; of the heavy oil where it accumulates. The lighter components of crude oil (methane to butane, isobutane) create a certain risk of explosion, which often leads to disasters at illegal plants. In 2022, Nigeria suffered 125 deaths from explosions at local, illegal refineries.

== Politics ==
=== Government ===

Nigeria is a federal republic modelled after the United States, with 36 states and capital Abuja as an independent unit. The executive power is exercised by the President. The president is both head of state and head of the federal government; the president is elected by popular vote to a maximum of two four-year terms. State governors, like the president, are elected for four years and may serve a maximum of two terms. The president&#x27;s power is checked by a Senate and a House of Representatives, which are combined in a bicameral body called the National Assembly. The Senate is a 109-seat body with three members from each state and one from the capital region of Abuja; members are elected by popular vote to four-year terms. The House contains 360 seats, with the number of seats per state determined by population.

The Nigerian president is elected in a modified two-round system. To be elected in the first round, a candidate must receive a relative majority of the votes and more than 25% of the votes in at least 24 of the 36 states. If no candidate reaches this hurdle, a second round of voting takes place between the leading candidate and the next candidate who received the majority of votes in the highest number of states. By convention, presidential candidates take a running mate (candidate for the vice presidency) who is both ethnically and religiously the opposite of themselves. There is no law prescribing this, yet all presidential candidates since the existence of the Fourth Republic until 2023 adhered to this rule.

However, this principle of religious and ethnic diversity in leadership was ignored in the 2023 General Elections, where the candidate for the All Progressives Congress, Bola Ahmed Tinubu, a Muslim, selected another Muslim, Senator Kashim Shettima, as running mate.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Nigeria is divided into thirty-six states and one Federal Capital Territory, which are further sub-divided into 774 local government areas. In some contexts, the states are aggregated into six geopolitical zones: North West, North East, North Central, South West, South East, and South South.

Nigeria has five cities with a population of over a million (from largest to smallest): Lagos, Kano, Ibadan, Benin City and Port Harcourt. Lagos is the largest city in Africa, with a population of over 12 million in its urban area.

The south of the country in particular is characterised by very strong urbanisation and a relatively large number of cities. According to an estimate from 2015, there are 20 cities in Nigeria with more than 500,000 inhabitants, including ten cities with a population of one million.

=== Law ===

The Constitution of Nigeria is the supreme law of the country. There are four distinct legal systems in Nigeria, which include English law, common law, customary law, and Sharia law:
* English law in Nigeria consists of the collection of British laws from colonial times.
* Common law is the collection of authoritative judicial decisions in the field of civil law (so-called precedents) that have been handed down in the country concerned – in this case Nigeria. (This system is mainly found in Anglo-Saxon countries; in continental Europe, on the other hand, codified and, as far as possible, abstracted civil law predominates, as in the Napoleonic Code in France).
* Customary law is derived from indigenous traditional norms and practices, including the dispute resolution meetings of pre-colonial Yoruba land secret societies and the Èkpè and Okónkò of Igboland and Ibibioland.
* Sharia law &quot;(also known as Islamic Law)&quot; used to be used only in Northern Nigeria, where Islam is the predominant religion. It is also being used in Lagos State, Oyo State, Kwara State, Ogun State, and Osun State by Muslims. Muslim penal codes are not the same in every state and they differentiate in punishment and offences according to religious affiliation (for example, alcohol consumption and distribution).

The country has a judicial branch, the highest court of which is the Supreme Court of Nigeria.

=== Foreign relations ===
Upon gaining independence in 1960, Nigeria made African unity the centrepiece of its foreign policy. One exception to the African focus was Nigeria&#x27;s close relationship with Israel throughout the 1960s. Israel sponsored and oversaw the construction of Nigeria&#x27;s parliament buildings.

Nigeria&#x27;s foreign policy was put to the test in the 1970s after the country emerged united from its civil war. It supported movements against white minority governments in Southern Africa. Nigeria backed the African National Congress by taking a committed tough line about the South African government. Nigeria was a founding member of the Organisation for African Unity (now the African Union) and had tremendous influence in West Africa and Africa on the whole. Nigeria founded regional cooperative efforts in West Africa, functioning as the standard-bearer for the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and ECOMOG (especially during the Liberia and Sierra Leone civil wars).

With this Africa-centred stance, Nigeria readily sent troops to the Congo at the behest of the United Nations shortly after independence (and has maintained membership since that time). Nigeria also supported several Pan-African and pro-self-government causes in the 1970s, including garnering support for Angola&#x27;s MPLA, SWAPO in Namibia, and aiding opposition to the minority governments of Portuguese Mozambique, and Rhodesia. Nigeria retains membership in the Non-Aligned Movement. In late November 2006, it organized an Africa-South America Summit in Abuja to promote what some attendees termed &quot;South-South&quot; linkages on a variety of fronts. Nigeria is also a member of the International Criminal Court and the Commonwealth of Nations. It was temporarily expelled from the latter in 1995 when ruled by the Abacha regime.

Nigeria has remained a key player in the international oil industry since the 1970s and maintains membership in OPEC, which it joined in July 1971. Its status as a major petroleum producer figures prominently in its sometimes volatile international relations with developed countries, notably the United States, and with developing countries.

Since 2000, Chinese–Nigerian trade relations have risen exponentially. There has been an increase in total trade of over 10.3 billion dollars between the two nations from 2000 to 2016. However, the structure of the Chinese–Nigerian trade relationship has become a major political issue for the Nigerian state. Chinese exports account for around 80 per cent of total bilateral trade volumes. This has resulted in a serious trade imbalance, with Nigeria importing ten times more than it exports to China. Subsequently, Nigeria&#x27;s economy is becoming over-reliant on cheap imports to sustain itself, resulting in a clear decline in Nigerian industry under such arrangements.

Continuing its Africa-centred foreign policy, Nigeria introduced the idea of a single currency for West Africa known as the Eco under the presumption that it would be led by the naira. But on 21 December 2019, Ivorian President Alassane Ouattara, Emmanuel Macron, and multiple other UEMOA states announced that they would merely rename the CFA franc instead of replacing the currency as originally intended. As of 2021, the Eco currency has been delayed to 2027.

=== Military ===
The Nigerian Armed Forces are the combined military forces of Nigeria. It consists of three uniformed service branches: the Nigerian Army, Nigerian Navy, and Nigerian Air Force. The President of Nigeria functions as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, exercising his constitutional authority through the Ministry of Defence, which is responsible for the management of the military and its personnel. The operational head of the AFN is the Chief of the Defence Staff, who is subordinate to the Nigerian Defence Minister. With a force of more than 223,000 active personnel, the Nigerian military is one of the largest uniformed combat services in Africa.

Nigeria has 143,000 troops in the armed forces (army 100,000, navy 25,000, air force 18,000) and another 80,000 personnel for &quot;gendarmerie &amp; paramilitary&quot; in 2020, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies. Nigeria spent just under 0.4 per cent of its economic output, or US$1.6 billion, on its armed forces in 2017. For 2022, US$2.26 billion has been budgeted for the Nigerian armed forces, which is just over a third of Belgium&#x27;s defence budget (US$5.99 billion).

=== Communal conflicts ===
Boko Haram and the bandit conflict have been responsible for numerous serious attacks with thousands of casualties since mid-2010. Since then, according to the Council on Foreign Relations&#x27; Nigeria Security Tracker, over 41,600 lives have been lost to this conflict (as of October 2022). The United Nations refugee agency UNHCR counts about 1.8 million internally displaced persons and about 200,000 Nigerian refugees in neighbouring countries.

The Boko Haram-affected states agreed in February 2015 to establish an 8,700-strong Multinational Joint Task Force to jointly fight Boko Haram. By October 2015, Boko Haram had been driven out of all the cities it controlled and almost all the counties in northeastern Nigeria. In 2016, Boko Haram split and in 2022, 40,000 fighters surrendered. The splinter group ISWAP (Islamic State in West Africa) remains active.

The fight against Boko Haram, other sectarians and criminals has been accompanied by increasing police attacks. The Council on Foreign Relations&#x27; Nigeria Security Tracker counted 1,086 deaths from Boko Haram attacks and 290 deaths from police violence in the first 12 months of its establishment in May 2011. In the 12 months after October 2021, 2,193 people died from police violence and 498 from Boko Haram and ISWAP, according to the NST. The Nigerian police are notorious for vigilante justice.

The Niger Delta saw intense attacks on oil infrastructure in 2016 by militant groups such as the &quot;Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta&quot; (MEND), the &quot;Niger Delta People&#x27;s Volunteer Force&quot; (NDPVF), the &quot;Ijaw National Congress&quot; (INC) and the &quot;Pan Niger Delta Forum&quot; (PANDEF). In response, the new Buhari government pursued a dual strategy of repression and negotiation.

In late 2016, the Nigerian federal government resorted to the gambit of offering the militant groups a 4.5 billion naira (US$144 million) contract to &quot;guard&quot; oil infrastructure. Most accepted. The contract was renewed in August 2022, but led to fierce disputes among the above-mentioned groups over the distribution of the funds. Representatives speak of &quot;war&quot; – against each other. The high propensity for violence and the pettiness of the leaders, as well as the complete absence of social and environmental arguments in this dispute give rise to fears that the militant groups, despite their lofty names, have discarded responsibility for their region and ethnic groups and have moved into the realm of protection rackets and self-enrichment. In any case, the pipelines in the Niger Delta are not very effectively &quot;guarded&quot; – the pollution of the Niger Delta with stolen crude oil and illegally produced heavy fuel oil continued unhindered after 2016.

In central Nigeria, conflicts between Muslim Hausa-Fulani herders and indigenous Christian farmers flared up again, especially in Kaduna, Plateau, Taraba and Benue states. In individual cases, these clashes have claimed several hundred lives. Conflict over land and resources is increasing due to the ongoing desertification in northern Nigeria, population growth and the generally tense economic situation.

In June 2022, a massacre took place in the St. Francis Xavier Church, in Owo. The Government blamed ISWAP for the murder of over 50 parishioners, but locals suspect Fulani herdsmen&#x27;s involvement.

== Economy ==
Nigeria&#x27;s economy is the fourth largest in Africa, the 31st-largest in the world by nominal GDP, and 30th-largest by PPP. In 2022, its GDP (PPP) per capita was US$9,148, which is less than South Africa, Egypt and Morocco, but slightly higher than Ghana and Ivory Coast. As of 2023, Nigeria&#x27;s economy is classified as lower-middle-income.

Before 1999, economic development was hindered by years of military rule, corruption, and mismanagement. In the decades thereafter, the restoration of democracy and subsequent economic reforms led to rapid growth. In 2011, Citigroup projected that Nigeria would have the highest average GDP growth in the world between 2010 and 2050.

Nigeria is an economic leader in Africa in several industries, including energy, financial markets, pharmaceuticals, and entertainment. Its financial services sector is well-developed, with a mix of local and international banks, asset management companies, brokerage houses, insurance companies and brokers, private equity funds, and investment banks. After petroleum, the largest source of foreign exchange earnings for Nigeria are remittances sent home by Nigerians living abroad.

Nigeria also has an abundant supply of under-exploited natural resources, including coal, bauxite, tantalite, gold, tin, iron ore, limestone, niobium, lead and zinc. The country&#x27;s gold production in 2015 was 8 metric tons. Despite huge deposits of these natural resources, the mining industry in Nigeria is still in its infancy.

=== Agriculture ===
In 2021, about 23.4% of Nigeria&#x27;s GDP is contributed by agriculture, forestry and fishing combined. Nigeria is the world&#x27;s largest producer of cassava. Further major crops include maize, rice, millet, yam beans, and guinea corn (sorghum). Cocoa is the principal agricultural export, and one of the country&#x27;s most significant non-petroleum products. Nigeria is also one of the world&#x27;s top twenty exporters of natural rubber, generating $20.9 million in 2019.

Before the Nigerian Civil War and the oil boom, Nigeria was self-sufficient in food. Agriculture used to be the principal foreign exchange earner of Nigeria. Agriculture has failed to keep pace with Nigeria&#x27;s rapid population growth, and Nigeria now relies upon food imports to sustain itself. It spends US$6.7 billion yearly for food imports, four times more than revenues from food export. The Nigerian government promoted the use of inorganic fertilizers in the 1970s.

Nigeria&#x27;s rice production increased by 10% from 2017/18 to 2021/22 to 5 million tonnes a year, but could hardly keep up with the increased demand. Rice imports therefore remained constant at 2 million tonnes per year. In August 2019, Nigeria closed its border with Benin and other neighbouring countries to stop rice smuggling into the country as part of efforts to boost local production.

Until now, Nigeria exported unhusked rice but had to import husked rice, the country&#x27;s staple food. – The rice mill in Imota, near Lagos, is intended to handle the corresponding processing at home, improve the balance of trade and the labour market, and save unnecessary costs for transport and middlemen. When fully operational at the end of 2022, the plant, the largest south of the Sahara, is expected to employ 250,000 people and produce 2.5 million 50-kg bags of rice annually.

=== Oil and natural gas ===

Nigeria is the 15th largest producer of petroleum in the world, the 6th largest exporter, and has the 9th largest proven reserves. Petroleum plays a large role in the Nigerian economy and politics, accounting for about 80% of government earnings. Nigeria also has the 9th largest proven natural gas reserves estimated by OPEC; the government&#x27;s value of its about 206.53 trillion cubic feet has been valued at $803.4 trillion. Natural gas is seen as having the potential to unlock an economic miracle on the Niger River. Nigeria each year loses to gas flaring an estimate of US$2.5 billion, and over 120,000 barrels of oil per day to crude theft in the Niger Delta, its main oil-producing region. This has led to piracy and conflict for control in the region and has led to disruptions in production preventing the country from meeting its OPEC quota and exporting petroleum at full capability.

Nigeria has a total of 159 oil fields and 1,481 wells in operation according to the Department of Petroleum Resources. The most productive region of the nation is the coastal Niger Delta Basin in the Niger Delta or &quot;south-south&quot; region which encompasses 78 of the 159 oil fields. Most of Nigeria&#x27;s oil fields are small and scattered, and as of 1990, these small fields accounted for 62.1% of all Nigerian production. This contrasts with the sixteen largest fields which produced 37.9% of Nigeria&#x27;s petroleum at that time. Petrol was Nigeria&#x27;s main import commodity until 2021, accounting for 24% of import volume.

The Niger Delta Nembe Creek oil field was discovered in 1973 and produces from the middle Miocene deltaic sandstone-shale in an anticline structural trap at a depth of . In June 2013, Shell announced a strategic review of its operations in Nigeria, hinting that assets could be divested. While many international oil companies have operated there for decades, by 2014 most were making moves to divest their interests, citing a range of issues including oil theft. In August 2014, Shell said it was finalising its interests in four Nigerian oil fields.

The supply of natural gas to Europe, threatened by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, is pushing projects to transport Nigerian natural gas via pipelines to Morocco or Algeria. As of May 2022, however, there are no results on this yet.

=== Energy ===
Nigeria&#x27;s energy consumption is much more than its generation capacity. Most of the energy comes from traditional fossil fuels, which account for 73% of total primary production. The rest is from hydropower (27%). Since independence, Nigeria has tried to develop a domestic nuclear industry for energy. Nigeria opened 2004 a Chinese-origin research reactor at Ahmadu Bello University and has sought the support of the International Atomic Energy Agency to develop plans for up to 4,000 MWe of nuclear capacity by 2027 according to the National Program for the Deployment of Nuclear Power for Generation of Electricity. In 2007, President Umaru Yar&#x27;Adua urged the country to embrace nuclear power to meet its growing energy needs. In 2017, Nigeria signed the UN Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. In April 2015, Nigeria began talks with Russia&#x27;s state-owned Rosatom to collaborate on the design, construction and operation of four nuclear power plants by 2035, the first of which will be in operation by 2025. In June 2015, Nigeria selected two sites for the planned construction of the nuclear plants. Neither the Nigerian government nor Rosatom would disclose the specific locations of the sites, but it is believed that the nuclear plants will be sited in Akwa Ibom State and Kogi State. The sites are planned to house two plants each. In 2017 agreements were signed for the construction of the Itu nuclear power plant.

==== Electricity ====
According to the survey, 94% of Nigerians are connected to the national grid, but only 57% have their electricity consumption recorded by an electricity meter. Only 1% of Nigerians surveyed reported having electricity 24 hours a day. 68% have electricity 1 to 9 hours a day, according to the NIO. Two-thirds of Nigerians, or 66%, pay up to 10,000 Naira (US$13) a month for electricity, which is almost 3% of the average income in Nigeria. Over two-thirds of respondents, or 67%, were willing to pay more for uninterrupted electricity supply. Power generators are owned by 21% of Nigerians, while 14% use solar energy.

=== Manufacturing and technology ===
Nigeria has a manufacturing industry that includes leather and textiles (centred in Kano, Abeokuta, Onitsha, and Lagos), plastics and processed food. Ogun is considered to be Nigeria&#x27;s current industrial hub, as most factories are located in Ogun and more companies are moving there, followed by Lagos. The city of Aba in the south-eastern part of the country is well known for handicrafts and shoes, known as &quot;Aba made&quot;. Nigeria has a market of 720,000 cars per year, but less than 20% of these are produced domestically.

In 2016, Nigeria was the leading cement producer south of the Sahara, ahead of South Africa. Aliko Dangote, Nigeria&#x27;s richest inhabitant, based his wealth on cement production, as well as agricultural commodities. According to its own information, the Ajaokuta Steel Company Limited produces 1.3 million tonnes of steel per year. However, steel plants in Katsina, Jos and Osogbo no longer appear to be active.

In June 2019, Nigeria EduSat-1 was deployed from the International Space Station. It is the first satellite that was built in Nigeria, which followed many other Nigerian satellites that were built by other countries. In 2021, Nigeria hosts about 60 percent of the pharmaceutical production capacity in Africa, the larger pharmaceutical companies are located in Lagos. The pharmaceutical producer with the most employees in Nigeria is Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. Nigeria has a few electronic manufacturers like Zinox, the first branded Nigerian computer, and manufacturers of electronic gadgets such as tablet PCs. As of January 2022, Nigeria is the host to 5 out of the 7 unicorn companies in Africa.

=== Internet and telecommunications ===

 The Nigerian telecommunications market is one of the fastest-growing in the world, with major emerging market operators (like MTN, 9mobile, Airtel and Globacom) basing their largest and most profitable centres in the country. Nigeria&#x27;s ICT sector has experienced much growth, representing 10% of the nation&#x27;s GDP in 2018 as compared to just 1% in 2001. Lagos is regarded as one of the largest technology hubs in Africa with its thriving tech ecosystem. According to a survey by the GSM Association, 92% of adult Nigerian men and 88% of women owned a mobile phone. Using various measures including but not limited to illegal arrest, taking down of websites, passport seizures, and restricted access to bank accounts, the Nigerian government is punishing citizens for expressing themselves on the internet and working to stifle internet freedom.

=== Tourism ===
Tourism in Nigeria centres largely on events, because of the country&#x27;s ample amount of ethnic groups, but also includes rain forests, savannahs, waterfalls, and other natural attractions.
Abuja is home to several parks and green areas. The largest, Millennium Park, was designed by architect Manfredi Nicoletti and officially opened in December 2003. After the re-modernization project achieved by the administration of Governor Raji Babatunde Fashola, Lagos is gradually becoming a major tourist destination. Lagos is currently taking steps to become a global city. The 2009 Eyo carnival (a yearly festival originating from Iperu Remo, Ogun State) was a step toward world city status. Currently, Lagos is primarily known as a business-oriented and fast-paced community. Lagos has become an important location for African and black cultural identity.

Lagos has sandy beaches by the Atlantic Ocean, including Elegushi Beach and Alpha Beach. Lagos also has many private beach resorts including Inagbe Grand Beach Resort and several others in the outskirts. Lagos has a variety of hotels ranging from three-star to five-star hotels, with a mixture of local hotels such as Eko Hotels and Suites, Federal Palace Hotel and franchises of multinational chains such as Intercontinental Hotel, Sheraton, and Four Points by Sheraton. Other places of interest include the Tafawa Balewa Square, Festac town, The Nike Art Gallery, Freedom Park, and the Cathedral Church of Christ.

=== Transport ===

Due to Nigeria&#x27;s location in the center of West Africa, transport plays a major role in the national service sector. Government investments have seen an increase in extensive road repairs and new construction has been carried out gradually as states in particular spend their share of increased government allocations. Representative of these improvements is the Second Niger Bridge near Onitsha, which was largely completed in 2022. A 2017 World Bank report on logistics hubs in Africa placed the country in fourth place, behind Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, Senegal, and Sao Tome, but in 2021, Nigeria joined the World Logistics Passport, a private sector group working to increase the effiency of global trade.

==== Roads ====

Four trans-African automobile routes pass through Nigeria:
* Lagos-Mombasa Highway
* Algiers-Lagos Highway
* Dakar-Lagos Highway
* Dakar-Ndjamena Highway

Nigeria has the largest road network in West Africa. It covers about 200,000 km, of which 60,000 km are asphalted. Nigeria&#x27;s roads and highways handle 90% of all passenger and freight traffic. It contributes N2.4trn ($6.4bn) to GDP in 2020. The federal government is responsible for 35,000 km of the road network. The motorway links of important economic centers such as Lagos-Ibadan, Lagos-Badagry and Enugu-Onitsha have been renovated.

The rest of the road network is a state matter and therefore in very different shape, depending on which state you are in. Economically strong states such as Lagos, Anambra and Rivers receive particularly poor evaluations. Most roads were built in the 1980s and early 1990s. Poor maintenance and inferior materials have worsened the condition of the roads. Travelling is very difficult. Especially during the rainy season, the use of secondary roads is sometimes almost impossible due to potholes. Road bandits often take advantage of this situation for their criminal purposes.
==== Rail transport ====
Railways have undergone a massive revamping with projects such as the Lagos-Kano Standard Gauge Railway being completed connecting northern cities of Kano, Kaduna, Abuja, Ibadan and Lagos.

==== Air transport ====
The Nigerian aviation industry generated 198.62 billion naira (€400 million) in 2019, representing a contribution of 0.14% to GDP. It was the fastest-growing sector of the Nigerian economy in 2019. Passenger traffic increased from 9,358,166 in 2020 to 15,886,955 in 2021, a significant increase of over 69%. Aircraft movements increased by more than 46% from 2020 to 2021. Total freight volumes were 191 tonnes in 2020 but increased to 391 tonnes in 2021. In December 2021, the Anambra International Cargo Airport started its operation. In April 2022, the second terminal of the Murtala Muhammed International Airport has been inaugurated. It will increase the capacity of the airport to 14 million passengers per year.

There are 54 airports in Nigeria, The principal airports are:
* Murtala Muhammed International Airport in Lagos,
* Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport in Abuja,
* Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport in Kano,
* Akanu Ibiam International Airport in Enugu and
* Port Harcourt International Airport in Port Harcourt.

Nigeria had in the past operated a state-owned airline Nigeria Airways which was over-indebted in 2003 and was bought by the British Virgin Group; since 28 June 2005, it has flown under the name Virgin Nigeria Airways. At the end of 2008, the Virgin Group announced its withdrawal from the airline; since September 2009 the airline has been operating as Nigerian Eagle Airlines. The largest airline in Nigeria is privately owned Air Peace, founded in 2012.

== Demographics ==

The United Nations estimates that the population of Nigeria in was at , distributed as 51.7% rural and 48.3% urban, and with a population density of 167.5 people per square kilometre. Around 42.5% of the population were 14 years or younger, 19.6% were aged 15–24, 30.7% were aged 25–54, 4.0% were aged 55–64, and 3.1% were aged 65 years or older. The median age in 2017 was 18.4 years. Nigeria is the world&#x27;s sixth-most populous country. The birth rate is 35.2-births/1,000 population and the death rate is 9.6 deaths/1,000 population as of 2017, while the total fertility rate is 5.07 children born/woman. Nigeria&#x27;s population increased by 57 million from 1990 to 2008, a 60% growth rate in less than two decades. Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and accounts for about 17% of the continent&#x27;s total population as of 2017; however, exactly how populous is a subject of speculation.

Millions of Nigerians have emigrated during times of economic hardship, primarily to Europe, North America and Australia. It is estimated that over a million Nigerians have emigrated to the United States and constitute the Nigerian American populace. Individuals in many such Diasporic communities have joined the &quot;Egbe Omo Yoruba&quot; society, a national association of Yoruba descendants in North America. Nigeria&#x27;s largest city is Lagos. Lagos has grown from about 300,000 in 1950 to an estimated 13.4 million in 2017.

Nigeria has more than 250 ethnic groups, with varying languages and customs, creating a country of rich ethnic diversity. The three largest ethnic groups are the Hausa, Yoruba and Igbo, together accounting for more than 60% of the population, while the Edo, Ijaw, Fulɓe, Kanuri, Urhobo-Isoko, Ibibio, Ebira, Nupe, Gbagyi, Jukun, Igala, Idoma, Ogoni and Tiv account for between 35 and 40%; other minorities make up the remaining 5%. The Middle Belt of Nigeria is known for its diversity of ethnic groups, including the Atyap, Berom, Goemai, Igala, Kofyar, Pyem, and Tiv. There are small minorities of British, American, Indian, Chinese (est. 50,000), white Zimbabwean, Japanese, Greek, Syrian and Lebanese immigrants. Immigrants also include those from other West African or East African nations.

=== Languages ===
Five hundred and twenty-five languages have been spoken in Nigeria; out of these 525 languages, eight are now extinct. In some areas of Nigeria, ethnic groups speak more than one language. The official language of Nigeria, English, was chosen to facilitate the cultural and linguistic unity of the country, owing to the influence of British colonisation which ended in 1960. Nigerian Pidgin English, first used by British and African slavers to facilitate the Atlantic slave trade in the late 17th century, has replaced the native language for many Nigerians. Many French speakers from surrounding countries have influenced the English spoken in the border regions of Nigeria and some Nigerian citizens have become fluent enough in French to work in the surrounding countries. The French spoken in Nigeria may be mixed with some native languages and English.

The major languages spoken in Nigeria represent three major families of languages of Africa: the majority are Niger-Congo languages, such as Igbo, Yoruba, Ibibio, Ijaw, Fulfulde, Ogoni, and Edo. Kanuri, spoken in the northeast, primarily in Borno and Yobe State, is part of the Nilo-Saharan family, and Hausa is an Afroasiatic language. Even though most ethnic groups prefer to communicate in their languages, English as the official language is widely used for education, business transactions and official purposes. English as a first language is used by only a small minority of the country&#x27;s urban elite, and it is not spoken at all in some rural areas. Hausa is the most widely spoken of the three main languages spoken in Nigeria.

With the majority of Nigeria&#x27;s populace in rural areas, the major languages of communication in the country remain indigenous languages. Some of the largest of these, notably Yoruba and Igbo, have derived standardised languages from several different dialects and are widely spoken by those ethnic groups. Nigerian Pidgin English, often known simply as &quot;Pidgin&quot; or &quot;Broken&quot; (Broken English), is also a popular lingua franca, though with varying regional influences on dialect and slang. The pidgin English or Nigerian English is widely spoken within the Niger Delta Region.

=== Religion ===


Nigeria is a religiously diverse society, with Nigerians nearly equally divided into Muslims and Christians, with a tiny minority of adherents of traditional African religions and other religions. The Christian share of Nigeria&#x27;s population is in decline because of the lower fertility rate compared to Muslims in the country. As in other parts of Africa where Islam and Christianity are dominant, religious syncretism with the traditional African religions is common.

A 2012 report on religion and public life by the Pew Research Center stated that in 2010, 49.3% of Nigeria&#x27;s population was Christian, 48.8% was Muslim, and 1.9% were followers of indigenous and other religions (such as the Bori in the North) or unaffiliated. However, in a report released by Pew Research Center in 2015, the Muslim population was estimated to be 50%, and by 2060, according to the report, Muslims will account for about 60% of the country. The 2010 census of Association of Religion Data Archives has also reported that 48.8% of the total population was Christian, slightly larger than the Muslim population of 43.4%, while 7.5% were members of other religions. However, these estimates should be taken with caution because sample data is mostly collected from major urban areas in the south, which are predominantly Christian. According to a 2018 estimate in The World Factbook by the CIA, the population is estimated to be 53.5% Muslim, 45.9% Christian (10.6% Roman Catholic and 35.3% Protestant and other Christian), and 0.6% as other.

Islam dominates northwestern Nigeria and northeastern Nigeria (Kanuri, Fulani and other groups). In the west, the Yoruba people are predominantly Muslim with a significant Christian minority in addition to a few adherents of traditional religions. Protestant and locally cultivated Christianity are widely practised in Western areas, while Roman Catholicism is a more prominent Christian feature of southeastern Nigeria. Both Roman Catholicism and Protestantism are observed in the Ibibio, Efik, Ijo and Ogoni lands of the south. The Igbos (predominant in the east) and the Ibibio (south) are 98% Christian, with 2% practising traditional religions. The middle belt of Nigeria contains the largest number of minority ethnic groups in Nigeria, who were found to be majority Christians and members of traditional religions, with a significant Muslim minority.

=== Health ===
Health care delivery in Nigeria is a concurrent responsibility of the three tiers of government in the country, and the private sector. Nigeria has been reorganising its health system since the Bamako Initiative of 1987, which formally promoted community-based methods of increasing accessibility of drugs and health care services to the population, in part by implementing user fees. The new strategy dramatically increased accessibility through community-based health care reform, resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services. A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care, with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost.

Almost half of Nigerians, or 48%, report that they or a household member has fallen ill in the last three months. Malaria had been diagnosed in 88% of the cases and typhoid fever in 32%. High blood pressure was in third place with 8%. For symptoms of malaria, 41% of Nigerians turn to a hospital, 22% to a chemist&#x27;s shop, 21% to a pharmacy and 11% seek cure through herbs.

The HIV/AIDS rate in Nigeria is much lower than in other African nations such as Botswana or South Africa whose prevalence (percentage) rates are in the double digits. , the HIV prevalence rate among adults of ages 15–49 was 1.5 per cent. Life expectancy in Nigeria is 54.7 years on average, and 71% and 39% of the population have access to improved water sources and improved sanitation, respectively. , the infant mortality is 74.2 deaths per 1,000 live births.

In 2012, a new bone marrow donor program was launched by the University of Nigeria to help people with leukaemia, lymphoma, or sickle cell disease to find a compatible donor for a life-saving bone marrow transplant, which cures them of their conditions. Nigeria became the second African country to have successfully carried out this surgery. In the 2014 Ebola outbreak, Nigeria was the first country to effectively contain and eliminate the Ebola threat that was ravaging three other countries in the West African region; the unique method of contact tracing employed by Nigeria became an effective method later used by countries such as the United States when Ebola threats were discovered.

The Nigerian health care system is continuously faced with a shortage of doctors known as &quot;brain drain&quot;, because of emigration by skilled Nigerian doctors to North America and Europe. In 1995, an estimated 21,000 Nigerian doctors were practising in the United States alone, which is about the same as the number of doctors working in the Nigerian public service. Retaining these expensively trained professionals has been identified as one of the goals of the government.

=== Education ===

Education in Nigeria is overseen by the Ministry of Education. Local authorities take responsibility for implementing policy for state-controlled public education and state schools at a regional level. The education system is divided into kindergarten, primary education, secondary education and tertiary education. After the 1970s oil boom, tertiary education was improved so it would reach every subregion of Nigeria. 68% of the Nigerian population is literate, and the rate for men (75.7%) is higher than that for women (60.6%).

Nigeria provides free, government-supported education, but attendance is not compulsory at any level, and certain groups, such as nomads and the handicapped, are under-served. Nearly 10.5 million Nigerian children aged 5–14 years are not in school. Only 61% of 6–11 year-olds regularly attend primary school. The education system consists of six years of primary school, three years of junior secondary school, three years of senior secondary school, and four, five or six years of university education leading to a bachelor&#x27;s degree. The government has majority control of university education. Tertiary education in Nigeria consists of universities (public and private), polytechnics, monotechnics, and colleges of education. The country has a total of 138 universities, with 40 federally owned, 39 state-owned, and 59 privately owned. Nigeria was ranked 113th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

=== Crime ===

The security situation in Nigeria is considered inadequate despite political stability. 68% of Nigerians feel &quot;not safe&quot; in their country. 77% do not know of an alarm number (&quot;helpline&quot;) for emergencies.

Nigerians, according to the above survey, fear being robbed (24%) or kidnapped (also 24%), being victims of armed bandits or of petty theft (both 8%), or being harmed in the herdsmen-farmers conflict (also 8%). This is followed by &quot;ritual killings&quot; (4%) and &quot;Boko Haram&quot; (3.5%). Respondents see &quot;more security personnel and better training&quot; (37%), &quot;reduction of unemployment&quot; (13%) and &quot;prayers / divine intervention&quot; (8%) as promising countermeasures.
The number of homicides in Nigeria varies greatly depending on the state. Metropoles such as Lagos, Kano and Ibadan seem much safer than rural areas. Kano has better statistics than the UK, with one and one-half homicides per year and one million inhabitants – which can be explained by the fact that the region&#x27;s religious and morality police not only monitor the morality of the inhabitants and crack down on drug users, but also have a curbing effect on murder and manslaughter. This contrasts with other cities that are also Islamic, such as Maiduguri and Kaduna, which have worrying statistics on homicides.

There is some piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, with attacks directed at all types of vessels. However, security measures on board of mentioned vessels have recently meant that pirates are now more likely to attack fishing villages.

Internationally, Nigeria is infamous for a type of advance-fee scam along with a form of confidence trick. The victim is talked into sending money or bank account information to the scammer on the premise that a larger amount of money will be transferred to them. In reality, the scammer collects money from the victim with no payout occurring. In 2003, the Nigerian Economic and Financial Crimes Commission was created to combat this and other forms of organised financial crime. The EFCC is quite active.

=== Poverty ===

According to the International Monetary Fund, 32% of Nigeria&#x27;s population lives in extreme poverty (as of 2017), living on less than US$2.15 a day. The World Bank stated in March 2022 that the number of poor Nigerians had increased by 5 million to 95.1 million during the Covid period. Accordingly, 40% of Nigerians live below the poverty line of US$1.90 as handled by the World Bank.

The threshold amounts used internationally by the IMF and the World Bank do not take into account the local purchasing power of a US dollar. The methodology is therefore not without controversy. Despite the undoubted existence of slums in Nigeria, for example, the fact that 92% of men and 88% of women in Nigeria own a mobile phone is difficult to reconcile with the poverty percentages published by the IMF and the World Bank.

=== Human rights ===
Nigeria&#x27;s human rights record remains poor. According to the U.S. Department of State, the most significant human rights problems are the use of excessive force by security forces, impunity for abuses by security forces, arbitrary arrests, prolonged pretrial detention, judicial corruption and executive influence on the judiciary, rape, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of prisoners, detainees and suspects; harsh and life‑threatening prison and detention centre conditions; human trafficking for prostitution and forced labour, societal violence and vigilante killings, child labour, child abuse and child sexual exploitation, domestic violence, discrimination based on ethnicity, region and religion.

Nigeria is a state party of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women It also has signed the Maputo Protocol, an international treaty on women&#x27;s rights, and the African Union Women&#x27;s Rights Framework. Discrimination based on sex is a significant human rights issue. Forced marriages are common. Child marriage remains common in Northern Nigeria; 39% of girls are married before age 15, although the Marriage Rights Act banning marriage of girls under 18 was introduced on a federal level in 2008. There is rampant polygamy in Northern Nigeria. Domestic violence is common. Women have fewer land rights. Maternal mortality was at 814 per 100,000 live births in 2015. Female genital mutilation is common, although a ban was implemented in 2015. At least half a million suffer from vaginal fistula, largely as a result of lack of medical care.

Women face a large amount of inequality Politically in Nigeria, being subjugated to a bias that is sexist and reinforced by socio-cultural, economic and oppressive ways. Women throughout the country were only politically emancipated in 1979. Yet husbands continue to dictate the votes for many women, which upholds the patriarchal system. Most workers in the informal sector are women. Women&#x27;s representation in government since independence from Britain is very poor. Women have been reduced to sideline roles in appointive posts throughout all levels of government and still make up a tiny minority of elected officials. But nowadays with more education available to the public, Nigerian women are taking steps to have more active roles in the public, and with the help of different initiatives, more businesses are being started by women.

Under the Shari&#x27;a penal code that applies to Muslims in twelve northern states, offences such as alcohol consumption, homosexuality, infidelity and theft carry harsh sentences, including amputation, lashing, stoning and long prison terms. Nigeria is considered to be one of the most homophobic countries in the world. In the 23 years up to September 2022, university workers in Nigeria went on strike 17 times, for a total of 57 months. As a result, the 2022 summer semester was cancelled nationwide.

== Culture ==
=== Literature ===
Most Nigerian literature is written in English, partly because this language is understood by most Nigerians. Literature in the Yoruba, Hausa and Igbo languages (the three most populous language groups in Nigeria) does exist, however, and in the case of the Hausa, for example, can look back on a centuries-old tradition. With Wole Soyinka, Nigeria can present a Nobel Prize winner for literature. Ben Okri won the prestigious Booker Prize in 1991; Chinua Achebe did the same in 2007. Achebe also won the Peace Award of the German Book Trade in 2002. Lola Shoneyin has won several awards for her book The Secret Lives of Baba Segi&#x27;s Wives.

=== Music ===

The earliest known form of popular music in Nigeria was the palm-wine music which dominated the music landscape in the 1920s. Tunde King was a prominent name in the genre.

The 1930s saw the emergence of Onitsha Native Orchestra. They explored various social themes and trends in their native singing style.

In the 1950s and 1960s, Highlife music became a popular staple in the country with regional genres such as the Igbo Highlife. A notable exponent of the genre were the genre&#x27;s first Nigerian boy band Oriental Brothers International, Bobby Benson, Osita Osadebe, Victor Olaiya, Rex Lawson, Dr Sir Warrior and Oliver De Coque.

The 1970s was the era of Fela Kuti, the pioneer of Afrobeat genre – fused from Highlife, Jazz and Yoruba Music. Fela later evolved into social activism and black consciousness.

In the 1980s, King Sunny Ade achieved success with Juju Music. Prominent singer of the era is William Onyeabor who is known for his fusion of Funk Music and Disco.

By the 1990s, reggae music transitioned into the music scene. Prominent reggae artiste of the era was Majek Fashek. By the mid-1990s, Hip hop Music began to gain popularity, led by acts such as Remedies, Trybes Men, JJC, etc. Throughout the years, highlife music retained its popularity in the country.

At the turn of the century, famous 2000s acts like P-Square, 2face, and Dbanj were credited to have made tremendous impact in the evolution of Afrobeats and its popularization on the international stage.

In November 2008, Nigeria&#x27;s music scene (and that of Africa) received international attention when MTV hosted the continent&#x27;s first African music awards show in Abuja. Over a decade later, the Afrobeat genre has widely taken over, with artist like Davido, Wizkid and Burna Boy.

=== Cinema ===

The Nigerian film industry is known as Nollywood (a blend of &quot;Nigeria&quot; and &quot;Hollywood&quot;) and is now the second-largest producer of movies in the world, having surpassed Hollywood. Only India&#x27;s Bollywood is larger. Nigerian film studios are based in Lagos, Kano, and Enugu, and form a major portion of the local economy of these cities. Nigerian cinema is Africa&#x27;s largest movie industry in terms of both value and the number of movies produced per year. Although Nigerian films have been produced since the 1960s, the country&#x27;s film industry has been aided by the rise of affordable digital filming and editing technologies.
The 2009 thriller film &quot;The Figurine&quot; heightened the media attention towards the New Nigerian Cinema revolution. The film was a critical and commercial success in Nigeria, and it was also screened in international film festivals. The 2010 film &quot;Ijé&quot; by Chineze Anyaene, overtook &quot;The Figurine&quot; to become the highest-grossing Nigerian film; a record it held for four years until it was overtaken in 2014 by &quot;Half of a Yellow Sun&quot; (2013). By 2016, this record was held by &quot;The Wedding Party&quot; by Kemi Adetiba.

By the end of 2013, the film industry reportedly hit a record-breaking revenue of ₦1.72 trillion (US$4.1 billion). As of 2014, the industry was worth ₦853.9 billion (US$5.1 billion), making it the third most valuable film industry in the world behind the United States and India. It contributed about 1.4% to Nigeria&#x27;s economy; this was attributed to the increase in the number of quality films produced and more formal distribution methods.

T.B. Joshua&#x27;s Emmanuel TV, originating from Nigeria, is one of the most viewed television stations across Africa.

=== Festival ===

There are many festivals in Nigeria, some of which date to the period before the arrival of the major religions in this ethnically and culturally diverse society. The main Muslim and Christian festivals are often celebrated in ways that are unique to Nigeria or unique to the people of a locality. The Nigerian Tourism Development Corporation has been working with the states to upgrade the traditional festivals, which may become important sources of tourism revenue.

=== Cuisine ===




Nigerian cuisine, like West African cuisine in general, is known for its richness and variety. Many different spices, herbs, and flavourings are used in conjunction with palm oil or groundnut oil to create deeply flavoured sauces and soups often made very hot with chilli peppers. Nigerian feasts are colourful and lavish, while aromatic market and roadside snacks cooked on barbecues or fried in oil are plentiful and varied. Suya is usually sold in urban areas especially during night-time.

=== Fashion ===

The fashion industry in Nigeria contributes significantly to the country&#x27;s economics. Casual attire is commonly worn but formal and traditional styles are also worn depending on the occasion. Nigeria is known not only for its fashionable textiles and garments, but also for its fashion designers who have increasingly gained international recognition. Euromonitor estimates the Sub-Saharan fashion market to be worth $31 billion, with Nigeria accounting for 15% of these $31 billion. Nigeria is not only known for their many fashion textiles and garment pieces that are secret to their culture. They also outputted many fashion designers who have developed many techniques and businesses along the way.

=== Sports ===

Football is largely considered Nigeria&#x27;s national sport, and the country has its own professional football league. Nigeria&#x27;s national football team, known as the &quot;Super Eagles&quot;, has played in the FIFA World Cup on six occasions (1994, 1998, 2002, 2010, 2014, and 2018). In April 1994, the Super Eagles ranked fifth in the FIFA World Rankings, the highest ranking achieved by an African team. They won the Africa Cup of Nations in 1980, 1994, and 2013, and have also hosted both the U17 and U20 FIFA World Cup. They won the gold medal for football in the 1996 Summer Olympics (in which they beat Argentina) becoming the first African football team to win gold in Olympic football.

Nigeria is also involved in other sports such as basketball, cricket and track and field. Nigeria&#x27;s national basketball team made the headlines internationally when it became the first African team to beat the United States men&#x27;s national team. In earlier years, Nigeria qualified for the 2012 Summer Olympics as it beat heavily favoured world elite teams such as Greece and Lithuania. Nigeria has been home to numerous internationally recognised basketball players in the world&#x27;s top leagues in America, Europe and Asia. These players include Basketball Hall of Famer Hakeem Olajuwon, and later players in the NBA. The Nigerian Premier League has become one of the biggest and most-watched basketball competitions in Africa. The games have aired on &quot;Kwese TV&quot; and have averaged a viewership of over a million people.

Nigeria made history by qualifying the first bobsled team for the Winter Olympics from Africa when their women&#x27;s two-person team qualified for the bobsled competition at the XXIII Olympic Winter Games. In the early 1990s, Scrabble was made an official sport in Nigeria; by the end of 2017, there were around 4,000 players in more than 100 clubs in the country. In 2018, the Nigerian Curling Federation was established to introduce a new sport to the country in order to make the game part of the curriculum at the elementary, high school, and university levels. At the 2019 World Mixed Doubles Curling Championship in Norway, Nigeria won their first international match beating France 8–5.

Nigeria&#x27;s women&#x27;s and men&#x27;s national teams in beach volleyball competed at the 2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup. The country&#x27;s U21 national teams qualified for the 2019 FIVB Beach Volleyball U21 World Championships.

Nigeria is the birthplace of the sport loofball.

== See also ==

* Index of Nigeria-related articles
* Outline of Nigeria

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Bibliography===
* 

== Further reading ==
* Dibua, Jeremiah I. &quot;Modernization and the Crisis of Development in Africa: The Nigerian Experience&quot; (Routledge, 2017)
* Ekundare, Olufemi R. &quot;An Economic History of Nigeria 1860–1960&quot; (Methuen &amp; Co Ltd, 1973)
* Falola, Toyin; and Adam Paddock. &quot;Environment and Economics in Nigeria&quot; (2012)
* Falola, Toyin, Ann Genova, and Matthew M. Heaton. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Nigeria&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2018) online 
* Falola, Toyin, and Matthew M. Heaton. &quot;A History of Nigeria&quot; (2008)
* Shillington, Kevin. &quot;Encyclopedia of African History&quot;. (University of Michigan Press, 2005) p. 1401.
* Metz, Helen Chapin, ed. &quot;Nigeria: a country study&quot; (U.S. Library of Congress. Federal Research Division, 1992) online free , comprehensive historical and current coverage; not copyright.
* Jones, Cunliffe-Peter. &quot;My Nigeria: Five Decades of Independence&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2010)
* Achebe, Chinua. &quot;The Trouble with Nigeria&quot; (Fourth Dimension, 1983)

== External links ==

* , Government of Federal Republic of Nigeria
* 
* Foreign Affairs of Nigeria
* Nigeria profile from ECOWAS
* News headline links from Al Jazeera.
* Nigeria, Democracy Now!
* Nigeria profile from the BBC News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="0" end="7" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="24" end="51" title="Nigeria" label="Federal Republic of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="69" end="80" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="109" end="114" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="136" end="150" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="158" end="172" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297611" start="215" end="227" title="Demographics of Nigeria" label="a population"/>
<link wikidata="Q153211" start="264" end="285" title="List of African countries by population" label="most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="289" end="295" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="305" end="345" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="world&amp;#x27;s sixth-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="363" end="368" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089173" start="372" end="381" title="Niger–Nigeria border" label="the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="383" end="387" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089176" start="391" end="404" title="Chad–Nigeria border" label="the northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="406" end="414" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089050" start="418" end="426" title="Cameroon–Nigeria border" label="the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="432" end="437" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089038" start="441" end="449" title="Benin–Nigeria border" label="the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="464" end="480" title="Federation" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q465842" start="495" end="501" title="States of Nigeria" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q509300" start="510" end="535" title="Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria" label="Federal Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="556" end="561" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509340" start="579" end="602" title="List of Nigerian cities by population" label="largest city in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="620" end="625" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="646" end="664" title="List of largest cities" label="metropolitan areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733189" start="686" end="703" title="List of cities in Africa by population" label="largest in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290758" start="769" end="788" title="Nigerian traditional rulers" label="pre-colonial states"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732247" start="793" end="801" title="Sahelian kingdoms" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="819" end="829" title="millennium" label="millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="838" end="849" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="918" end="932" title="Hausa Kingdoms" label="Hausa Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287326" start="963" end="966" title="Edo people" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="967" end="983" title="Kingdom of Benin" label="Kingdom of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="1001" end="1005" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q145749" start="1006" end="1020" title="Kingdom of Nri" label="Kingdom of Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="1061" end="1067" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051642" start="1068" end="1078" title="Ife Empire" label="Ife Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="1100" end="1110" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="1177" end="1188" title="City-state" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736105" start="1220" end="1231" title="Fula jihads" label="Fula jihads"/>
<link wikidata="Q600524" start="1250" end="1266" title="Sokoto Caliphate" label="Sokoto Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="1301" end="1324" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="British colonialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062030" start="1407" end="1436" title="Southern Nigeria Protectorate" label="Southern Nigeria Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q585408" start="1445" end="1474" title="Northern Nigeria Protectorate" label="Northern Nigeria Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1488" end="1495" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789094" start="1543" end="1576" title="Nigerian Chieftaincy" label="incorporated traditional monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661443" start="1590" end="1603" title="indirect rule" label="indirect rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440850" start="1631" end="1653" title="Federation of Nigeria" label="independent federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="1690" end="1699" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033039" start="1747" end="1769" title="Nigerian military juntas of 1966–79 and 1983–99" label="military dictatorships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603123" start="1861" end="1896" title="1999 Nigerian presidential election" label="1999 Nigerian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="1912" end="1931" title="multinational state" label="multinational state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297611" start="1955" end="1972" title="Demographics of Nigeria" label="250 ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q919083" start="1982" end="2004" title="Languages of Nigeria" label="500 distinct languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="2095" end="2100" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509092" start="2104" end="2113" title="Northern Region, Nigeria" label="the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="2115" end="2121" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752938" start="2125" end="2133" title="Yorubaland" label="the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="2139" end="2143" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234624" start="2147" end="2155" title="Igboland" label="the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="2217" end="2234" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033019" start="2238" end="2245" title="Nigerian English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="2308" end="2335" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="Nigeria&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="2350" end="2357" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="2364" end="2383" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42590" start="2436" end="2442" title="Islam by country" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965842" start="2447" end="2456" title="Christianity by country" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2513" end="2520" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="2576" end="2586" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="2618" end="2638" title="Traditional African religions" label="indigenous religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723030" start="2668" end="2672" title="Odinani" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086440" start="2677" end="2683" title="Yoruba religion" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="2732" end="2746" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="2763" end="2775" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140374" start="2802" end="2824" title="Economy of Nigeria" label="Nigeria&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622706" start="2832" end="2856" title="List of African countries by GDP (nominal)" label="fourth-largest in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="2862" end="2887" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="53rd-largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2899" end="2902" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="2908" end="2920" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="27th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="2924" end="2927" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="3029" end="3036" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="3065" end="3080" title="emerging market" label="emerging market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3088" end="3098" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="3136" end="3149" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3214" end="3228" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3234" end="3257" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3259" end="3262" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="NAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="3268" end="3309" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="3311" end="3346" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="3351" end="3355" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3393" end="3397" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Neill, Baron O&amp;#x27;Neill of Gatley#Goldman Sachs" label="MINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689184" start="3435" end="3446" title="Next Eleven" label="Next Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="3515" end="3526" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073851" start="3622" end="3632" title="Flora Shaw, Lady Lugard" label="Flora Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="3650" end="3667" title="Republic of Niger" label="Republic of Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="3872" end="3878" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="3979" end="3987" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="4008" end="4028" title="scramble for Africa" label="European colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043618" start="4310" end="4320" title="Kainji Dam" label="Kainji Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4395" end="4404" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="4418" end="4426" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4465" end="4471" title="Bronze Age" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4539" end="4550" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673834" start="4560" end="4568" title="Iron metallurgy in Africa" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="4576" end="4587" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="4838" end="4856" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="4863" end="4879" title="Nok culture" label="Nok civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="4940" end="4950" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q681198" start="5165" end="5171" title="Nsukka" label="Nsukka"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568964" start="5269" end="5272" title="Opi (archaeological site)" label="Opi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472901" start="5307" end="5321" title="Kano Chronicle" label="Kano Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="5389" end="5394" title="Hausa Kingdoms" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732247" start="5395" end="5414" title="Sahelian kingdoms" label="Sahelian city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="5418" end="5422" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="5458" end="5470" title="Hausa Bakwai" label="Hausa Bakwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173023" start="5475" end="5480" title="Daura" label="Daura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637733" start="5482" end="5489" title="Hadejia" label="Hadeija"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="5491" end="5495" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q937487" start="5497" end="5504" title="Katsina (city)" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067629" start="5506" end="5512" title="Zazzau" label="Zazzau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293412" start="5514" end="5518" title="Rano" label="Rano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533541" start="5524" end="5529" title="Gobir" label="Gobir"/>
<link wikidata="Q209703" start="5674" end="5679" title="Sudan (region)" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="5830" end="5842" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="5855" end="5874" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="6024" end="6036" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="6150" end="6168" title="Kanem–Bornu Empire" label="Kanem–Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q145749" start="6234" end="6248" title="Kingdom of Nri" label="Kingdom of Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637063" start="6390" end="6397" title="List of rulers of Nri" label="Eze Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10262232" start="6457" end="6469" title="Igbo culture" label="Igbo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694564" start="6479" end="6486" title="Aguleri" label="Aguleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385897" start="6647" end="6650" title="Eri (king)" label="Eri"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="6702" end="6718" title="lost wax process" label="lost wax process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024641" start="6729" end="6738" title="Igbo-Ukwu" label="Igbo-Ukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="6773" end="6779" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="6792" end="6795" title="Ife" label="Ife"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="6800" end="6803" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="6911" end="6916" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570124" start="7098" end="7118" title="Portuguese discoveries" label="Portuguese explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="7134" end="7143" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="7266" end="7273" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360692" start="7291" end="7302" title="Slave Coast of West Africa" label="Slave Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="7417" end="7437" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q999031" start="7477" end="7492" title="Bight of Biafra" label="Bight of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q798812" start="7658" end="7665" title="Badagry" label="Badagry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47530" start="7680" end="7694" title="Bight of Benin" label="Bight of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q640657" start="7700" end="7712" title="Bonny Island" label="Bonny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="7888" end="7901" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="8228" end="8240" title="Kingdom of Benin" label="Benin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="8255" end="8265" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q761370" start="8292" end="8307" title="Aro Confederacy" label="Aro Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="8520" end="8524" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="8617" end="8629" title="Kanem–Bornu Empire" label="Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="8721" end="8726" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="8779" end="8784" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380452" start="8922" end="8937" title="Usman dan Fodio" label="Usman dan Fodio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707899" start="8942" end="8960" title="Fulani War" label="a successful jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="8973" end="8987" title="Hausa Kingdoms" label="Hausa Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q600524" start="9014" end="9030" title="Sokoto Caliphate" label="Sokoto Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598560" start="9123" end="9138" title="List of Sultans of Sokoto" label="his descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736105" start="9153" end="9168" title="Fula jihads" label="invading armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q464953" start="9340" end="9345" title="Kwara State" label="Kwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752938" start="9373" end="9389" title="Yorubaland" label="Yoruba heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="9393" end="9399" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="9566" end="9576" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="9751" end="9767" title="Slavery in Africa" label="slave population"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="9851" end="9860" title="Caliphate" label="Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="10120" end="10140" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020194" start="10488" end="10508" title="West Africa Squadron" label="West Africa Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794926" start="10555" end="10569" title="Saro people" label="rescued slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="10584" end="10592" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226249" start="10644" end="10668" title="John Clarkson (abolitionist)" label="Lieutenant John Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="10744" end="10770" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28047984" start="10921" end="10931" title="Kosoko" label="Oba Kosoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701083" start="10969" end="10976" title="Akitoye" label="Akitoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909475" start="10993" end="11031" title="Treaty Between Great Britain and Lagos, 1 January 1852" label="Treaty between Great Britain and Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11050" end="11057" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="11077" end="11089" title="crown colony" label="crown colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822209" start="11114" end="11137" title="Lagos Treaty of Cession" label="Lagos Treaty of Cession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662556" start="11225" end="11246" title="Samuel Ajayi Crowther" label="Samuel Ajayi Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q576827" start="11272" end="11301" title="Church of Nigeria" label="bishop of the Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="11346" end="11365" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="11422" end="11439" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="11478" end="11497" title="Royal Niger Company" label="Royal Niger Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545092" start="11526" end="11547" title="George Taubman Goldie" label="George Taubman Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="11684" end="11695" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="11719" end="11724" title="Benin Empire" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q617278" start="11746" end="11759" title="Anglo-Aro War" label="Anglo-Aro War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062030" start="11982" end="12011" title="Southern Nigeria Protectorate" label="Southern Nigeria Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="12025" end="12037" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12054" end="12068" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q336027" start="12170" end="12186" title="Frederick Lugard, 1st Baron Lugard" label="Frederick Lugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="12205" end="12220" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q336350" start="12466" end="12472" title="Sokoto (city)" label="Sokoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932914" start="12481" end="12501" title="Muhammadu Attahiru I" label="Muhammadu Attahiru I"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="12667" end="12672" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="12681" end="12686" title="Hegira" label="hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="12731" end="12743" title="Kanem–Bornu Empire" label="Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946145" start="12780" end="12793" title="Borno Emirate" label="Borno Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670484" start="12812" end="12836" title="Abubakar Garbai of Borno" label="Abubakar Garbai of Borno"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162687" start="12884" end="12898" title="Battle of Kano (1903)" label="Battle of Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162693" start="12930" end="12977" title="Battle of Kwatarkwashi" label="pacifying the heartland of the Sokoto Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555304" start="13081" end="13104" title="Sokoto Grand Vizier" label="vizier of the caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932917" start="13164" end="13185" title="Muhammadu Attahiru II" label="Muhammadu Attahiru II"/>
<link wikidata="Q585408" start="13324" end="13353" title="Northern Nigeria Protectorate" label="Northern Nigeria Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044572" start="13390" end="13414" title="Sokoto Sultanate Council" label="Sokoto Sultanate Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062030" start="13603" end="13632" title="Southern Nigeria Protectorate" label="Southern Nigeria Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q585408" start="13641" end="13670" title="Northern Nigeria Protectorate" label="Northern Nigeria Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="13680" end="13714" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q472146" start="13808" end="13820" title="Lagos Colony" label="Lagos Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14299" end="14311" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="14315" end="14336" title="Decolonisation of Africa" label="wave for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440850" start="15159" end="15180" title="Federation of Nigeria" label="Federation of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="15186" end="15208" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243301" start="15216" end="15230" title="Prime Minister of Nigeria" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="15252" end="15267" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="15269" end="15281" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898094" start="15312" end="15328" title="Queen of Nigeria" label="Queen of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="15330" end="15344" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="15367" end="15383" title="governor-general" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="15518" end="15523" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="15584" end="15602" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="15644" end="15653" title="President of Nigeria" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="15738" end="15760" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058854" start="15896" end="15927" title="Northern People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="Northern People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q401032" start="15939" end="15951" title="Ahmadu Bello" label="Ahmadu Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754230" start="16031" end="16076" title="National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons" label="National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q123708" start="16154" end="16166" title="Action Group (Nigeria)" label="Action Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="16203" end="16209" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q960892" start="16221" end="16236" title="Obafemi Awolowo" label="Obafemi Awolowo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16296" end="16311" title="Southern Cameroons#Trust territory" label="1961 plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542471" start="16313" end="16331" title="Southern Cameroons" label="Southern Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="16350" end="16370" title="Cameroon" label="Republic of Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028835" start="16377" end="16395" title="British Cameroon" label="Northern Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="16633" end="16647" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205928" start="16661" end="16691" title="1966 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="first coup was in January 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402445" start="16736" end="16753" title="Emmanuel Ifeajuna" label="Emmanuel Ifeajuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="16762" end="16766" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116061" start="16775" end="16798" title="Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu" label="Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509092" start="16800" end="16810" title="Northern Region, Nigeria" label="Northerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509795" start="16814" end="16821" title="Eastern Region, Nigeria" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682413" start="16838" end="16855" title="Adewale Ademoyega" label="Adewale Ademoyega"/>
<link wikidata="Q401032" start="16931" end="16943" title="Ahmadu Bello" label="Ahmadu Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="16952" end="16974" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q338973" start="17038" end="17053" title="Ladoke Akintola" label="Samuel Akintola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988329" start="17061" end="17075" title="Western State (Nigeria)" label="Western Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070730" start="17151" end="17163" title="Nwafor Orizu" label="Nwafor Orizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="17202" end="17206" title="Nigerian Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q379888" start="17265" end="17286" title="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi" label="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q354695" start="17396" end="17408" title="Yakubu Gowon" label="Yakubu Gowon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572480" start="17474" end="17519" title="1966 anti-Igbo pogrom" label="Igbos in northern cities suffered persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509795" start="17541" end="17555" title="Eastern Region, Nigeria" label="Eastern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509795" start="17587" end="17601" title="Eastern Region, Nigeria" label="Eastern Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q380670" start="17614" end="17626" title="C. Odumegwu Ojukwu" label="Emeka Ojukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="17701" end="17719" title="Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509795" start="17813" end="17820" title="Eastern Region, Nigeria" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572480" start="17856" end="17863" title="1966 anti-Igbo pogrom" label="pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="17899" end="17917" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123481844" start="18045" end="18063" title="blockade of Biafra" label="blockade of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905413" start="18159" end="18173" title="List of wars by death toll" label="number of dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="18422" end="18440" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="18490" end="18499" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q164535" start="18528" end="18548" title="Mobutu Sese Seko" label="Joseph-Désiré Mobutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q111939271" start="18710" end="18723" title="Separatist movements of Nigeria" label="secessionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250780" start="18764" end="18772" title="oil boom" label="oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="18819" end="18823" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="18930" end="18948" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q66741952" start="19366" end="19383" title="1975 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup in July 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509379" start="19401" end="19425" title="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q282519" start="19430" end="19442" title="Joseph Nanven Garba" label="Joseph Garba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645061" start="19628" end="19652" title="Supreme Military Council of Nigeria (1966–1979)" label="Supreme Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="19699" end="19715" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="19763" end="19780" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782290" start="19819" end="19837" title="Theophilus Danjuma" label="Theophilus Danjuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511542" start="20151" end="20166" title="Buka Suka Dimka" label="Buka Suka Dimka"/>
<link wikidata="Q85724676" start="20178" end="20204" title="1976 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="February 1976 coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625960" start="20639" end="20675" title="Vice President of Nigeria" label="Chief of Staff, Supreme Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351737" start="20778" end="20797" title="Chief of Army Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of Army Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033039" start="20850" end="20865" title="Nigerian military juntas of 1966–79 and 1983–99" label="military regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q465842" start="20929" end="20944" title="States of Nigeria" label="states creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305439" start="20949" end="20970" title="Boundary delimitation" label="national delimitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639634" start="20972" end="20996" title="Local government areas of Nigeria" label="local government reforms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21005" end="21038" title="Constitution of Nigeria#1979 constitution (Second Republic)" label="constitutional drafting committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="21372" end="21385" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974818" start="21393" end="21418" title="National Party of Nigeria" label="National Party of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="21569" end="21601" title="President of Nigeria" label="President and Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540878" start="22464" end="22494" title="1983 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1983 military coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="22633" end="22649" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="22815" end="22832" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Ibrahim Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033004" start="22908" end="22933" title="Nigerian Political Bureau of 1986" label="Nigerian Political Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q85726324" start="23126" end="23164" title="1990 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1990 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550561" start="23374" end="23397" title="Social Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978037" start="23402" end="23432" title="National Republican Convention" label="National Republican Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033040" start="23446" end="23468" title="1992 Nigerian parliamentary election" label="1992 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511524" start="23536" end="23544" title="Bola Ige" label="Bola Ige"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033051" start="23593" end="23619" title="1993 Nigerian presidential election" label="1993 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528125" start="23783" end="23797" title="Moshood Abiola" label="Moshood Abiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837296" start="23802" end="23819" title="Baba Gana Kingibe" label="Baba Gana Kingibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866859" start="23860" end="23871" title="Bashir Tofa" label="Bashir Tofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660837" start="23876" end="23890" title="Sylvester Ugoh" label="Sylvester Ugoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q471351" start="24208" end="24223" title="Ernest Shonekan" label="Ernest Shonekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052713" start="24235" end="24262" title="Cabinet of Ernest Shonekan" label="interim national government"/>
<link wikidata="Q85726877" start="24501" end="24525" title="1993 Nigerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="24541" end="24552" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478209" start="24744" end="24749" title="Ogoni people" label="Ogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649225" start="24787" end="24819" title="Suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations" label="suspension from the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413080" start="24849" end="24867" title="Alien Tort Statute" label="Alien Tort Statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="24876" end="24893" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q262346" start="25339" end="25359" title="Abdulsalami Abubakar" label="Abdulsalami Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="25610" end="25627" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705" start="26158" end="26177" title="Umaru Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Umaru Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q57380" start="26438" end="26455" title="Goodluck Jonathan" label="Goodluck Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569328" start="27066" end="27087" title="Boko Haram insurgency" label="Boko Haram insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17136409" start="27101" end="27115" title="Gwoza massacre" label="Gwoza massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16725863" start="27120" end="27149" title="Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping" label="Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205072" start="27173" end="27197" title="2015 Nigerian general election" label="general election of 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q343617" start="27259" end="27285" title="Action Congress of Nigeria" label="Action Congress of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160852" start="27291" end="27322" title="Congress for Progressive Change" label="Congress for Progressive Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432251" start="27328" end="27353" title="All Nigeria Peoples Party" label="All Nigeria Peoples Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729271" start="27372" end="27403" title="All Progressives Grand Alliance" label="All Progressives Grand Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729266" start="27511" end="27536" title="All Progressives Congress" label="All Progressives Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594192" start="27712" end="27716" title="2019 Nigerian general election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q83974481" start="27721" end="27725" title="2023 Nigerian presidential election" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594192" start="28151" end="28177" title="2019 Nigerian general election" label="2019 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q83974481" start="28296" end="28322" title="2023 Nigerian presidential election" label="2023 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="28472" end="28495" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="multiparty constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510850" start="28579" end="28596" title="Obidient Movement" label="Obidient movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510850" start="28600" end="28609" title="Peter Obi" label="Peter Obi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509922" start="28752" end="28767" title="Rabiu Kwankwaso" label="Rabiu Kwankwaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q682571" start="28788" end="28798" title="Kano State" label="Kano State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="28817" end="28828" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q118558565" start="29008" end="29020" title="Inauguration of Bola Tinubu" label="inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774311" start="29071" end="29092" title="kidnapping in Nigeria" label="kidnapping in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14405797" start="29167" end="29188" title="Nigeria, We Hail Thee" label="Nigeria, We Hail Thee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="29225" end="29240" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q237878" start="29300" end="29320" title="Arise, O Compatriots" label="Arise, O Compatriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="29389" end="29403" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="29457" end="29477" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="32nd-largest country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842000" start="29593" end="29602" title="Ambazonia" label="Ambazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="29610" end="29619" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186295" start="29665" end="29667" title="4th parallel north" label="4°"/>
<link wikidata="Q509766" start="29672" end="29676" title="14th parallel north" label="14°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q938807" start="29693" end="29695" title="2nd meridian east" label="2°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700643" start="29700" end="29704" title="15th meridian east" label="15°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q976055" start="29738" end="29751" title="Chappal Waddi" label="Chappal Waddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="29781" end="29786" title="Niger River" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q204806" start="29795" end="29800" title="Benue River" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="29836" end="29847" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="29954" end="29962" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="30165" end="30173" title="Highland (geography)" label="highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626923" start="30245" end="30261" title="Mambilla Plateau" label="Mambilla Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="30340" end="30348" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="30360" end="30367" title="montane" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627312" start="30388" end="30405" title="Bamenda Highlands" label="Bamenda Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="30452" end="30479" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075587" start="30544" end="30557" title="Obudu Plateau" label="Obudu Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="30559" end="30572" title="Coastal plain" label="Coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817834" start="30625" end="30639" title="Mangrove swamp" label="Mangrove swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754073" start="30762" end="30796" title="Cross–Sanaga–Bioko coastal forests" label="Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="30797" end="30806" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="30832" end="30844" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q221434" start="30870" end="30883" title="Drill (animal)" label="drill primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="30987" end="30994" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141201" start="31166" end="31178" title="Cross River (Nigeria)" label="Cross Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574824" start="31282" end="31303" title="Cross–Niger transition forests" label="replaced by grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="31363" end="31370" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="31540" end="31569" title="Guinean forest–savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="32199" end="32212" title="Sahara" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q125309" start="32277" end="32286" title="Lake Chad" label="Lake Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986599" start="32293" end="32305" title="Lake Chad Basin Commission" label="shared water"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305439" start="32315" end="32327" title="Boundary delimitation" label="delimitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125309" start="33157" end="33166" title="Lake Chad" label="Lake Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="33584" end="33592" title="savannah" label="savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="33674" end="33681" title="montane" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141201" start="33929" end="33940" title="Cross River (Nigeria)" label="Cross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504181" start="33952" end="33966" title="Central African mangroves" label="mangrove swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="34168" end="34197" title="Guinean forest–savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="34355" end="34360" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="34451" end="34467" title="Waste management" label="Waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="34478" end="34494" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="34520" end="34533" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="34538" end="34554" title="Soil retrogression and degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="34560" end="34574" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="34578" end="34592" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="34682" end="34690" title="megacity" label="megacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441355" start="35006" end="35011" title="Kubwa, Abuja" label="Kubwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764665" start="35586" end="35597" title="Groundwater in Nigeria" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="35641" end="35654" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="35686" end="35719" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35727" end="35741" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="36035" end="36047" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="36097" end="36129" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065799" start="36257" end="36288" title="Zamfara State lead poisoning outbreak" label="exposed to lead-containing soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="36303" end="36314" title="gold mining" label="gold mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="36432" end="36446" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="36624" end="36633" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="36802" end="36809" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202792" start="36867" end="36895" title="Conflict in the Niger Delta" label="conflict in the Delta region"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="37442" end="37449" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q134192" start="37453" end="37459" title="butane" label="butane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407225" start="37461" end="37470" title="isobutane" label="isobutane"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="37690" end="37706" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="37726" end="37739" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="37838" end="37847" title="President of Nigeria" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="37871" end="37884" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="37889" end="37919" title="Head of government" label="head of the federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="37938" end="37961" title="Direct election" label="elected by popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37999" end="38014" title="State governors in nigeria" label="State governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="38144" end="38150" title="Senate of Nigeria" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q665693" start="38157" end="38181" title="House of Representatives (Nigeria)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="38207" end="38221" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="38233" end="38250" title="National Assembly (Nigeria)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729266" start="39372" end="39397" title="All Progressives Congress" label="All Progressives Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="39399" end="39416" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Ahmed Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374297" start="39453" end="39476" title="Kashim Shettima" label="Senator Kashim Shettima"/>
<link wikidata="Q465842" start="39554" end="39571" title="States of Nigeria" label="thirty-six states"/>
<link wikidata="Q509300" start="39580" end="39605" title="Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria" label="Federal Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639634" start="39646" end="39668" title="Local government areas of Nigeria" label="local government areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343839" start="39719" end="39741" title="Geopolitical zones of Nigeria" label="six geopolitical zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599795" start="39743" end="39753" title="North West (Nigeria)" label="North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457984" start="39755" end="39765" title="North East (Nigeria)" label="North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q113372052" start="39767" end="39780" title="North Central, Nigeria" label="North Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599791" start="39782" end="39792" title="South West (Nigeria)" label="South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599797" start="39794" end="39804" title="South East (Nigeria)" label="South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599787" start="39810" end="39821" title="South South" label="South South"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="39912" end="39917" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="39919" end="39923" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="39925" end="39931" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q320704" start="39933" end="39943" title="Benin City" label="Benin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="39948" end="39961" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658545" start="39976" end="39998" title="List of most populous cities in Africa" label="largest city in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496553" start="40026" end="40036" title="List of metropolitan areas by population" label="12 million"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="40044" end="40054" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="40358" end="40381" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="Constitution of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="40481" end="40492" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="40494" end="40504" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="40506" end="40519" title="customary law" label="customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="40525" end="40535" title="Sharia" label="Sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="40994" end="41009" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350555" start="41193" end="41197" title="Egbo" label="Èkpè"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234624" start="41212" end="41220" title="Igboland" label="Igboland"/>
<link wikidata="Q239577" start="41225" end="41235" title="Ibibio people" label="Ibibioland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509092" start="41314" end="41330" title="Northern Nigeria" label="Northern Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="41338" end="41343" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="41363" end="41371" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="41398" end="41409" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos State"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="41682" end="41697" title="judicial branch" label="judicial branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509369" start="41733" end="41757" title="Supreme Court of Nigeria" label="Supreme Court of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="42258" end="42273" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="42294" end="42319" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="42426" end="42456" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation for African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="42466" end="42479" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="42654" end="42695" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="42709" end="42715" title="ECOMOG" label="ECOMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="42827" end="42851" title="Congo Crisis" label="sent troops to the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="43084" end="43090" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q28551" start="43098" end="43102" title="Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola" label="MPLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="43104" end="43109" title="SWAPO" label="SWAPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002270" start="43175" end="43196" title="Mozambican War of Independence" label="Portuguese Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444955" start="43202" end="43210" title="Rhodesian Bush War" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="43246" end="43266" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="43338" end="43343" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="43471" end="43499" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="43508" end="43531" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="43603" end="43616" title="Sani Abacha" label="Abacha regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="43660" end="43686" title="Petroleum industry" label="international oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="43731" end="43735" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178969" start="43771" end="43807" title="Petroleum industry in Nigeria" label="status as a major petroleum producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="43883" end="43902" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100253" start="43975" end="44007" title="China–Nigeria relations" label="Chinese–Nigerian trade relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="44385" end="44400" title="Balance of trade" label="trade imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="44719" end="44734" title="Currency union" label="single currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q761559" start="44764" end="44767" title="Eco (currency)" label="Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q203567" start="44818" end="44823" title="Nigerian naira" label="naira"/>
<link wikidata="Q878210" start="44850" end="44867" title="List of heads of state of Ivory Coast" label="Ivorian President"/>
<link wikidata="Q57413" start="44868" end="44885" title="Alassane Ouattara" label="Alassane Ouattara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052772" start="44887" end="44902" title="Emmanuel Macron" label="Emmanuel Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="44923" end="44928" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="UEMOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="44980" end="44989" title="CFA franc" label="CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q250774" start="45125" end="45146" title="Nigerian Armed Forces" label="Nigerian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="45155" end="45179" title="Military" label="combined military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="45245" end="45258" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510333" start="45260" end="45273" title="Nigerian Navy" label="Nigerian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707397" start="45279" end="45297" title="Nigerian Air Force" label="Nigerian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="45303" end="45323" title="President of Nigeria" label="President of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="45341" end="45359" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="45396" end="45420" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="constitutional authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097054" start="45568" end="45594" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251230" start="45622" end="45647" title="Defence Minister of Nigeria" label="Nigerian Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206709" start="45978" end="46023" title="International Institute for Strategic Studies" label="International Institute for Strategic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="46240" end="46247" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q937312" start="46255" end="46269" title="defence budget" label="defence budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="46317" end="46327" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084997" start="46336" end="46351" title="Nigerian bandit conflict" label="bandit conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661119" start="47132" end="47137" title="Islamic State – West Africa Province" label="ISWAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="47302" end="47330" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="47671" end="47688" title="Vigilantism" label="vigilante justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q27245756" start="47719" end="47756" title="2016 Niger Delta conflict" label="attacks on oil infrastructure in 2016"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48336" end="48358" title="Tompolo#Arrest warrant" label="renewed in August 2022"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49034" end="49067" title="#Oil spills" label="illegally produced heavy fuel oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377873" start="49122" end="49200" title="Herder–farmer conflicts in Nigeria" label="conflicts between Muslim Hausa-Fulani herders and indigenous Christian farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622706" start="49757" end="49781" title="List of African countries by GDP (nominal)" label="fourth largest in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="49787" end="49812" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="31st-largest in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="49833" end="49845" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="30th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="49849" end="49852" title="purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="49867" end="49876" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="50299" end="50308" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q208697" start="50492" end="50508" title="financial market" label="financial market"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="50511" end="50526" title="Medication" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="50532" end="50545" title="Entertainment industry" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21638589" start="50551" end="50576" title="Banking in Nigeria" label="financial services sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="50845" end="50855" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="50986" end="50993" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q637080" start="50995" end="51004" title="tantalite" label="tantalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="51012" end="51015" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="51027" end="51036" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="51038" end="51045" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="51056" end="51060" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007084" start="51404" end="51411" title="Cassava production in Nigeria" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="51441" end="51446" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="51448" end="51452" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="51454" end="51460" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="51462" end="51471" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="51477" end="51488" title="Sorghum bicolor" label="guinea corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="51500" end="51505" title="Cocoa bean" label="Cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="51679" end="51693" title="natural rubber" label="natural rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="51741" end="51759" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8250780" start="51768" end="51776" title="oil boom" label="oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q110588079" start="52715" end="52733" title="Imota rice mill" label="rice mill in Imota"/>
<link wikidata="Q912281" start="53137" end="53184" title="List of countries by oil production" label="15th largest producer of petroleum in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131192" start="53190" end="53210" title="List of countries by oil exports" label="6th largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="53224" end="53251" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="9th largest proven reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116737" start="53390" end="53429" title="List of countries by natural gas proven reserves" label="9th largest proven natural gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="53443" end="53447" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692772" start="53610" end="53626" title="economic miracle" label="economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319873" start="53674" end="53685" title="Gas flare" label="gas flaring"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121911" start="53760" end="53771" title="Oil theft in Nigeria" label="crude theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="53779" end="53790" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197663" start="53839" end="53845" title="Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202792" start="53850" end="53858" title="Conflict in the Niger Delta" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="54049" end="54059" title="Petroleum reservoir" label="oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="54070" end="54075" title="Oil well" label="wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q25083444" start="54106" end="54139" title="Department of Petroleum Resources" label="Department of Petroleum Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032758" start="54197" end="54214" title="Niger Delta Basin (geology)" label="Niger Delta Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="54752" end="54759" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="54760" end="54767" title="River delta" label="deltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="54768" end="54777" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="54778" end="54783" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="54790" end="54799" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261773" start="54800" end="54815" title="Petroleum trap" label="structural trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="55270" end="55297" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q401034" start="55830" end="55853" title="Ahmadu Bello University" label="Ahmadu Bello University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="55888" end="55922" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q104705" start="56108" end="56127" title="Umaru Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Umaru Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="56236" end="56280" title="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q514140" start="56348" end="56355" title="Rosatom" label="Rosatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q424388" start="56749" end="56764" title="Akwa Ibom State" label="Akwa Ibom State"/>
<link wikidata="Q387745" start="56769" end="56779" title="Kogi State" label="Kogi State"/>
<link wikidata="Q48795688" start="56888" end="56911" title="Itu nuclear power plant" label="Itu nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="57676" end="57680" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q206484" start="57682" end="57690" title="Abeokuta" label="Abeokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q852238" start="57692" end="57699" title="Onitsha" label="Onitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="57742" end="57746" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q202162" start="57912" end="57915" title="Aba, Abia" label="Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367147" start="58156" end="58179" title="Cement production by country" label="leading cement producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394965" start="58224" end="58237" title="Aliko Dangote" label="Aliko Dangote"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402045" start="58388" end="58418" title="Ajaokuta Steel Mill" label="Ajaokuta Steel Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="58450" end="58455" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q937487" start="58491" end="58498" title="Katsina (city)" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q321079" start="58500" end="58503" title="Jos" label="Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q868203" start="58508" end="58514" title="Osogbo" label="Osogbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33327095" start="58561" end="58577" title="Nigeria EduSat-1" label="Nigeria EduSat-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="58600" end="58627" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967794" start="58697" end="58727" title="Nigerian weather and communications satellites" label="many other Nigerian satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="58908" end="58913" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58981" end="59012" title="Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries" label="Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59066" end="59071" title="Zinox" label="Zinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983877" start="59228" end="59245" title="Unicorn (company)" label="unicorn companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813361" start="59426" end="59429" title="MTN Group" label="MTN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59431" end="59438" title="9mobile" label="9mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q854867" start="59440" end="59446" title="Airtel" label="Airtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570033" start="59451" end="59459" title="Globacom" label="Globacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q795901" start="59792" end="59807" title="GSM Association" label="GSM Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60030" end="60113" title="Telecommunications in Nigeria#Internet censorship and surveillance" label="Nigerian government is punishing citizens for expressing themselves on the internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q333642" start="60425" end="60440" title="Millennium Park (Abuja)" label="Millennium Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q455114" start="60468" end="60486" title="Manfredi Nicoletti" label="Manfredi Nicoletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="60730" end="60741" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064998" start="60801" end="60811" title="Iperu, Ogun" label="Iperu Remo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232226" start="61085" end="61099" title="Elegushi Beach" label="Elegushi Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q23777901" start="61346" end="61367" title="Eko Hotels and Suites" label="Eko Hotels and Suites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440324" start="61369" end="61389" title="Federal Palace Hotel" label="Federal Palace Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825730" start="61437" end="61459" title="InterContinental" label="Intercontinental Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q634831" start="61461" end="61469" title="Sheraton Hotels and Resorts" label="Sheraton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439966" start="61475" end="61498" title="Four Points by Sheraton" label="Four Points by Sheraton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25042466" start="61537" end="61557" title="Tafawa Balewa Square" label="Tafawa Balewa Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044062" start="61576" end="61592" title="Nike Art Gallery" label="Nike Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203190" start="61594" end="61606" title="Freedom Park (Lagos)" label="Freedom Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003559" start="61616" end="61642" title="Cathedral Church of Christ, Lagos" label="Cathedral Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462084" start="61725" end="61784" title="Transport in Nigeria" label="transport plays a major role in the national service sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405232" start="62032" end="62051" title="Second Niger bridge" label="Second Niger Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406553" start="62452" end="62473" title="Lagos-Mombasa Highway" label="Lagos-Mombasa Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449946" start="62476" end="62497" title="Algiers-Lagos Highway" label="Algiers-Lagos Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157731" start="62500" end="62519" title="Dakar-Lagos Highway" label="Dakar-Lagos Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157732" start="62522" end="62544" title="Dakar-Ndjamena Highway" label="Dakar-Ndjamena Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="62586" end="62597" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="62922" end="62927" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="62928" end="62934" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q798812" start="62942" end="62949" title="Badagry" label="Badagry"/>
<link wikidata="Q465022" start="62954" end="62959" title="Enugu (city)" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852238" start="62960" end="62967" title="Onitsha" label="Onitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q117714" start="63155" end="63162" title="Anambra State" label="Anambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q503923" start="63167" end="63173" title="Rivers State" label="Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24088912" start="63664" end="63697" title="Lagos–Kano Standard Gauge Railway" label="Lagos-Kano Standard Gauge Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q682571" start="63744" end="63748" title="Kano State" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="63750" end="63756" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="63758" end="63763" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="63765" end="63771" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="63776" end="63781" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q111915271" start="64286" end="64321" title="Anambra International Cargo Airport" label="Anambra International Cargo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043631" start="64387" end="64425" title="Murtala Muhammed International Airport" label="Murtala Muhammed International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043631" start="64593" end="64631" title="Murtala Muhammed International Airport" label="Murtala Muhammed International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q525030" start="64644" end="64680" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431654" start="64693" end="64732" title="Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport" label="Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497354" start="64744" end="64777" title="Akanu Ibiam International Airport" label="Akanu Ibiam International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432453" start="64793" end="64828" title="Port Harcourt International Airport" label="Port Harcourt International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189310" start="64903" end="64918" title="Nigeria Airways" label="Nigeria Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q494917" start="64981" end="64993" title="Virgin Group" label="Virgin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q407651" start="65043" end="65065" title="Air Nigeria" label="Virgin Nigeria Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161750" start="65277" end="65286" title="Air Peace" label="Air Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="65330" end="65344" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65727" end="65767" title="List of countries and dependencies by population#Sovereign states and dependencies by population" label="world&amp;#x27;s sixth-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032863" start="66461" end="66478" title="Nigerian American" label="Nigerian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="66683" end="66688" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="66934" end="66939" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="66941" end="66947" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="66952" end="66956" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287326" start="67025" end="67028" title="Edo people" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="67030" end="67034" title="Ijaw people" label="Ijaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="67036" end="67041" title="Fula people" label="Fulɓe"/>
<link wikidata="Q572665" start="67043" end="67049" title="Kanuri people" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993629" start="67051" end="67063" title="Urhobo people" label="Urhobo-Isoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q239577" start="67065" end="67071" title="Ibibio people" label="Ibibio"/>
<link wikidata="Q403092" start="67073" end="67078" title="Ebira people" label="Ebira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482397" start="67080" end="67084" title="Nupe people" label="Nupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568762" start="67086" end="67092" title="Gbagyi people" label="Gbagyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664002" start="67094" end="67099" title="Jukun people (West Africa)" label="Jukun"/>
<link wikidata="Q887672" start="67101" end="67106" title="Igala people" label="Igala"/>
<link wikidata="Q403034" start="67108" end="67113" title="Idoma people" label="Idoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478209" start="67115" end="67120" title="Ogoni people" label="Ogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235705" start="67125" end="67128" title="Tiv people" label="Tiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841227" start="67208" end="67219" title="Middle Belt" label="Middle Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217022" start="67290" end="67295" title="Atyap people" label="Atyap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894645" start="67297" end="67302" title="Berom people" label="Berom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425743" start="67319" end="67325" title="Kofyar people" label="Kofyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235705" start="67337" end="67340" title="Tiv people" label="Tiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="67391" end="67397" title="Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100885" start="67399" end="67406" title="Chinese people in Nigeria" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995667" start="67422" end="67438" title="White Zimbabweans" label="white Zimbabwean"/>
<link wikidata="Q33655" start="67962" end="67985" title="Nigerian Pidgin" label="Nigerian Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="68013" end="68028" title="Slavery in Africa" label="African slavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="68047" end="68067" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="68519" end="68538" title="languages of Africa" label="languages of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="68557" end="68568" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger-Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="68588" end="68592" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="68594" end="68600" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33792" start="68602" end="68608" title="Ibibio language" label="Ibibio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322020" start="68610" end="68614" title="Ijaw languages" label="Ijaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="68616" end="68624" title="Fula language" label="Fulfulde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350726" start="68626" end="68631" title="Ogoni languages" label="Ogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35375" start="68637" end="68640" title="Edo language" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36094" start="68642" end="68648" title="Kanuri language" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="68688" end="68693" title="Borno State" label="Borno"/>
<link wikidata="Q682777" start="68698" end="68708" title="Yobe State" label="Yobe State"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="68725" end="68737" title="Nilo-Saharan languages" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="68750" end="68755" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="68762" end="68773" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33655" start="69501" end="69524" title="Nigerian Pidgin" label="Nigerian Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="69554" end="69560" title="Pidgin" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="69625" end="69638" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="69955" end="69984" title="traditional African religions" label="traditional African religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="70090" end="70104" title="Total fertility rate" label="fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="70222" end="70232" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="70333" end="70352" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q893589" start="70513" end="70517" title="Hausa animism" label="Bori"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="70766" end="70803" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="71171" end="71185" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="71193" end="71196" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="71461" end="71467" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="71595" end="71605" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="71687" end="71704" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q288809" start="71837" end="71841" title="Efik people" label="Efik"/>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="71843" end="71846" title="Ijaw people" label="Ijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478209" start="71851" end="71856" title="Ogoni people" label="Ogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="71881" end="71886" title="Igbo people" label="Igbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q239577" start="71921" end="71927" title="Ibibio people" label="Ibibio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841227" start="72001" end="72012" title="Middle Belt" label="middle belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q805921" start="72415" end="72432" title="Bamako Initiative" label="Bamako Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="73070" end="73077" title="Malaria" label="Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="73121" end="73134" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="73243" end="73251" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629871" start="73339" end="73363" title="HIV/AIDS in Nigeria" label="HIV/AIDS rate in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="73509" end="73512" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="73574" end="73589" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="73712" end="73722" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543380" start="73786" end="73797" title="live birth (human)" label="live births"/>
<link wikidata="Q927304" start="73861" end="73882" title="University of Nigeria" label="University of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="73903" end="73912" title="leukaemia" label="leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="73914" end="73922" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="73927" end="73946" title="sickle cell disease" label="sickle cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128050" start="73992" end="74014" title="Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation" label="bone marrow transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="74150" end="74169" title="Western African Ebola virus epidemic" label="2014 Ebola outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128437" start="74344" end="74359" title="contact tracing" label="contact tracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="74590" end="74601" title="Human capital flight" label="brain drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032905" start="75036" end="75057" title="Federal Ministry of Education (Nigeria)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639634" start="75059" end="75076" title="Local government areas of Nigeria" label="Local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="75235" end="75247" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="75249" end="75266" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="75268" end="75287" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="75292" end="75310" title="tertiary education" label="tertiary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="76404" end="76427" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="77274" end="77279" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="77281" end="77285" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="77290" end="77296" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="77367" end="77369" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q221436" start="77732" end="77741" title="Maiduguri" label="Maiduguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="77746" end="77752" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197663" start="77814" end="77842" title="piracy in the Gulf of Guinea" label="piracy in the Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q830193" start="78081" end="78097" title="advance-fee scam" label="advance-fee scam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="78119" end="78135" title="confidence trick" label="confidence trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q431302" start="78397" end="78437" title="Economic and Financial Crimes Commission" label="Economic and Financial Crimes Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="78572" end="78599" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="78712" end="78722" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862865" start="79765" end="79795" title="inhuman or degrading treatment" label="inhuman or degrading treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097862" start="79997" end="80009" title="Child labour in Nigeria" label="child labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205965" start="80027" end="80052" title="Child sexual abuse in Nigeria" label="child sexual exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238098" start="80054" end="80071" title="Domestic violence in Nigeria" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q277072" start="80162" end="80236" title="Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women" label="Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924288" start="80260" end="80275" title="Maputo Protocol" label="Maputo Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346503" start="80472" end="80486" title="Child marriage in Nigeria" label="Child marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369897" start="80691" end="80719" title="Polygamy in Nigeria" label="polygamy in Northern Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238098" start="80721" end="80748" title="Domestic violence in Nigeria" label="Domestic violence is common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="80780" end="80798" title="Maternal death" label="Maternal mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130435" start="80843" end="80878" title="Female genital mutilation in Nigeria" label="Female genital mutilation is common"/>
<link wikidata="Q48207191" start="80956" end="80971" title="Urogenital fistula" label="vaginal fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001439" start="81019" end="81058" title="Gender inequality in Nigeria" label="Women face a large amount of inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="81118" end="81124" title="Sexism" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q380351" start="81240" end="81251" title="Emancipation" label="emancipated"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="81378" end="81393" title="Informal economy" label="informal sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520506" start="81877" end="81889" title="Sharia in Nigeria" label="Shari&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626346" start="81990" end="82003" title="LGBT rights in Nigeria" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="82155" end="82165" title="Homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="82446" end="82453" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="82535" end="82541" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="82543" end="82548" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="82553" end="82557" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41488" start="82734" end="82746" title="Wole Soyinka" label="Wole Soyinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="82770" end="82803" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize winner for literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q315362" start="82805" end="82813" title="Ben Okri" label="Ben Okri"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="82834" end="82846" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q155845" start="82856" end="82869" title="Chinua Achebe" label="Chinua Achebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q265920" start="82912" end="82948" title="Friedenspreis des Deutschen Buchhandels" label="Peace Award of the German Book Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836510" start="82958" end="82971" title="Lola Shoneyin" label="Lola Shoneyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117706168" start="83008" end="83050" title="The Secret Lives of Baba Segi&amp;#x27;s Wives (novel)" label="The Secret Lives of Baba Segi&amp;#x27;s Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480212" start="83128" end="83143" title="palm-wine music" label="palm-wine music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934800" start="83194" end="83204" title="Tunde King" label="Tunde King"/>
<link wikidata="Q963061" start="83401" end="83415" title="Highlife" label="Highlife music"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208255" start="83488" end="83501" title="Igbo highlife" label="Igbo Highlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q216337" start="83572" end="83580" title="boy band" label="boy band"/>
<link wikidata="Q123111578" start="83581" end="83612" title="Oriental Brothers International" label="Oriental Brothers International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934770" start="83614" end="83626" title="Bobby Benson" label="Bobby Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096937" start="83628" end="83641" title="Chief Stephen Osita Osadebe" label="Osita Osadebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926207" start="83643" end="83656" title="Victor Olaiya" label="Victor Olaiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319236" start="83658" end="83668" title="Rex Lawson" label="Rex Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304553" start="83670" end="83684" title="Dr Sir Warrior" label="Dr Sir Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087487" start="83689" end="83704" title="Oliver De Coque" label="Oliver De Coque"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="83732" end="83741" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q963061" start="83786" end="83794" title="Highlife" label="Highlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="83796" end="83800" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048265" start="83805" end="83817" title="Yoruba music" label="Yoruba Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715700" start="83936" end="83946" title="Jùjú music" label="Juju Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016354" start="83979" end="83995" title="William Onyeabor" label="William Onyeabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="84027" end="84037" title="Funk" label="Funk Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="84042" end="84047" title="Disco" label="Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124631" start="84152" end="84164" title="Majek Fashek" label="Majek Fashek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="84184" end="84197" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip hop Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393713" start="84244" end="84252" title="The Remedies" label="Remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q963061" start="84298" end="84312" title="Highlife" label="highlife music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582829" start="84405" end="84413" title="P-Square" label="P-Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q222021" start="84415" end="84420" title="2Baba" label="2face"/>
<link wikidata="Q944365" start="84426" end="84431" title="D&amp;#x27;banj" label="Dbanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099840" start="84497" end="84506" title="Afrobeats" label="Afrobeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234484" start="84817" end="84823" title="Davido" label="Davido"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233663" start="84825" end="84831" title="Wizkid" label="Wizkid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305712" start="84836" end="84845" title="Burna Boy" label="Burna Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065894" start="84903" end="84912" title="Nollywood" label="Nollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="84916" end="84921" title="Blend word" label="blend"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="85081" end="85090" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="85111" end="85123" title="film studios" label="film studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="85137" end="85142" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="85144" end="85148" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q465022" start="85154" end="85159" title="Enugu (city)" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="85243" end="85249" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q761706" start="85481" end="85508" title="Digital cinema" label="digital filming and editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859552" start="85552" end="85564" title="The Figurine" label="The Figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038083" start="85614" end="85633" title="New Nigerian Cinema" label="New Nigerian Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995253" start="85783" end="85786" title="Ijé" label="Ijé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758443" start="85861" end="85891" title="List of highest-grossing films in Nigeria" label="highest-grossing Nigerian film"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556678" start="85965" end="85985" title="Half of a Yellow Sun (film)" label="Half of a Yellow Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q26684632" start="86039" end="86056" title="The Wedding Party (2016 film)" label="The Wedding Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216886" start="86066" end="86078" title="Kemi Adetiba" label="Kemi Adetiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="86336" end="86349" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="86354" end="86359" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q377137" start="86529" end="86540" title="T.B. Joshua" label="T.B. Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782286" start="86548" end="86559" title="Emmanuel TV" label="Emmanuel TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445837" start="86682" end="86702" title="festivals in Nigeria" label="festivals in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033037" start="87157" end="87173" title="Nigerian cuisine" label="Nigerian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="87327" end="87335" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="87339" end="87348" title="Peanut" label="groundnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="87422" end="87435" title="chili pepper" label="chilli pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650627" start="87584" end="87588" title="Suya" label="Suya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991878" start="88025" end="88036" title="Euromonitor International" label="Euromonitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="88051" end="88062" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="88071" end="88077" title="Market (economics)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="88393" end="88401" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q830826" start="88483" end="88511" title="Nigeria Professional Football League" label="professional football league"/>
<link wikidata="Q181930" start="88513" end="88550" title="Nigeria national football team" label="Nigeria&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="88609" end="88623" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="88642" end="88646" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="88648" end="88652" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="88654" end="88658" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="88660" end="88664" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="88666" end="88670" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q170645" start="88676" end="88680" title="2018 FIFA World Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="88735" end="88754" title="FIFA World Rankings" label="FIFA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="88818" end="88839" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q746048" start="88843" end="88847" title="1980 African Cup of Nations" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q515037" start="88849" end="88853" title="1994 African Cup of Nations" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q688351" start="88859" end="88863" title="2013 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="88967" end="88987" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298873" start="89184" end="89223" title="Nigeria men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Nigeria&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="89309" end="89347" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q194209" start="89393" end="89413" title="Basketball at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q331640" start="89468" end="89474" title="Greece men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q326843" start="89479" end="89488" title="Lithuania men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="89653" end="89677" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Famer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273256" start="89678" end="89693" title="Hakeem Olajuwon" label="Hakeem Olajuwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="89720" end="89723" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606552" start="89729" end="89752" title="Nigerian Premier League (basketball)" label="Nigerian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="89983" end="89990" title="bobsled" label="bobsled"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="90004" end="90019" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27897170" start="90086" end="90143" title="Bobsleigh at the 2018 Winter Olympics" label="the bobsled competition at the XXIII Olympic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="90165" end="90173" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q60055782" start="90512" end="90557" title="2019 World Mixed Doubles Curling Championship" label="2019 World Mixed Doubles Curling Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="90695" end="90711" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q85731006" start="90728" end="90775" title="2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup" label="2018–2020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032165" start="90838" end="90883" title="FIVB Beach Volleyball U21 World Championships" label="FIVB Beach Volleyball U21 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499621" start="90925" end="90933" title="loofball" label="loofball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431111" start="90954" end="90987" title="Index of Nigeria-related articles" label="Index of Nigeria-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112384" start="90990" end="91008" title="Outline of Nigeria" label="Outline of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="92249" end="92255" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="92283" end="92293" title="Al Jazeera" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="92348" end="92356" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21384" wikidata="Q1435215" url="?curid=21384" title="History of Nigeria">
<text>The history of [[Nigeria]] can be traced to the earliest inhabitants whose date remains at least 13,000 BC through the early civilizations such as the Nok culture which began around 1500 BC. Numerous ancient African civilizations settled in the region that is known today as Nigeria, such as the Kingdom of Nri, the Benin Kingdom, and the Oyo Empire. Islam reached Nigeria through the Bornu Empire between (1068 AD) and Hausa Kingdom during the 11th century, while Christianity came to Nigeria in the 15th century through Augustinian and Capuchin monks from Portugal to the Kingdom of Warri. The Songhai Empire also occupied part of the region. Through contact with Europeans, early harbour towns such as Calabar, Badagry and Bonny emerged along the coast after 1480, which did business in the transatlantic slave trade, among other things. Conflicts in the hinterland, such as the civil war in the Oyo Empire, meant that new enslaved people were constantly being &quot;supplied&quot;.

After 1804, Usman dan Fodio unified an immense territory in his jihad against the superior but quarrelling Hausa states of the north, which was stabilised by his successors as the &quot;Caliphate of Sokoto&quot;.

In its initial endeavour to stop the slave trade in West Africa, the United Kingdom gradually expanded its sphere of influence after 1851, starting from the tiny island of Lagos (3 km2) and the port city of Calabar. The British followed expansive trading companies such as the RNC and missionaries such as Mary Slessor, who advanced into the hinterland, preached and founded missionary schools, but also took action against local customs such as the religiously induced killing of twins or servants of deceased village elders and against the Trial by ordeal as a means of establishing the legal truth. At the Berlin Congo Conference in 1885, the European powers demarcated their spheres of interest in Africa without regard to ethnic or linguistic boundaries and without giving those affected a say. Thereafter, the British made increasing advances in the Niger region, which they had negotiated in Berlin, and ultimately defeated the Sokoto Caliphate. From 1903, Great Britain controlled almost the entire present-day territory of Nigeria, which was united under a single administration in 1914 (in 1919, a border strip of the former German colony of Cameroon was added to the territory of Nigeria).

Under the British colonial administration, purchasing cartels (of companies such as Unilever, Nestlé and Cadbury) kept the prices of cocoa, palm oil and peanuts artificially low, thereby damaging Nigerian agriculture, but on the other hand ports and an extensive railway network were also built. Newspapers, political parties, trade unions and higher education institutions were established - rather against the wishes of the colonial rulers in order to control the oversized colony. In the East African campaign of 1941, Nigerian regiments achieved the first major success against the Axis powers with the fastest military advance in history at the time. In 1956, oil fields were discovered in Nigeria. Since then, vandalism, oil theft and illegal, unprofessional refining by local residents have caused the contamination of the Niger Delta with crude and heavy oil, particularly around disused exploratory boreholes.

Nigeria became independent in 1960. From 1967 to 1970, the &quot;Biafra War&quot; raged in the south-east - one of the worst humanitarian disasters of modern times. After three decades mostly of increasingly restrictive military dictatorships, Nigeria became a democratic federal republic based on the US model in 1999. Quadrennial elections are criticised as &quot;non-transparent&quot;. Nevertheless, changes of power in the presidential villa at Aso Rock took place peacefully in 2007, 2010, 2015 and 2023, making Nigeria one of the few stable democracies in the region - despite its shortcomings. The Boko Haram revolt of 2014, which received much attention in the West, fell apart due to infighting and the united approach of Nigeria and its neighbours. The spread of the Ebola epidemic to the slums of Lagos in the same year was prevented by professional crisis management. Recent years have seen the rise of the Nigerian music and film industry and success in software programming with five out of seven African tech unicorns. With large new refineries, the country attempts since January 2024 to process the extracted domestic crude oil on its own and in a professional manner in the future (meaning without heavy oil as a waste product).

The biggest security problem is the numerous kidnappings, 38% of Nigerians personally know a kidnap victim. Due to the abrupt economic turnaround in 2023, 64% of Nigerians are hungry or cannot finance basic needs. 78% rate the work of President Tinubu as ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’.

==Prehistory==
Acheulean tool-using archaic humans may have dwelled throughout West Africa since at least between 780,000 BP and 126,000 BP (Middle Pleistocene).

By at least 61,000 BP, Middle Stone Age West Africans may have begun to migrate south of the West Sudanian savanna, and, by at least 25,000 BP, may have begun to dwell near the coast of West Africa.

An excessively dry Ogolian period occurred, spanning from 20,000 BP to 12,000 BP. By 15,000 BP, the number of settlements made by Middle Stone Age West Africans decreased as there was an increase in humid conditions, expansion of the West African forest, and increase in the number of settlements made by Late Stone Age West African hunter-gatherers. Iwo Eleru people persisted at Iwo Eleru, in Nigeria, as late as 13,000 BP.

Macrolith-using late Middle Stone Age peoples, who dwelled in Central Africa, to western Central Africa, to West Africa, were displaced by microlith-using Late Stone Age Africans as they migrated from Central Africa into West Africa. After having persisted as late as 1000 BP, or some period of time after 1500 AD, remaining West African hunter-gatherers were ultimately acculturated and admixed into the larger groups of West African agriculturalists.

The Dufuna canoe, a dugout canoe found in Yobe State in northeastern Nigeria has been dated to around 6300 BC, making it the oldest known boat in Africa, and the second oldest worldwide.

==Iron Age==
Archaeological sites containing iron smelting furnaces and slag have been excavated at sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria in what is now Igboland: dating to 2000 BC at the site of Lejja (Eze-Uzomaka 2009) and to 750 BC and at the site of Opi (Holl 2009). Iron metallurgy may have been independently developed in the Nok culture between the 9th century BC and 550 BC. More recently, Bandama and Babalola (2023) have indicated that iron metallurgical development occurred 2631 BC – 2458 BC at Lejja, in Nigeria.

Daima, an archaeological tell site located near Lake Chad in Borno State, has a history of human occupation spanning approximately 1800 years, from 550 BC to 1150 AD. The sequence of occupation is divided into three phases: Daima I (800 BC—500 AD) represents an occupation of a people without metalwork; Daima II (500 BC—800 AD) represents the earliest iron-using people of the site; and Daima III (800 BC—1100/1300 AD) a more &quot;advanced&quot; iron-using people.

===Nok culture===
Nok culture may have emerged in 1500 BC and continued to persist until 1 BC. Nok people developed terracotta sculptures through large-scale economic production, as part of a complex funerary culture. Iron metallurgy may have been independently developed in the Nok culture between the 9th century BC and 550 BC. As each share cultural and artistic similarity with the Nok culture, the Niger-Congo-speaking Yoruba, Jukun, or Dakakari peoples may be descendants of the Nok peoples. Based on stylistic similarities with the Nok terracottas, the bronze figurines of the Yoruba Ife Empire and the Bini kingdom of Benin may also be continuations of the traditions of the earlier Nok culture.

=== Igbo-Ukwu ===

Igbo-Ukwu, an archaeological site in southeastern Nigeria, gained prominence for its remarkable discoveries dating back to the 9th century AD. The excavations revealed a complex of burial sites containing a stunning array of bronze and copper artifacts, showcasing advanced metalworking skills. Among the findings were intricately crafted ceremonial vessels, ornaments, and tools, challenging previous assumptions about the technological and artistic sophistication of ancient sub-Saharan Africa. The artifacts highlight a sophisticated society with a high level of craftsmanship and organizational complexity, providing crucial insights into the rich cultural traditions of the Igbo people.

The significance of Igbo-Ukwu lies in its contribution to reshaping the understanding of early African cultures. The site&#x27;s discoveries not only demonstrated the Igbo people&#x27;s ability to create aesthetically pleasing objects but also challenged misconceptions about the historical achievements of the continent. Igbo-Ukwu stands as a testament to the advanced metallurgical practices and cultural richness of the people who inhabited the region, leaving a lasting legacy in the study of African archaeology.

== Roman expeditions to Nigeria (1st century AD) ==
Between 50 AD and 90 AD, Roman explorers undertook three expeditions to the area of present-day Nigeria. The reports of these expeditions confirm, among other things, the geologically already established extent of Lake Chad at that time and thus its drastic shrinkage in the past 2,000 years.

The expeditions were supported by legionaries and served mainly commercial purposes.

One of the main goals of the explorations was the search for and extraction of gold, which was to be transported back to the Roman provinces on the Mediterranean coast by land with the help of camels.

The Romans had at their disposal the memoirs of the ancient Carthaginian explorer Hanno the Navigator. However, it is not known to what extent they were read, believed or found interesting by the Romans.

The three Roman explorations/expeditions in Nigeria were:

* The Flaccus expedition
* The Matiernus expedition
* Possibly a commander of Legio III Augusta named Festus undertook an expedition in the direction of the Niger River.

Roman coins have been found in Nigeria. However, it is likely that all these coins were introduced at a much later date and there was not direct Roman traffic this far down the west coast. The coins are the only ancient European items found in Central Africa.

== Early states before 1500 ==
=== Advance of Islam in the north, the 14 Hausa states ===

With the spread of Islam from the 7th century AD, the area became known as Sudan or Bilad Al Sudan (“Land of the Blacks”, Arabic: بلاد السودان). Around the eighth century, Arab documents mention that Muslims crossed the Sahara to West Africa for trade purposes. Several factors contributed to the growth of the Muslim class in non-Muslim kingdoms. Islam facilitated long-distance trade by providing merchants with useful tools such as contract law, credit (e.g. mudaraba) and information networks. Muslim merchants also played an important role as advisors and scribes. They had the ability to use letter-based writing (instead of hieroglyphics), which was helpful in the administration of kingdoms. Arithmetic in a decimal system (Arabic numerals) was also introduced to West Africa through Islam.

A system of Hausa city-states had existed in northern Nigeria since the 11th century. These city-states were mainly subject to tribute to large empires such as Kanem on Lake Chad. In the 14th century, all the ruling elites of Hausaland were Muslims, although the majority of the population did not convert until the eighteenth century.

From 1400 onwards, Nigeria&#x27;s first written documents with letters were produced in the north of the country. They were part of the Islamic missionary work and were written in Ajami - a script based on Arabic, but supplemented by special letters for local languages (Hausa, Fula, Yoruba). The Hausa also began to write history. In the Kano Chronicle, the history of the Hausa state is traced back to 999 AD.

=== Northern kingdoms of the Sahel ===
After the collapse of Mali, a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464-1492) founded the Songhai Empire in the Middle Niger region and took control of the trans-Saharan trade. Sonni Ali conquered Timbuktu in 1468 and Djenné in 1473 and built his regime on trade revenues and cooperation with Muslim merchants. His successor Askia Muhammad Ture (1493-1528) made Islam the official religion, built mosques and brought Muslim scholars to Gao, including al-Maghili (d. 1504).

Throughout the 16th century, much of northern Nigeria paid homage to the Songhai Empire in the west or the rival Borno Empire in the east.

=== Kanem–Bornu Empire ===

Kanem became an empire in the Lake Chad Basin in the 13th century. The Mai (king) of Kanem and his court adopted Islam in the 11th century. The first ruler of Kanem was Saif and his dynasty, the Sayfawa, ruled the empire for a millennium (800 AD to 1846 AD). The first Muslim ruler of Kanem was Mai Umme Jilmi (r. 1085-1097), who died on his way to Mecca in Egypt. Due to the growing influence of Kanem in North Africa and the territorial expansion it achieved in the 12th and 13th centuries, the empire became very well known in the Islamic world of the time.

The civil war that shattered Kanem in the second half of the 14th century led to the independence of Bornu. The Sayfawa moved to Bornu. Mai Ali Ghaji (r. 1470-1508) established a large capital there called Birnin N&#x27;gazargamu. He carried out government reforms and ended the civil unrest. With a reinvigorated army, he extended Bornu&#x27;s influence to the neighboring regions and demanded tribute from some Hausa states. He also re-established diplomatic and trade relations with North Africa. Ali&#x27;s successors continued to rule Kanem and kept it as a province of Bornu until the 19th century. 

The most prosperous period in the history of the empire was the reign of Idris Alauma (1571-1603). His troops carried out far-reaching campaigns: in the north from southern Libya to northern Niger; in the east from eastern Chad to northern Cameroon; in the south he put down the rebellion of a Marghi prince and in the west he subdued Kano. He also carried out administrative reforms. He replaced customary law with Shari&#x27;a law and appointed qadis (judges). He built several mosques, which were constructed from baked bricks instead of reeds. He also undertook the pilgrimage to Mecca and financed the construction of a hostel for the Bornu pilgrims there.

Borno&#x27;s economy was dominated by the Trans-Sudanese slave trade and the desert trade in salt and livestock. The court and mosques of Borno retained a reputation as centers of Islamic culture and scholarship.

===Development and formation of Ife===

Archaeological evidence points to settlements in Ile-Ife dating back as early as the 10th to 6th century BCE. The city gradually transitioned into a more urban center around the 4th to 7th centuries CE. By the 8th century, a powerful city-state had formed, laying the foundation for the eventual rise of the Ife Empire (circa 1200-1420). Under figures like the Now defied figures such as Oduduwa, revered as the first divine king of the Yoruba, the Ife Empire grew. Ile-Ife, its capital, rose to prominence, its influence extending across a vast area of what is now southwestern Nigeria.

The period between 1200 and 1400 is often referred to as the &quot;golden age&quot; of Ile-Ife, marked by exceptional artistic production, economic prosperity, and urban development. The Ife Empire&#x27;s strategic location facilitated its participation in extensive trade networks that spanned West Africa. Of note is the evidence of a thriving glass bead industry in Ile-Ife. Archaeological excavations have unearthed numerous glass beads, indicating local production and pointing to the existence of specialized knowledge and technology. These beads, particularly the dichroic beads known for their iridescent qualities, were highly sought-after trade items, found as far afield as the Sahel region, demonstrating the far-reaching commercial connections of the Ife Empire.

The wealth generated through trade fueled the remarkable urban development witnessed in Ile-Ife. Archaeological evidence points to a well-planned city with impressive infrastructure, including paved roads and sophisticated drainage systems, a distinctive feature of Ife urban planning was the use of potsherd pavements. These pavements, created using fragments of broken pottery. The Ife Empire declined around the 15th century.

===Oyo and Benin===
During the 15th century, Oyo and Benin surpassed Ife as political and economic powers, although Ife preserved its status as a religious center. Respect for the priestly functions of the &quot;ooni&quot; of Ife was a crucial factor in the evolution of Yoruba culture. The Ife model of government was adapted at Oyo, where a member of its ruling dynasty controlled several smaller city-states. A state council (the &quot;Oyo Mesi&quot;) named the &quot;Alaafin&quot; (king) and acted as a check on his authority. Their capital city was situated about 100 km north of present-day Oyo. Unlike the forest-bound Yoruba kingdoms, Oyo was in the savanna and drew its military strength from its cavalry forces, which established hegemony over the adjacent Nupe and the Borgu kingdoms and thereby developed trade routes farther to the north.

The Benin Empire (1440–1897; called &quot;Bini&quot; by locals) was a pre-colonial African state in what is now modern Nigeria. It should not be confused with the modern-day country called Benin, formerly called Dahomey.

The Igala are an ethnic group of Nigeria. Their homeland, the former Igala Kingdom, is an approximately triangular area of about in the angle formed by the Benue and Niger rivers. The area was formerly the Igala Division of Kabba province and is now part of Kogi State. The capital is Idah in Kogi state. Igala people are majorly found in Kogi state. They can be found in Idah, Igalamela/Odolu, Ajaka, Ofu, Olamaboro, Dekina, Bassa, Ankpa, omala, Lokoja, Ibaji, Ajaokuta, Lokoja and kotonkarfe Local government all in Kogi state. Other states where Igalas can be found are Anambra, Delta and Benue states.

The royal stool of Olu of Warri was founded by an Igala prince.

=== Yoruba ===
Historically, the Yoruba people have been the dominant group on the west bank of the Niger. Their nearest linguistic relatives are the Igala who live on the opposite side of the Niger&#x27;s divergence from the Benue, and from whom they are believed to have split about 2,000 years ago. The Yoruba were organized in mostly patrilineal groups that occupied village communities and subsisted on agriculture. From approximately the 8th century, adjacent village compounds called &quot;ilé&quot; coalesced into numerous territorial city-states in which clan loyalties became subordinate to dynastic chieftains. Urbanisation was accompanied by high levels of artistic achievement, particularly in terracotta and ivory sculpture and in the sophisticated metal casting produced at Ife.

The Yoruba are especially known for the Oyo Empire that dominated the region. The Oyo Empire held supremacy over other Yoruba nations like the Egba Kingdom, Awori Kingdom, and the Egbado. In its prime, they also dominated the Kingdom of Dahomey (now located in the modern day Republic of Benin).

The Yoruba pay tribute to a pantheon composed of a Supreme Deity, Olorun and the Orisha. The Olorun is now called God in the Yoruba language. There are 400 deities called Orisha who perform various tasks. According to the Yoruba, Oduduwa is regarded as the ancestor of the Yoruba kings. According to one of the various myths about him, he founded Ife and dispatched his sons and daughters to establish similar kingdoms in other parts of what is today known as Yorubaland. The Yorubaland now consists of different tribes from different states which are located in the Southwestern part of the country, states like Lagos State, Oyo State, Ondo State, Osun State, Ekiti State and Ogun State, among others.

=== Igbo Kingdoms ===
==== Nri Kingdom ====

The Kingdom of Nri is considered to be the foundation of Igbo culture and the oldest Kingdom in Nigeria. Nri and Aguleri, where the Igbo creation myth originates, are in the territory of the Umueri clan, who trace their lineages back to the patriarchal king-figure, Eri. Eri&#x27;s origins are unclear, though he has been described as a &quot;sky being&quot; sent by Chukwu (God). He has been characterized as having first given societal order to the people of Anambra.

Archaeological evidence suggests that Nri hegemony in Igboland may go back as far as the 9th century, and royal burials have been unearthed dating to at least the 10th century. Eri, the god-like founder of Nri, is believed to have settled in the region around 948 with other related Igbo cultures following in the 13th century. The first Eze Nri (King of Nri), Ìfikuánim, followed directly after him. According to Igbo oral tradition, his reign started in 1043. At least one historian puts Ìfikuánim&#x27;s reign much later, around 1225.

The Kingdom of Nri was a religio-polity, a sort of theocratic state, that developed in the central heartland of the Igbo region. The Nri had a taboo symbolic code with six types. These included human (such as the birth of twins), animal (such as killing or eating of pythons), object, temporal, behavioral, speech and place taboos. The rules regarding these taboos were used to educate and govern Nri&#x27;s subjects. This meant that, while certain Igbo may have lived under different formal administrations, all followers of the Igbo religion had to abide by the rules of the faith and obey its representative on earth, the Eze Nri.

With the decline of Nri kingdom in the 15th to 17th centuries, several states once under their influence, became powerful economic oracular oligarchies and large commercial states that dominated Igboland. The neighboring Awka city-state rose in power as a result of their powerful Agbala oracle and metalworking expertise. The Onitsha Kingdom, which was originally inhabited by Igbos from east of the Niger, was founded in the 16th century by migrants from Anioma (Western Igboland). Later groups like the Igala traders from the hinterland settled in Onitsha in the 18th century. Kingdoms west of the River Niger like Aboh (Abo), which was significantly populated by Igbos among other tribes, dominated trade along the lower River Niger area from the 17th century until European explorations into the Niger delta. The Umunoha state in the Owerri area used the &quot;Igwe ka Ala&quot; oracle at their advantage. However, the Cross River Igbo state like the Aro had the greatest influence in Igboland and adjacent areas after the decline of Nri.

The Arochukwu kingdom emerged after the Aro-Ibibio Wars from 1630 to 1720, and went on to form the Aro Confederacy which economically dominated Eastern Nigerian hinterland. The source of the Aro Confederacy&#x27;s economic dominance was based on the judicial oracle of Ibini Ukpabi (&quot;Long Juju&quot;) and their military forces which included powerful allies such as Ohafia, Abam, Ezza, and other related neighboring states. The Abiriba and Aro are Brothers whose migration is traced to the Ekpa Kingdom, East of Cross River, their exact take of location was at Ekpa (Mkpa) east of the Cross River. They crossed the river to Urupkam (Usukpam) west of the Cross River and founded two settlements: Ena Uda and Ena Ofia in present-day Erai. Aro and Abiriba cooperated to become a powerful economic force.

The Igbo-Igala Wars were a series of conflicts between the Igbo people and the Igala people in pre-colonial Nigeria. The wars occurred in the 18th and 19th centuries and were primarily driven by territorial disputes, competition for resources, and political power struggles between the two ethnic groups. The Igbo and Igala engaged in military confrontations, with both sides vying for control over strategic territories. These wars were part of the complex dynamics and inter-ethnic relations that characterized the region during that historical period. The outcomes of specific battles and the overall impact of the Igbo-Igala Wars varied, and the conflicts eventually contributed to shaping the socio-political landscape of the region.

Igbo gods were numerous, but their relationship to one another and human beings was essentially egalitarian, reflecting Igbo society as a whole. A number of oracles and local cults attracted devotees while the central deity, the earth mother and fertility figure Ala, was venerated at shrines throughout Igboland.

The Kingdom of Benin had influence on the western Igbo, who adopted many of the political structures familiar to the Yoruba-Benin region, but Asaba and its immediate neighbours, such as Ibusa, Ogwashi-Ukwu, Okpanam, Issele-Azagba and Issele-Ukwu, were much closer to the Kingdom of Nri. Ofega was the queen for the Onitsha Igbo.

==== Akwa Akpa ====
The modern city of Calabar was founded in 1786 by Efik families who had left Creek Town, farther up the Calabar river, settling on the east bank in a position where they were able to dominate traffic with European vessels that anchored in the river, and soon becoming the most powerful in the region extending from now Calabar down to Bakassi in the East and Oron Nation in the West. Akwa Akpa (named Calabar by the Spanish) became a center of the Atlantic slave trade, where African slaves were sold in exchange for European manufactured goods. Igbo people formed the majority of enslaved Africans sold as slaves from Calabar, despite forming a minority among the ethnic groups in the region. From 1725 until 1750, roughly 17,000 enslaved Africans were sold from Calabar to European slave traders; from 1772 to 1775, the number soared to over 62,000.

With the suppression of the slave trade, palm oil and palm kernels became the main exports. The chiefs of Akwa Akpa placed themselves under British protection in 1884. From 1884 until 1906 Old Calabar was the headquarters of the Niger Coast Protectorate, after which Lagos became the main center.
Now called Calabar, the city remained an important port shipping ivory, timber, beeswax, and palm produce until 1916, when the railway terminus was opened at Port Harcourt, 145 km to the west.

== First contact with colonial powers, Nigeria as a &quot;slave coast&quot; ==

=== Trade in ivory, gold and slaves ===

The first encounters between the inhabitants of the coast and Europeans, the Portuguese, took place around 1472. The Portuguese began to trade extensively, particularly with the kingdom of Benin. The Portuguese traded European products, especially weapons, for ivory and palm oil and increasingly for slaves. The manillas that the Portuguese used to pay their Nigerian suppliers were melted down again in the Kingdom of Benin to create the bronze artworks that adorned the royal palace as a sign of affluence.

In 1553, the first English expedition arrived in Benin. From then on, European merchant ships regularly anchored on the West African coast, albeit at a safe distance from the mainland due to the mosquitoes in the lagoons and the tropical diseases they spread. Locals came to these ships on barques and conducted their business. The Europeans named the coasts of West Africa after the products that were of interest to them there. The &quot;Ivory Coast&quot; still exists today. The western coast of Nigeria became the slave coast. In contrast to the Gold Coast further west (today&#x27;s Ghana), the Europeans did not establish any fortified bases here until the middle of the 19th century.

The harbour of Calabar on the historic Bay of Biafra became one of the largest slave trading centres in West Africa. Other important slave harbours in Nigeria were located in Badagry, Lagos in the Bay of Benin and Bonny Island. Most of the enslaved people brought to these harbours were captured in raids and wars. The most &quot;prolific&quot; slave-trading kingdoms were the Edo Empire of Benin in the south, the Oyo Empire in the south-west and the Aro Confederacy in the south-east.

=== Caliphate of Sokoto (1804 to 1903) ===

In the north, the incessant fighting between the Hausa city-states and the decline of the Bornu Empire led to the Fulani gaining a foothold in the region. Originally, the Fulani mainly travelled with cattle through the semi-desert region of Sahel in northern Sudan, avoiding trade and mixing with the Sudanese peoples. At the beginning of the 19th century, Usman dan Fodio led a successful jihad against the Hausa kingdoms and founded the centralised caliphate of Sokoto. The empire, with Arabic as its official language, grew rapidly under his rule and that of his descendants, who sent invading armies in all directions. The vast landlocked empire linked the east with western Sudan and penetrated the south, conquering parts of the Oyo kingdom and advancing into the Yoruba heartland of Ibadan. The territory controlled by the empire included much of what is now northern and central Nigeria. The Sultan sent emirs to establish suzerainty over the conquered territories and to promote Islamic civilisation; the emirs in turn grew richer and more powerful through trade and slavery.

By the 1890s, the largest slave population in the world, about two million, was concentrated in the Sokoto Caliphate. Slaves were used on a large scale, especially in agriculture. When the Sokoto Caliphate disintegrated into various European colonies in 1903, it was one of the largest pre-colonial African states.

=== Expeditions along the Niger and in northern Nigeria ===

Around 1829, Hugh Clapperton&#x27;s expedition to Europe made it known that and where the Niger flows into the Atlantic. (He himself did not survive the journey, but died of malaria and dysentery. His documents were published by his servant Richard Lander). After this, there were numerous privately funded forays into the interior, such as the Niger Expedition of 1841 (in which a large number of the European participants quickly died of tropical diseases and which is reported in the diary of fellow traveller Samuel Ajayi Crowther, mentioned again in the next chapter).

Around 1850, the explorer Heinrich Barth travelled through northern Nigeria as part of a British expedition. Through his travels, Barth acquired special merits in the unprejudiced and respectful study of peoples and languages (he himself had the ability to learn African languages very quickly - he spoke and wrote Arabic fluently), as well as in African history. Barth also developed the hypothesis of a primeval wet phase in northern Africa.

=== British ban on the slave trade (from 1807) ===
Around 1750, British merchant ships shipped European goods to Africa, from there slaves to American plantations and products from there, such as tobacco, to Europe. However, from 1787 and increasingly from 1791, following reports of a slave revolt in Saint Domingue, the British Parliament debated the abolition of the slave trade.

With the prohibition of the slave trade (not slavery) by Britain in 1807, British interest in Nigeria shifted to palm oil for use in soaps and as a lubricant for machinery. However, abolition in Britain was one-sided, and many other countries took its place. European companies and smugglers continued to operate the Atlantic slave trade. The British West Africa Squadron attempted to intercept the smugglers at sea. The rescued slaves were taken to Freetown, a colony in West Africa originally founded by Lieutenant John Clarkson for the resettlement of slaves freed by Britain after the American Revolutionary War in North America.

==British colonial rule==
=== Crown Colony of Lagos (since 1861) ===

Britain&#x27;s West Africa squadron was tenacious in concluding anti-slavery treaties with coastal chiefdoms along the West African coast from Sierra Leone through the Niger Delta to the south of the Congo. However, the Nigerian coast proved difficult to control with its countless bays, meandering channels and rampant tropical diseases. Badagry, Lagos, Bonny and Calabar therefore remained lively centres of the slave trade. The fight against the slave trade by the British plunged the kingdom of Oyo into a crisis that ultimately led to civil war within the Yoruba region. It became a constant source of prisoners of war for the slave markets.

==== The consulate era ====
In 1841, Oba Akitoye ascended the throne of Lagos and tried to put an end to the slave trade. Some Lagos merchants resisted the ban, deposed the king and replaced him with his brother Kosoko. Britain intervened in this power struggle within the Lagos royalty by bombarding Lagos with the Royal Navy in 1851. The British thus replaced Kosoko with Akitoye again. In 1852, Akitoye and the British consul John Beecroft signed a treaty to free the slaves and grant the British permanent trade access to Lagos. However, Akitoye had difficulties implementing these resolutions. The situation therefore remained unsatisfactory for Britain.

The Royal Navy originally used the harbour of the island of Fernando Po (now Bioko, Equatorial Guinea) off Nigeria as a base of operations. In 1855, Spain claimed this harbour for itself. The Royal Navy therefore had to look for another naval base and chose the island of Lagos, which at 9 km2 was roughly the same size as the Orkney island of Papa Westray resp. five times the size of Coney Island or one seventh of Lower Manhattan and flooded several times per year, for this purpose. King Akitoye had died in the meantime. His brother Kosoko then threatened to take back control of Lagos with the help of French colonial troops. The American Civil War, which centred on the issue of slavery, made the power struggle for Lagos particularly urgent. As a result, Lord Palmerston (British Prime Minister) made the decision that it was expedient &quot;losing no time in assuming the formal protectorate of Lagos&quot;. William McCoskry, the acting consul in Lagos, together with Commander Bedingfield, convened a meeting with King Dosunmu, Akitoye&#x27;s successor, on board HMS Prometheus on 30 July 1861, at which the British intentions were explained. Dosunmu resisted the terms of the treaty, but under the threat of having Commander Bedingfield bombard Lagos, he relented and signed the Lagos Cession Treaty.

==== Lagos, naval base and growing commercial centre ====
Lagos proved to be strategically useful and became a major trading centre as traders could count on the protection of the Royal Navy to protect them from pirates, for example. British missionaries penetrated further inland. Brazilian freedmen settled in Lagos.

The British government introduced English laws in Lagos in 1862. There was the Court of Civil and Criminal Justice and the West African Court of Appeal. A Supreme Court was established in 1876. English common law, equity law and British law applied.

==== Push into the hinterland ====
After its experiences in the American War of Independence, Great Britain had limited itself to maintaining strategically placed bases around the world - such as Lagos - and avoided colonising regions far from the coast. This changed in the 1860s, when European powers embarked on the &quot;Scramble for Africa&quot;. Up until this point, European trade with the natives was conducted by ships that anchored off the coast and travelled on once the business was concluded. As tropical lagoons - unlike the open sea - offer favourable conditions for mosquitoes, which pass on tropical diseases, Europeans avoided going ashore. Because of the &quot;sleeping sickness&quot;, West Africa was nicknamed &quot;The white man&#x27;s grave&quot; until around 1850. The industrial production of quinine from the 1820s and its use as a prophylactic against malaria on a large scale changed the situation. The European naval powers were now able to establish permanent settlements in the tropics.

British missionaries penetrated the interior of the country. In south-eastern Nigeria, Hope Wadell and Mary Slessor fought against the customary killing of newborn twins, against the trial by ordeal in legal disputes and against the killing of the servants of deceased village elders (in order to be able to serve them in the afterlife) from 1845 onwards. Missionaries founded schools and enabled the careers of Eyo Ita, the first dark-skinned professor, and Nnamdi Azikiwe, the first Nigerian president, for example. In 1864, Samuel Ajayi Crowther became the first African bishop of the Anglican Church.

=== The Royal Niger Company, the monopolist on the Niger ===
The first years of European colonialism in Africa were characterised by the Austrian school of economics and the marginal utility theory it advocated, according to which the value of products manufactured in Europe was higher in markets that were not yet saturated, such as Africa (marginal utility), and trade with colonies was therefore more profitable than in one&#x27;s own country, for example. (The lower demand or purchasing power in the unsaturated market was not taken into account).

With the prospect of such high profits, various private trading companies promoted European influence in West Africa. One of them was the United Africa Company, founded by George Goldie in 1879, which was granted concessions for the entire area around the Niger Basin by the British government in 1886 under the name Royal Niger Company. The RNC marked out its territory as if it were a state in its own right and also negotiated treaties with the northern states, the Sokoto Caliphate, Nupe and Gwandu. It was also authorised to administer justice in its territories.

The RNC faced competition from three other groups, two French trading companies and another British group. A price war ensued, in which the RNC emerged victorious because in France the main proponent of African colonisation, Léon Gambetta, had died in 1882 and in 1883 considerable subsidies for these &quot;colonisation companies&quot; were cancelled by the mother country.

The RNC&#x27;s monopoly enabled Britain to resist French and German demands for the internationalisation of trade on the Niger during negotiations at the Berlin Conference in 1884–1885. Goldie succeeded in having the region in which the RNC operated included in the British sphere of interest. British assurances that free trade in Niger would be respected were hollow words: the RNC&#x27;s more than 400 contracts with local leaders obliged the natives to trade exclusively with or through the company&#x27;s agents. High tariffs and royalties drove competing companies out of the territory. When King Jaja of Opobo organised his own trading network and even began routing his own palm oil shipments to Britain, he was lured onto a British warship and exiled to St Vincent on charges of &#x27;breach of treaty&#x27; and &#x27;obstruction of trade&#x27;.

The RNC, which traded mainly in liquor and arms along the Niger, soon gained a bad reputation. Originally a way for the colonial office to bring the region under British control at little cost, it proved ineffective in promoting peace and stability. This was evident in the case of the Brass. They had no arable land of their own and traditionally lived from barter along the Niger. With the advent of the RCN, they had to pay license fees for imports and exports, which they could not afford. The Brass tried unsuccessfully to find alternative trade routes and began to starve. On December 29, 1894, they attacked the RNC headquarters in Akassa, looting much of the company&#x27;s property and destroying the warehouses and machinery. They even kidnapped several of the company&#x27;s employees, whom they later ritually ate as part of a spiritual ceremony, which they hoped would protect them against the rampant smallpox epidemic. The RNC now demanded massive protection for its employees from the Colonial Office, which the latter was not prepared to do and which contradicted the above-mentioned goal of low expenditure. The Colonial Office, which had been under the imperialist leadership of Joseph Chamberlain since 1895, increasingly wondered whether it would not be better to place the monopolist&#x27;s territory under direct colonial rule.

=== After the Berlin Congo Conference ===
The Berlin Congo Conference of 1885 defined the spheres of interest of the European colonial powers in Africa - without regard to ethnic or cultural conditions and without the participation of the people in the affected regions. For example, the territory of the Yoruba and that of the Hausa was divided by the demarcation between the British and the French. One must even assume that this was intentional. After all, this fragmentation naturally made it easier for the colonial rulers to dominate the indigenous people.

Although this avoided wars between Europeans over these colonies, it encouraged military advances by Europeans in Africa - with devastating consequences for the &quot;natives&quot;. This was due to the fact that a colonial power&#x27;s demarcated territories were only valid if that colonial power actually brought the area under its control (rather than another power first).

==== Conquest of Ijebu (1892) and Oyo (1895) ====
The United Kingdom now took military action wherever British traders or missionaries saw their fields of activity restricted. In 1892, the British conquered the Ijebu Empire on the outskirts of Lagos, an empire that had previously seceded from the Oyo Empire and refused to engage in trade with the British. Machine guns (of the Maxim type) were used for the first time. One Captain Lugard (see below) noted: &quot;On the West Coast, in the &#x27;Jebu&#x27; war, undertaken by Government, I have been told &#x27;several thousands&#x27; were mowed down by the Maxim.&quot;

In 1895, it was now not the British traders who called for military action, but missionaries in the Oyo Empire 50 km north of Lagos - which, even after its decline, was still one of the most powerful native states in present-day Nigeria and restricted the activities of the missionaries. The British bombed the capital Ibadan after Christian missionaries had brought their parishioners to safety. After the bombardment, the missionaries had a &quot;fair&quot; talk with the elector-king (Alaafin) of Ibadan and convinced him to submit to British protection. Anglican Christianity became the &quot;state religion&quot; in Oyo.

The conquered territory was administered as the British &quot;Protectorate of Yorubaland&quot;, while Lagos remained a colony. Residents of a colony were direct subjects of the Crown and could, for example, initiate legal proceedings against the colonial rulers. Residents of a protectorate did not have these rights.

==== The punitive expedition to the Kingdom of Benin in 1897 ====

Benin was a slave-owning state 150 kilometres east of Lagos and was one of the four largest kingdoms in what is now Nigeria. As early as 1862, there were reports of human sacrifices being made in Benin in times of need. Consul Burton described the kingdom as &quot;gratuitous barbarity which stinks of death&quot;.

In 1892, Great Britain concluded a contract with King (Oba) Ovọnramwẹn of Benin for the supply of palm oil. The latter signed reluctantly and shortly afterwards made additional financial demands. In 1896, Vice-Consul Phillips travelled to Ovọnramwẹn with 18 officials, 180 porters and 60 local workers to renegotiate the contract. He sent a delegate ahead with gifts to announce his visit - but the king sent word that he did not wish to receive the visit for the time being (King Ovọnramwẹn was aware of the fate of King Jaja of Opobo (see above), which could explain his lack of hospitality). Phillips nevertheless set off, but was ambushed, from which only two of his fellow travellers escaped alive, albeit seriously injured.

In February 1897, a punitive expedition was set up under Admiral Rawson. The Colonial Office in London ruled: &quot;It is imperative that a most severe lesson be given the Kings, Chiefs, and JuJu men of all surrounding countries, that white men cannot be killed with impunity...&quot; 5,000 British soldiers and sailors invaded the Kingdom of Benin, which barely defended itself but made the above-mentioned human sacrifices in its misery. The British forces encountered shocking scenes.

The Kingdom of Benin was incorporated into the British dominion. The British burnt down the royal palace of Benin and looted the bronze sculptures there, which are now a World Heritage Site. These were later auctioned off in Europe to finance the punitive expedition.

==== The West African Frontier Force ====
In 1897, Captain Lugard, who had already established and stabilised British colonial rule in Malawi and Uganda, was commissioned to set up an indigenous Nigerian force to protect British interests in the hinterland of the colony of Lagos and Nigeria against French attacks. In August 1897, Lugard organised the West African Frontier Force and commanded it until the end of December 1899. By September 1898, Britain and France had already settled their colonial disputes in the Fashoda Crisis and concluded the Entente cordiale in 1904, thus depriving the WAFF of its original purpose (However, the WAFF was to play a crucial role in the liberation of East Africa from (fascist) Italian rule during the Second World War in 1941. Colonel Lugard would significantly determine Nigeria&#x27;s development over the next 22 years.

==== First railway line ====
The first railway line in West and Central Africa - between Lagos and Abeokuta - was opened in Nigeria in 1898 (However, it was followed shortly afterwards by the British colony of Gold Coast/Ghana (1901), the German colonies of Cameroon (1901) and Togo (1905) and the French colonies of Dahomey (1906) and Ivory Coast (1907)). Forced labour was also (or mainly) used in the construction work. The staff of the railway company soon organised themselves and organised Nigeria&#x27;s first strike in 1904.

=== Southern Nigeria (since 1900) ===

==== The Royal Niger Company sells its land ====

Ten years after the &quot;Scramble for Africa&quot; - in the 1890s - it became increasingly clear that colonial rule in Africa was not a profitable endeavour and that the exploration and development of the continent, which had originally been initiated by the private sector, could only be continued through state-military measures and/or taxpayers&#x27; money. The above-mentioned marginal utility theory had given way to the theory of &quot;shrinking markets&quot;, a term coined by the economic theorist Werner Sombart. According to this theory, colonies were supposedly a necessary measure for industrialised countries to maintain sales and food supplies. The theory was adopted by both &quot;left-wing&quot; theorists such as Bukharin and Luxemburg (&quot;exploitation&quot; of the colonies) and &quot;right-wing&quot; thinkers such as Rosenberg and Hitler (&quot;Lebensraum&quot;). The RNC&#x27;s concession was revoked in 1899, and on 1 January 1900 it ceded its territories to the British government for the sum of £865,000. The ceded territory was merged with the small Niger Coast Protectorate, which had been under British control since 1884, to form the Southern Nigeria Protectorate, and the remaining RNC territory of around 1.3 million square kilometres became the Northern Nigeria Protectorate. 1,000 British soldiers were stationed in the Protectorate of Southern Nigeria, 2,500 in the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria and 700 in Lagos. The RNC was taken over by Lever Brothers in 1920 and became part of the Unilever Group in 1929. In 1939, the latter still controlled 80 per cent of Nigerian exports, mainly cocoa, palm oil and rubber.

==== The south-east ====
Due to the complex coastline in the Niger Delta, there were no closed dominions in south-east Nigeria until 1900, but rather a conglomerate of city-states that focussed on trade along the coast and inland along the Niger and Benue rivers. These city-states, which were united in the &quot;Aro Confederacy&quot;, had a religious centre in Arochukwu, the &quot;Juju Oracle&quot;. The form of decision-making in the city-states can be described as &quot;pre-democratic&quot;. In this region, which later became sadly known as &quot;Biafra&quot;, feudal rule was just as difficult to enforce as British colonial rule. (The later Biafra War of 1966 to 1970 was, among other things, a conflict between the democratic instincts of the south-eastern Igbo population and the authoritarian structures in the rest of Nigeria). The British defeated the Aro Confederacy in the Anglo-Aro War (1901–1902) and spread their influence along the coast to the south-east as far as German Cameroon. However, control of the Niger Delta remained an unsolved problem both for the British colonial rulers and later for independent Nigeria. Pirates, marauders, self-proclaimed freedom fighters and (since 1957) oil thieves still find enough nooks and crannies in the confusing landscape and under the jungle canopy to evade police action.

==== After 1902 ====

In 1906, the crown colony of Lagos was incorporated into the protectorate of Southern Nigeria.

In Lekki, near Lagos, the Nigerian Bitumen Corporation under businessman John Simon Bergheim discovered crude oil during test drilling in 1908. However, engineers were unable to prevent large quantities of water from being extracted as well. Oil production could therefore not be made profitable without additional investment. Bergheim&#x27;s fatal car accident in 1912 put an end to further exploration of Nigeria&#x27;s oil reserves for the time being.

In 1909, coal deposits were discovered and extracted in the south-east of Nigeria, in Enugu Two years later, this region, the Nti Kingdom, was placed directly under British colonial administration.

Despite the consecration of Samuel Ajayi Crowther as a bishop - or perhaps because of it - European and North American churches refused to accept dark-skinned clergymen, while the mainly Protestant missionary work in southern Nigeria was quite successful. This led to countless evangelistic and Pentecostal free churches, which are still omnipresent in the south today.

Nigeria&#x27;s first trade union, the Nigeria Civil Service Union, was formed in 1912, but would not be recognised until 1938, until which time its members were subjected to harassment.

=== Northern Nigeria (since 1900) ===

In 1900, Colonel Lugard was appointed High Commissioner of the newly created Protectorate of Northern Nigeria. He read the proclamation at Mount Patti in Lokoja that established the protectorate on 1 January 1900, but at this time the part of northern Nigeria that was actually under British control was still small.

==== North-east ====
In 1893, Rabih az-Zubayr, a Sudanese warlord, conquered the Kingdom of Bornu. The British recognised Rabih as &quot;Sultan of Borno&quot; until the French killed Rabih at the Battle of Kousséri on 22 April 1900. The colonial powers of Great Britain, France and Germany divided up his territory, with the British receiving what is now north-east Nigeria. They formally restituted the Borno Empire under British rule before the conquest in 1893 and appointed a scion of the ruling family of the time, Abubakar Garbai, as &quot;Shehu&quot; (Sheikh).

==== Northwest ====
In 1902, the British advanced north-westwards into the Sokoto Caliphate. In 1903, victory at the Battle of Kano gave the British a logistical advantage in pacifying the heartland of the Sokoto Caliphate and parts of the former Borno Empire. On 13 March 1903, the last vizier of the caliphate surrendered. By 1906, resistance to British rule had ended, and there would be no more war within Nigeria&#x27;s borders for the next 60 years. When Lugard resigned as commissioner in 1906, the entire region of present-day Nigeria was administered under British supervision.

==== The Protectorate of Northern Nigeria, the ‘Indirect Rule’ ====
After the British trauma of the siege of Khartoum, the colonial office favoured a more subtle approach in Islamic northern Nigeria. Lugard developed the concept of ‘Indirect Rule’, in which the colonial rulers left the traditional social structures intact. The fact that the Sokoto Caliphate of 1804 was a rule of the Fulani over the more numerous Hausa worked in his favour. By replacing the Fulani with the British, the new British rule in northern Nigeria could be implemented with minimal social upheaval.

The Sokoto Caliphate was formally allowed to continue and a new caliph, Attahiru II, was appointed in 1903. However, the sultan of the caliphate was now the governor of northern Nigeria, namely Lugard. Like his Fulani predecessors, he had the right to enact laws and appoint officials. Murray Last therefore refers to the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria as the ‘Colonial Caliphate’.

The local regents remained the emirs (several hundred in a three-tier hierarchy). The emirs were appointed by so-called ‘kingmakers’, whereby the sultan / British governor had the right of nomination. The British governor could depose emirs and Lugard did this ten times in 1906 alone. (Even in the Fourth Republic of Nigeria, emirs are occasionally deposed by state governors).

The emirs carried out British instructions (such as drafting recruits during the world wars) and presided over a court that spoke Islamic Maliki law but, following the opinion of the orientalist Joseph Schacht, took British law into ‘supplementary’ consideration. Within an emirate, the emir was therefore the employer of the judges (Alkali / Qadi) he appointed. Each emir was officially advised by a (British) ‘resident’, but was actually controlled. The British prevented torture as a method of interrogation, the cutting off of body parts for theft and stoning to death for adultery, for example. As the Maliki school of Islamic law makes no distinction between, for example, murder and involuntary manslaughter or the (criminal) offence of vandalism and (civil) damage to property, the British introduced the principle of malice intent. Death sentences had to be authorised by the Resident and children of slaves were now considered freeborn.

The emirs also collected taxes. Taxes such as the land tax kharaj and the poll tax jizyah no longer went to the emirs. Instead, each emir could retain 25 per cent of the taxes he collected for his ‘administration.’ The emirs thus had a financial and disciplinary motivation to be loyal to the British. Over the next few decades, Islamic law in northern Nigeria was continually restricted and by the 1940s only applied to family and inheritance law.

=== Unification into &quot;Crown Colony and Protectorate&quot; 1914, Governor Lugard ===
In 1912, after an interlude in Hong Kong, Lugard returned as governor of the two Nigerian protectorates. He merged the two colonies into one.

In the same year, Lugard, who found the inhabitants of Lagos rebellious, had a new seaport built in the south-east as a rival to Lagos and named it Port Harcourt after his superior in the Colonial Office. This seaport soon received a railway line to Enugu and shipped the coal mined there (from 1958 also crude oil) overseas.

==== Unification and yet separation ====
Lugard became the first governor of All Nigeria. The unification of Nigeria helped to give Nigeria common telegraphs, railways, customs and excise duties, uniform time, a common currency and a common civil service. Lugard thus introduced what was needed for the infrastructure of a modern state. However, the north and south remained as two separate countries with separate administrations.

In the south, English was the official language and was taught in schools, in the north Hausa. Southern Nigerians thus had access to English-language literature - from scientific literature to novels; their compatriots in the north had to make do with the much less comprehensive Hausa literature, which mainly dealt with philosophical and practical questions about Islam. (This imbalance can still be found today. In 2024, for example, there are 6.8 million articles in English and 101 articles in Hausa on Wikipedia). Southern Nigerians also began to engage in literary endeavours. Since 1950, there has been an independent and dynamic Nigerian literary scene, in which the German-Jewish professor at the University of Ibadan Ulli Beier played a major role.

The protectorate in the south financed itself with £1,933,235 in tax revenue (1912). The larger but underdeveloped Northern Protectorate collected £274,989 in the same year and had to be subsidised by the British to the tune of £250,000 annually. (This economic structure basically exists to this day.)

Regional differences in access to modern education soon became pronounced. Some children of the southern elite went to Britain for higher education. The imbalance between North and South was also reflected in Nigeria&#x27;s political life. For example, slavery was not banned in northern Nigeria until 1936, while it was abolished in other parts of Nigeria around 1885. Northern Nigeria still had between 1 million and 2.5 million slaves around 1900.

The attempt to enforce this system in the south also met with varying degrees of success. In the Yoruba region of the south-west, the British were able to tie in with existing or formerly existing kingdoms and their borders. However, as there were no hierarchical or even feudal structures in the south-east through which the British could indirectly rule, they appointed &quot;Warrant Chiefs&quot; with powers to act as local representatives of the British administration among their people. However, the British did not realise that in some parts of Africa the concept of &quot;chiefs&quot; or &quot;kings&quot; was not known. Among the Igbo, for example, decisions were made through lengthy debates and general consensus. The new powers vested in the Warrant Chiefs and reinforced by the native court system led to an exercise of power and authority unprecedented in pre-colonial times. The Warrant Chiefs also used their power to amass wealth at the expense of their subjects. The Warrant Chiefs were corrupt, arrogant and accordingly hated.

Governors were authorised to enact laws, otherwise English law applied. There was a Supreme Court, provincial courts and cantonal courts. Decisions of the Supreme Court could be appealed to the West African Court of Appeal. The provincial courts did not allow legal representation by lawyers and were staffed by administrative rather than judicial personnel.

==== Racial approaches in the army ====
From the outset, British colonial rule utilised - and reinforced - the differences between the ethnic groups present in order to offer itself to each side as a power-preserving factor and to be able to control the oversized colony with relatively little military expenditure (4,200 British soldiers). In the south, education, economy and civilisational achievements dominated, while in the north the military, feudalism and Islamic traditions were deliberately reinforced by the British. While officer positions were filled with British, enlisted men, non-commissioned officers and higher non-commissioned officer positions (sergeant majors) were exclusively filled with northern Nigerians, as these were regarded as &quot;warrior peoples&quot; in accordance with a popular doctrine practised in India since 1857 (e.g. Sikhs, Brahmins). Nigeria thus remained divided in many respects into the northern and southern protectorates and the colony of Lagos.

On Lugard, historian K. B. C. Onwubiko says: &quot;His system of Indirect Rule, his hostility towards educated Nigerians in the South, and his system of education for the North which aimed at training only the sons of the chiefs and emirs as clerks and interpreters show him as one of Britain&#x27;s arch-imperialists&quot;.

==== First World War ====
In August 1914, a British-Nigerian military unit attacked Cameroon. After 18 months, the German Imperial Schutztruppe surrendered to a superior force of British, Nigerians, Belgians and French. Some German units were able to escape to the Spanish and thus neutral Rio Muni (today&#x27;s Equatorial Guinea).

=== Time between the world wars ===
In the Treaty of Versailles, the German colony of Cameroon was divided up between the British and French as a League of Nations trust territory. In 1920, the western part of the former German colony of Cameroon was administratively annexed to British Nigeria as a League of Nations mandate territory under the name British Cameroons.
Lugard&#x27;s successor (1919–1925), Sir Hugh Clifford, was an avowed opponent of Lugard&#x27;s views and saw his role not in the efficient running of an apparatus of power, but in the development of the country. He intensified educational efforts in the south and repeatedly suggested to the Colonial Office in London that the power of the absolutist emirs ruling in the north should be limited - which was rejected. This further deepened the de facto division of the country into a northern, south-western and south-eastern part. In the north, the indirect rule aimed at preserving feudal rule continued to apply. In the south, an educated elite based on the European model emerged.

In 1922, Clifford established the Legislative Council. The four elected members were from Lagos (3) and Calabar (1). The Legislative Council enacted laws for the colony and the protectorate of Southern Nigeria. It also approved the annual budget for the entire country. The four elected members were the first Africans to be elected to a parliamentary body in British West Africa. The Clifford Constitution accordingly led to the formation of political parties in Nigeria. Herbert Macaulay, a newspaper owner and grandson of Samuel Ajayi Crowther (see above), founded the first Nigerian political party - the Nigeria National Democratic Party - in 1923. It remained the strongest party in the elections until 1939.

Nigeria&#x27;s (and the Commonwealth&#x27;s) contact with Great Britain was mainly maintained by mail ships of the Elder Dempster Lines. Until the end of 1967, such a mail ship sailed from Liverpool to Lagos every second Friday, alternating between the MS Apapa, the MS Accra and the MV Aureol. The journey took 13 days and went via Las Palmas, Bathurst (Banjul), Freetown, Monrovia and Tema with a five-day stopover in Lagos-Apapa. In addition to letters, parcels and newspapers, the mail ships also carried cargo and about 250 1st class passengers and 24 3rd class passengers, which was mainly used by nuns and Salvation Army officers (there was no 2nd class). The 1st class, which consisted of colonial officials, colonial army officers, business travelers and globetrotters, had its own lounge, library, bar and smoking room. There were generous baggage allowances, which Nigerian traders were happy to fully utilize on the return journey to Lagos.

The railway company paid very well due to the activities of the well-organised railway workers&#x27; union, but also due to competing employers - who were happy to poach skilled workers. High school graduates could train as train drivers or technicians (&quot;engineers&quot;) in six-year vocational school courses run by Nigerian Railways. During this training, the &quot;apprentices&quot; were paid and received an annual salary of £380 - £480 (as of 1935, in today&#x27;s money value about £38 - 48,000, significantly more than the average Nigerian income today). For the vocational students in Lagos, the railway company had specially provided a discarded but still functional 0-6-0 steam locomotive worth £4 million (in today&#x27;s money value), which they could use to learn how it worked.

In the meantime, it had become clear that colonies were neither &quot;profitable&quot; in the sense of the marginal utility theory described above, nor were they the solution to the problem of shrinking markets. Instead, Nigeria continued to gobble up taxpayers&#x27; money despite investments totalling several billions (like most African colonies) and hardly benefited the economy of the mother country. The new governor Graeme Thomson therefore introduced harsh austerity measures in 1925, including massive redundancies and the introduction of direct taxation.

The planned tax on women market traders, Graeme Thomson&#x27;s undiplomatic manner and the unpopular Warrant Chief system (see above) led to the &quot;Women&#x27;s War&quot; of 1929 among the Igbo. The women farmers destroyed ten native courts by December 1929, when the troops restored order in the region. In addition, the houses of chiefs and employees of the native courts were attacked, European factories looted, prisons attacked, and prisoners released. The women demanded the removal of the Warrant Chiefs and their replacement by native clan chiefs appointed by the people and not by the British. 55 women were killed by the colonial troops. Nevertheless, the Women&#x27;s War of 1929 led to fundamental reforms in the British colonial administration. The British abolished the system of &quot;Warrant Chiefs&quot; and reviewed the nature of colonial rule over the natives of Nigeria. Several colonial administrators condemned the prevailing administrative system and agreed to the call for urgent reforms based on the indigenous system. In place of the old Warrant Chief system, tribunals were introduced that took into account the indigenous system of government that had prevailed before colonial rule.

In 1933, the Lagos Youth Movement - later the Nigerian Youth Movement - was founded and took a more strident stance in favour of independence than the NNDP. In 1938, the NYM called for Nigeria to be granted British Dominion status, putting it on a par with Australia or Canada. In 1937, it was joined by Nnamdi Azikiwe, who had been exiled from Ghana/Gold Coast for seditious activities and who became publisher and editor-in-chief of the West African Pilot and father of Nigerian popular journalism. In 1938, the NYM protested against the cocoa cartel, which kept the purchase prices from farmers artificially low. In 1939, the NYM became the strongest party in the elections in Lagos and Calabar (no elections were held elsewhere).

In 1934, the Warrant Chiefs were abolished.
In 1935, the railway network reached its maximum expansion after the last investment projects were completed. It comprised 2,851 km of track with a gauge of 106.7 cm (&quot;Cape gauge&quot;) and 214 km with a gauge of 76.2 cm. This made the Nigerian railway network the longest and most complex in West and Central Africa. In 1916, a 550 m long railway bridge over the Niger River and in 1934 a bridge over the Benue River connected the regional railway networks. 179 mainline and 54 shunting locomotives were in use in 1934. Two maintenance and repair workshops in Lagos and Enugu employed about 2,000 locals. Rail transport was efficiently synchronised with maritime traffic. Travellers from mail steamers could board the &quot;Boat Express&quot; waiting right next to it at the port of Apapa in Lagos and reach Kano in the far north of Nigeria within 43 hours in sleeping and dining cars.

In 1931, the influential Nigerian Union of Teachers was founded under its president O. R. Kuti (the father of Fela Kuti). Nigeria&#x27;s first industrial union, the railway workers&#x27; union, was also founded in 1931 by lathe operator Michael Imoudu. In 1939, trade unions were permitted by decree by the colonial administration, but Imoudu was arrested in 1943. The railway workers&#x27; union was considered the most militant workers&#x27; union in Nigeria. Imoudu remained under house arrest until 1945.

Governor Cameron standardised the administration of the Northern and Southern Provinces in the 1930s by introducing a native appellate court system, High Courts and Magistrate Courts.

Bernard Bourdillon became governor of Nigeria in 1935 and remained so for eight years. He maintained close contact with local politicians, especially the NYM. Bourdillon, who always opposed any form of racism, was presumably the only governor in Nigeria who saw himself as a representative of the country&#x27;s interests - especially against prevailing views in the mother country. In the Colonial Office, he succeeded in 1938 in ensuring that the purchasing cartel for West African products such as cocoa, palm oil and peanuts was no longer supported by the British government. (The cartel included companies such as Unilever, Nestlé, Cadbury, Fry&#x27;s, Swiss African Trading Co, CFAO/Verminck, Union Trading Co/Basler Mission, G.B. Ollivant, Société commerciale de l&#x27;Ouest africain (SCOA), PZ Cussons/Zochonis, and others.) He involved the backward north more closely in political processes by creating a &quot;Central Council&quot;.

=== Second World War ===

==== Sinking of both mail ships to Nigeria ====
On 26 July 1940, one of the two mail ships connecting Nigeria with the colonial power, the MS Accra, was sunk off Ireland by the U-34 submarine. 24 people died.

On 15 November 1940, the sister ship on the same route, the MS Apapa, was sunk by a German FW 200 Condor on its way home off Ireland. 26 people lost their lives. An identical ship was given the same name and took over the same route service (see picture above).

==== Operation Postmaster ====
In 1942, Nigeria played a role in &quot;Operation Postmaster&quot;. In an adventurous manner, British special agents from Lagos captured Italian and German supply ships for submarines in the South Atlantic on the nearby but Spanish and therefore neutral island of Bioko and brought them to the home port of Lagos. The incident - in which no shots were fired - almost led to Franco&#x27;s Spain entering the war alongside the Third Reich and fascist Italy.

==== Rationing, price control, agricultural damage, education offensive ====
As early as 1939, the Nigeria Supply Board was set up to promote the production of rubber and palm oil, which were considered important for the war effort, at the expense of food production. The import of agricultural products was restricted.

From 1942, farmers were only allowed to sell rice, maize, beans etc. to government agencies and at a very low price under the &quot;Pullen Scheme&quot; so that the British Isles, which were cut off from the continent, could be supplied with food at low cost. However, this price control motivated farmers to either not sell their products at all or to sell them on the black market. Others may have resorted to growing unregulated, i.e. inedible, produce. Nigeria&#x27;s agriculture, which had already suffered from the European purchasing cartels (especially Unilever) and the Great Depression, was once again hampered in its development. In December 1942, consumer goods were rationed. (Rationing would last until 1948.) The transport of rice from Abeokuta to nearby Lagos was criminalised.

As a &quot;positive&quot; effect of the Second World War, the colonial administration trained war-critical skilled labour such as technicians, electricians, nurses, carpenters and clerks on a large scale during this period. New harbours and - for the first time - airports were built.

From October 1941 to January 1945, the 44th British General Hospital was stationed in Abeokuta, not far from Lagos. Soldiers, airmen and sailors could recover from their injuries here. There was also the 46th British General Hospital in Kaduna in 1942 and 1943.

==== Nigeria regiments, advance in Ethiopia ====
Throughout the war, 45,000 Nigerian soldiers served in the British forces in Africa and South-East Asia. Nigerian regiments formed the majority of the British Army&#x27;s 81st and 82nd West African Divisions. These divisions fought in Palestine, Morocco, Sicily and Burma. Nigerian soldiers also fought in India.

Three battalions of the Nigeria Regiment fought in the Ethiopian campaign against fascist Italy. On 26 March 1941, two motorised companies of the Nigeria Regiment advanced 930 km from Kenya to Daghabur within 10 days in Mussolini-controlled Ethiopia. On 26 March, the Nigeria Regiment captured Harar near Djibouti after an advance of 1,600 km in 32 days. At the time, this was the fastest military advance in world history. The advance also divided the fascist sphere of control in East Africa. In their hasty retreat, the Italian forces also left behind important ammunition and food depots. Addis Ababa was conquered by the Allies on 6 April. The Ethiopian campaign became the Allies&#x27; first major success against the Axis powers, not least due to the &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; of the Nigeria regiment. With East Africa (1.9 million km2), Italy lost an area in a few days that was larger than today&#x27;s Poland, Belarus, Ukraine and the Baltic states combined (1.3 million km2).

==== Ideas from India on independence ====

Fighting for the Allies were 600,000 volunteers from Africa, who had been promised equal brotherhood in arms with their Caucasian fellow soldiers. Nevertheless, they received less pay than their European or Asian counterparts. Corporal punishment (flogging) was also still a disciplinary punishment exclusively for black soldiers. In northern Nigeria, it is not necessarily possible to speak of &quot;voluntary&quot; recruits, as the local tribal chiefs were prescribed contingents of &quot;volunteers&quot; as part of the Indirect Rule. The absolutist rulers did not necessarily take into account the voluntary nature of the troops when providing them for service at the front. During the war, none of the commanding officers of the Nigerian Corps came from Nigeria. (The first Nigerian officers received their licences at the end of the war).

The Nigerian soldiers can hardly have been unaware of the contradiction between their reality and the propagated British interpretation of wanting to protect Africa from German and Italian colonisation. In addition, the Nigerian troops had been fighting alongside their Indian comrades for several years and there was already a strong and media-effective independence movement against British colonial rule in their homeland under Mahatma Gandhi. (India became independent just 22 months after the Second World War.) The exchange of ideas with the Indians striving for independence almost certainly contributed to the fact that Nigerian soldiers returned home from Burma in January 1946 with completely new ideas about an independent Nigeria, but with less patience.

In his victory speech, the commander of the troops in Burma, Sir William Slim, did not mention the Nigerian &quot;brothers in arms&quot; at all.

=== Post-war period, the road to independence ===
During the Second World War, the number of Nigerian trade union members had increased sixfold to 30,000. A general strike by railway workers for higher wages and for the release of imprisoned trade unionists such as Michael Imoudu (see above) made it clear in 1945 that the previous colonial administration had to be replaced by a new, national form of government.
The new governor of Nigeria, Richards, like Graeme Thomson and Bourdillon an ‘Oxford man’, introduced a constitution in 1946 that turned the country into a federation consisting of three states with uninspiring names such as ‘Northern/Western/Eastern Region’ and their own parliaments, governments and constitutions (the East had one house of parliament, the West and North a bicameral system). These would establish a central government for customs matters, common foreign policy and defence.

In retrospect, the Richards Constitution must be viewed critically and it was also viewed critically by Nigerians at the time. Money was collected in a campaign to enable the three most respected compatriots (newspaper publisher Macaulay, trade union leader Imoudu and journalist Azikiwe) to travel to London to present their views (ultimately unsuccessfully) to the Attlee government there. The British government in faraway London was apparently of the opinion that it knew better what was good for Nigerians than Nigerians themselves. After all, the constitution was slightly modified in 1951 and 1954; the last version, finally adopted by and named after the colonial minister Oliver Lyttelton, the son of the 4th Baron Lyttleton and later himself 1st Viscount Chandos, was the constitution with which Nigeria would become independent in 1960. Although there had been two conferences on the subject (one in London, the other in Lagos), these only had an advisory function: the constitution of independent Nigeria of 1960 was not the result of a constituent assembly of Nigerians, but a creation of British colonial ministers and governors, among whom (both) English aristocrats and Oxford graduates were still predominant at the time - representatives of the British upper class.

In this federation of just three federal states, the political process naturally became more of a conflict than a co-operation. Accordingly, the dominant political parties were organised along ethnic lines:
* The Northern Peoples Congress (NPC) represented the eponymous northern Nigerians, especially the Hausa, and was led by one of the highest nobles of the north, Ahmadu Bello,
* The National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC) represented the Igbo in the south-east after the death of Herbert Macaulay under the leadership of journalist Nnamdi Azikiwe, and
* The Action Group (AG) represented the Yoruba in the south-west and had Obafemi Awolowo as party leader.

In 1952, the regional parliaments were elected; for the Northern State, this was the first free election in its history. As expected, all three parties won a majority in their respective states and ethnic groups, with Bello, Azikiwe and Awolowo becoming prime ministers of their respective states. The governments of the North, South-West and South-East each constitutionally sent three ministers to the central government in Lagos. Accordingly, state revenues were also distributed according to a population proportion determined in Nigeria&#x27;s first census in 1953 (previously there had only been estimates). The precarious balance only lasted with the British as the &quot;tip of the scales&quot;, but for the nascent nation of Nigeria, without the British, it was only a preliminary stage that would last until one of the three ethnic groups no longer felt sufficiently represented in the federation. The main candidate for this was northern Nigeria and during the Kano riots of May 1953 secession was a distinct possibility. Many Hausa and Fulani favoured a separate, Muslim-majority state over the planned all-Nigeria. This was also due to the jurisprudence in the north. In the 1950s, civil and criminal law was still administered in northern Nigeria by emirs (i.e. by hereditary nobility, not by trained lawyers) in accordance with Sharia law. For northern Nigerians, it was hardly acceptable that this legal system should in future be given a higher instance in the form of the Supreme Court, in which non-Muslims and academically trained experts without a noble title would also be represented.

On the other hand, the south of Nigeria had co-financed the &quot;poor&quot; north in every fiscal year since 1914 (this has not changed until 2023) and even the most ardent advocates of a northern state did not dare to make the necessary tax increases palatable to their supporters. The funding dilemma initially delayed further endeavours for such a separate northern state and ultimately prevented it.

==== Discovery of oil in the south-east ====
In January 1956, the first oil field in Nigeria, the Olobiri Oilfield in the south-south of the country, was discovered.

The new Conservative government in the United Kingdom under Harold Macmillan had been advocating rapid decolonisation in the British Empire since 10 January 1957, following the debacle in the Suez Crisis and in view of the high costs of the loss-making colonial system. In just a few years, Great Britain granted independence to a good dozen African colonies. However, unlike nearby Ghana, for example, Nigeria had not fought for its independence; Nigerian sovereignty had virtually slipped out of Britain&#x27;s faint hand, exhausted by the Second World War, and fallen into the lap of the unprepared colony. The Nigerian independence movement lacked both the unifying experience of a struggle for freedom and the confirmation of a joint success against the former colonial power.

On 30 August 1957, the former transport minister Abubakar Tafawa Balewa became the first prime minister of Nigeria&#x27;s (weak) central government.

==== Late farewell to racial ideas ====
From 1958 onwards, the Nigerian army no longer recruited men exclusively from the north, as before, but from all over the country. In the following years, this meant that officer candidates from the south predominantly occupied the numerous positions of the outgoing British officers, as they were generally highly educated. This clashed with the older officers and sergeant majors, who had been taught that their people (Hausa, Fulani, Kanuri) belonged to the &quot;warrior peoples.&quot; and that representatives of the southern ethnic groups Yoruba and Igbo were not entitled to the new positions This conflict was to trigger the Biafra War in 1966.

The first all-Nigerian parliament was elected at the end of 1959. The parties, which saw themselves primarily as representatives of ethnic groups or regions, won according to their population strength. The Northern Peoples Congress won 148 of the 312 seats in the House of Representatives and formed a coalition with several minor parties to gain an absolute majority.In order to keep the &quot;Giant of Africa&quot; under control and partly because of racial ideology, the British colonial government treated the ethnic and social groups in the country very unequally for decades. In the north, absolutist-feudal systems, and until 1936 even slave-owning systems, had been supported financially and militarily, while in the south conditions had been created that at least did not appear too alien to the Europeans there. In addition, as in francophone countries, an upper class educated in the mother country had been brought up, which only looked down on other compatriots. In just a few years, this &quot;development split&quot; would undo all colonial investments and development efforts in the now independent Nigeria.

=== End of British colonial rule ===
On October 1, 1960, Nigeria was granted independence by an act of the British Parliament and admitted to the United Nations.

At first glance, the balance sheet of British colonial rule in Nigeria appears quite positive. The British put an end to human sacrifice, slavery, cannibalism, trials by ordeal and the killing of newborn twins and servants of the deceased in their colony. Islamic courts were forbidden to use torture for finding out the truth or stoning and mutilation as punishment. For the first time, intent of malice was taken into account in court proceedings. British missionaries founded schools, hospitals and libraries. British colonial officials created an efficient administration, a postal and telegraph network, paved roads and built ports and an extensive rail network. The colonial administration forced the Nigerians into the unavoidable cash economy with poll taxes. Unlike other colonial powers, it allowed a free press, political parties, trade unions, retail trade associations and women&#x27;s organizations. - The socio-political activist Deji Adeyanju therefore claimed in 2022 that Nigeria was better off under the colonial masters than under the new indigenous politicians. Like Adeyanju, some Nigerians today see the colonial era as a Belle Époque (beautiful era) in which righteous colonial officials administered the country, foreigners invested in Nigeria and money was still worth something.

However, the achievements listed above came from an autocratic system of rule that ran counter to traditional British achievements such as parliamentarianism or the rule of law and would never be accepted in the mother country. - The British only dared to introduce democracy for the whole of Nigeria when they realized that they themselves would soon be leaving. The governor enacted laws and even a constitution in 1946 without the participation of an elected parliament, without responsible ministers and against the justified protest of the most respected Nigerians (such an absolutist form of rule had already been abolished in Great Britain in 1688 with the Glorious Revolution). The lowest court instance did not allow representation by lawyers - a circumstance that the British had already abolished in their own country in 1275 and which denied the simpler Nigerians legal recourse from the outset. For Nigerians who grew up colonially, it must have seemed that civilizational progress was only possible under autocratic rule. Later Nigerian dictators from Agulyi-Ironsi to Abacha learned from the British governors and imitated them.

After 1960, however, Nigerians would have to experience that dictatorships of native officers who had acquired their education in the barracks of the British colonial army - unlike the autocratic administration by Oxford-educated British colonial civil servants with aristocratic pedigree - would not bring progress, but would lead to arbitrary rule, war and genocide.

The British-induced development gap between North and South, the British failure to exemplify democracy, the racial segregation practised by the British and the internal Nigerian racism reinforced by the British would in a few years undo all colonial investments and development efforts in the now independent Nigeria.

==Independence, First Republic (1960/1963–1966)==
On 1 October 1960, Nigeria gained full independence from the United Kingdom on the basis of a federal constitution, with three large states having a weak central government over them. NCNC Chairman Nnamdi Azikiwe replaced the colonial Governor-General James Wilson Robertson in November 1960 and Elizabeth II remained head of state for the time being.

The NPC and NCNC remained the governing parties, with the AG now in opposition. In this AG, the Yoruba party, there was a bitter power struggle between Obefemi Awolowo, who advocated a socialist course and sought to close ranks with the Soviet Union, and the conservative Prime Minister of the South-West, Samuel Akíntọ́lá, who wanted to improve co-operation with the Northern Party (NPC). This internal party dispute became so heated that the central government under Balewa had to impose a state of emergency on the south-west in May 1962. Akíntọ́lá eventually founded a new party, the NNDP, which would win the disputed 1964 elections in an electoral alliance with the NPC. From then on, Akíntọ́lá was seen in his region as a vicarious agent of the backward and feudal north, which would cost him his life in 1966.

On 1 June 1961, Nigeria received the &quot;North Cameroons&quot;, a Muslim-dominated strip of land on the border with Cameroon, following a referendum. The predominantly Christian inhabitants of the South Cameroons (bordering Biafra) decided against the Muslim-dominated and unstable Nigeria and in favour of belonging to Christian-dominated Cameroon. Both &quot;Cameroons&quot; were previously under UN administration; the Bakassi peninsula remained disputed.

Nigeria received a new constitution in 1963. Nigeria became a republic. The British system of government was retained. Abubakar Tafawa Balewa remained Prime Minister and British Queen&#x27;s Governor Nnamdi Azikiwe became president.

In 1964, a new House of Representatives was elected. The NPC and NNDP electoral alliance won 198 of the 312 seats The Yoruba and Igbo (who generated the lion&#x27;s share of tax revenue) now sat in opposition, while the Hausa/Fulani dominated politics and the lower ranks of the army up to the sergeant major ranks. Their northern state was larger than would have been suggested by the border between the three main ethnic groups or between the predominant denominations of Islam and Christianity. The Northern Region therefore included not only Muslim Hausa and Fulbe (for whom it was politically in favour, but who made up barely more than a quarter of the population), but also considerable minorities of Christians, followers of natural religions, Yoruba, Igbo and other minorities such as the Tiv. When the politically and militarily dominant Northern Region, which was chronically short of funds, wanted to impose a special tax, the Jizya, on the predominantly Christian Tiv in the same year, riots broke out in the affected region. 4,000 people were killed. One had to wonder how many lives would be lost if, for example, the much more numerous Igbo were to rise up and it was not about a special tax, but about the lucrative oil business in Igboland.

In the south-west, the unrest worsened in 1965 because the election results had apparently been falsified or were the result of intimidation and the government had halved the state-guaranteed producer prices for cocoa immediately after the election. There was arson and looting. Dozens of political opponents were tracked down in places like Ekiti or Ijebu-Ode (both not far from Lagos), doused with petrol and set on fire (&quot;Operation Wetie&quot;). Thugs controlled the streets. By the end of 1965, the south-west was in a state of complete anarchy.

On 1 May 1965, Sir Christopher Welby-Everard, the Chief of the General Staff of Nigeria and the last British officer from colonial times, retired. He was succeeded by Johnson Agulyi-Ironsi, an experienced officer, former military attaché in London and commander of the UN protection force in the Congo in 1964.
== Dictatorship and War ==

=== The January Coup, dictatorship Aguiyi-Ironsi (1966) ===
On 15 January 1966, six majors led by Patrick C. Nzeogwu (an intelligence officer), including five Igbo. The officers had received their commission in the UK in 1959-61 with honours at Sandhurst and Aldershot and recognised, not without some justification, the mismanagement and anarchy of the country they were returning to. The conspirators assassinated, among others, Head of Government Balewa and the Prime Ministers of the North and West, Bello and Akíntọ́lá. That the coup plotters also murdered the wives, secretaries and drivers of their originally intended victims at the same time casts a telling light on the perpetrators. Three of the conspirators, Nzeogwu, Ifeajuna and Onwatuegwu, also found enough time in the hectic hours of their attempted coup to locate and kill their superiors, Colonel Shodeinde, Brigadier General Maimalari and Brigadier General Ademulegun respectively, suggesting private revenge. Non-commissioned officer Daramola Oyegoke, who protested against this, was also murdered. Among the conspirators was Don Okafor, who, as commander of the head of government&#x27;s guard force, was personally responsible for his protection and was on ‘first name terms’ with him; his part in the murder of Balewa, whose body was left by the roadside, shows a particular perfidy. Among the 22 victims was only one Igbo.

Following the violent death of Prime Minister Balewa Parliamentary President Orizu, an Igbo, transferred government power to the army chief Agulyi-Ironsi, also an Igbo. With his first decree, he abolished the constitution and freedom of the press and dissolved parliament. Remaining ministers were forced to resign, and from then on, the head of state ruled by means of directives issued by his staff. Ironsi abolished the three federal states and made Nigeria a unitary state for the first time: a country in which all laws, all taxes etc. applied equally everywhere, without regional variations. Nigeria was to be forced to progress by directive, so to speak. This was inevitably viewed badly in the backward north. In addition, the military government was reluctant to take action against Igbo involved in the coup. Ironsi was Igbo himself and used the more highly educated Igbo in the north to implement the supposedly progressive decisions of the central government on the ground. For other ethnic groups, it must have seemed as if the Igbo wanted to take over the country.

=== Another coup, dictatorship Gowon, Biafra (1966–1975) ===


It should be remembered that the previously murdered Ahmadu Bello was not only the Prime Minister of the northern state, but also a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad and of the ‘black Napoleon’ dan Fodio, as well as Sardauna (crown prince) of the Sokoto Caliphate, a dynastic and religious title. For Muslims in the north, the complete clarification and rigorous atonement of the highly outrageous act was absolutely non-negotiable. From their point of view, the monstrosity of Bello&#x27;s murder authorised a hitherto unknown level of revenge and violence. Ironsi, however, did not distance himself from Bello&#x27;s killers (some of whom were from his personal work environment) and allowed investigations into them to fizzle out. Ironsi&#x27;s omission was to cost him dearly.

On 29 July 1966, soldiers staged a coup in Abeokuta in the south-west and captured Agulyi-Ironsi, who was visiting nearby Ibadan. When he refused to answer questions from lower-ranking officers about his role in Bello&#x27;s murder, he was taken to a forest near Lalupon by Major Danjuma&#x27;s subordinates and shot. Theophilus Danjuma&#x27;s co-conspirators included Murtala Muhammed, Bukar Dimka, Shehu Yar&#x27;Adua, Muhammadu Buhari, Ibrahim Babangida and Sani Abacha, a list of future dictators of Nigeria (and those who wanted to become such) - at that time still mostly 1st and 2nd class lieutenants. Pogroms against the Igbo broke out across the country, with sources claiming 30,000 victims, mostly children. In this situation, the coup plotters appointed Lieutenant Colonel Yakubu (&quot;Jack&quot;) Gowon as the new military and state leader and reintroduced federalism. Gowon did not belong to any of the three predominant ethnic groups and was confronted with the task of keeping the three divergent parts of his country and ethnic groups together and putting an end to the pogroms. Under these circumstances, it seemed unlikely that Yakubu Gowon&#x27;s rule would last comparatively long - nine years. However, one of the worst humanitarian disasters of modern times occurred during this period: the Biafra War.

In September 1966, the pogroms against the Igbo reached their peak. An estimated 1 million Igbo fled from all over the country to the south-east, where they believed they were safe.

In May 1967, the governor of the eastern region, Lieutenant Colonel Emeka Ojukwu, proclaimed it an independent state, the &quot;Republic of Biafra.&quot; Following this declaration of independence, the remaining Nigerian forces attacked Biafra at Garkem on 6 July 1967. Nigeria was ill-prepared for this situation due to the liquidation of leading officers during the previous coups. As a result, the Biafran forces were able to advance westwards to Benin City in August 1967. Biafra was besieged and cut off from trade without either side being able to make decisive military movements. It was not until December 1969 that Colonel Obasanjo advanced to Umuahia with 30,000 troops, splitting Biafra in two. This decided the war. The hostilities finally ended after 30 months in January 1970.

The Biafra region, which had already had to cope with an unprecedented wave of refugees, was no longer able to feed its inhabitants due to the trade blockade. Estimates of the number of deaths caused by hunger and acts of war during the civil war range from one to three million. Photographs of starving children in Biafra went around the world and characterised the image of post-colonial Africa.

In addition to acts of war and hunger, genocides against unarmed civilians claimed numerous victims. These include, for example, the massacre of Asaba. When Nigerian troops conquered the Igbo-majority town in the Midwest in October 1967, the citizens were ordered to attend an ordered celebration in the town&#x27;s central square. The 4,000 unarmed civilians who were gullible enough to comply were separated by gender; the men were murdered on the spot in front of the women and children.

John Martin, caterer on a mail steamer and British citizen, remembers terrible events in September 1967: &quot;Arriving in Lagos and before the ship could ‘clear’, the army came on board and assembled all the Africans on board, passengers and crew in the Dining Saloon. They started to segregate them with an officer identifying nationality and Nigerian tribal affiliations – even by cheek scarring. Our Master-at-Arms was recruited to help. The Master-at-Arms was a Nigerian who travelled between Lagos and Freetown and return, overseeing the deck passengers who we picked up along the coast from Freetown – and those travelling back from Lagos. In effect he was the security officer ensuring these passengers had bonafide tickets and they didn’t stray into other passenger areas of the ship. (...) Despite the efforts of Captain Hutchinson insisting the crew were under his protection, claiming the authority of the British Flag, those identified as Igbo’s, the last being the Master-at-Arms himself, were taken off the ship under armed escort. The last we saw of them was being taken round back of the sheds. Gunfire was heard. Bodies were seen floating in the lagoon on an outgoing tide.&quot;

Events like these have never been processed. Leading officers of the Nigerian army during the civil war, such as Obasanjo, Babangida and Buhari, were even head of state, some even several times, and continue to be influential in Nigerian politics (as of 2024). Igbo remain second-class Nigerians to this day, possibly due to their high level of assimilation to Western culture and high educational qualifications.

The federal government was only able to defeat the insurgents in Biafra with great difficulty. The fact that they succeeded in the end was mainly due to the officers Murtala Muhammed and Olusegun Obasanjo, who themselves became dictators a few years later after Gowon&#x27;s overthrow.

Gowon had increased the number of federal states in Nigeria to 12 in 1967. With this strategic move, he blocked the realistic opportunity for both the south-east and the north to establish their own state, won over the minorities (to which he himself belonged and which make up 30% of the Nigerian population) and, by skilfully drawing the borders of the federal states, deprived the Igbo of control over both the oil wells and the seaports. This fundamentally changed the federal character of Nigeria, but it remained federal.

Nigeria joined OPEC in 1971. It experienced a dynamic economic boom during the 1974 oil crisis, which mainly triggered inflation, and was confronted with declining demand and mass unemployment in 1975. During these years, the north also experienced the worst drought since 1914. Dictator Gowon&#x27;s 1972 nationalisation decree closed many sectors of the Nigerian economy to all foreign investment and banned foreign participation beyond a minority stake in several other areas. This decree proved detrimental to investment in the Nigerian economy.

On 1 October 1974, in contradiction to earlier statements, Gowon declared that Nigeria was not ready for civilian rule until 1976, and he postponed the handover date indefinitely.

Under Gowon, perceived corruption increased, especially among military government officials. Although Gowon himself was never implicated in the corrupt practices, he was often accused of turning a blind eye to the activities of his associates and acquaintances. Newspapers reported on bribery and nepotism. Theft and embezzlement in hospitals and orphanages outraged the Nigerian public. Medicines imported by officials at full price, which had long expired, showed that those involved were also indifferent to human lives.

In addition, the formerly efficient administration became bloated and was overburdened even with simpler tasks. The mismanagement in Gowon&#x27;s administration culminated in the infamous &quot;cement armada&quot; in the summer of 1975, when the port of Lagos was overcrowded with hundreds of ships trying to unload cement. Representatives of the Nigerian government had signed contracts with 68 different international suppliers to deliver a total of 20 million tonnes of cement to Lagos in one year, even though the port could only take one million tonnes of cargo per year. The poorly drafted cement contracts contained demurrage clauses that were very favourable to the suppliers, so that the bill would skyrocket as the ships waited in port to unload (or even as they waited in their home ports for permission to leave for Nigeria). The Nigerian government only realised the extent of its mistake when the port of Lagos became so congested that basic supplies could no longer be guaranteed. Their attempts to cancel the cement contracts and impose an emergency embargo on all incoming ships kept the country busy with litigation around the world for many years, including a 1983 U.S. Supreme Court decision.

Due to the turmoil of the Second World War and Nigeria&#x27;s looming independence, the infrastructure, e.g. the railway network, was no longer expanded and was no longer maintained after the outbreak of the Biafra War in 1966. Nigeria&#x27;s railway system became increasingly dilapidated (this also applies to the railway networks of other West African countries after their independence). As a result, by the 1990s, Nigeria&#x27;s railway system had deteriorated to the point where it was almost completely non-functional. Large sections of track were missing or unusable, locomotives and rolling stock were in an advanced state of disrepair, and the system could no longer provide reliable service. Expertise was lost, training institutions no longer received funding and ceased operations. (It was not until 2009 that Nigeria began to renovate and lay new tracks again for billions of euros with Chinese aid (see Nigerian Railway Corporation), but the country will still be operating barely more than the colonial line length in 2023).

Scandals and the obvious mismanagement caused dissatisfaction within the army. On 29 July 1975, when Gowon attended an OAU summit in Kampala, a group of officers led by Colonel Joe Nanven Garba announced his overthrow.

=== Dictatorship Murtala Muhammed (1975–1976) ===
On 29 July 1975, General Yakubu Gowon was overthrown while attending the 12th summit of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) in Kampala, Uganda.

Murtala Muhammed assumed power as the new military head of state. He was considered brilliant and bold, but also unpredictable and impetuous.

Murtala Muhammed also took control of the two largest newspapers in the country - Daily Times and New Nigerian; all media in Nigeria were now under state control. He also took control of the remaining state universities.

In a short time, Murtala Muhammed&#x27;s policies gained wide popular support and his determination made him a popular hero. However, his highly popular but impulsive style of governance and often televised speeches with the frequent addition of &quot;with immediate effect&quot; also earned him criticism among the country&#x27;s top officials. His ad hoc declarations often left his officials unprepared, lacking details and lacking the financial resources to implement his ideas.

Shortly after taking power, Muhammed realised that state revenues were falling due to low oil production. Global demand for oil had collapsed, spare parts had become more expensive and labour costs had risen. As a result, the military government lacked the funds to fulfil the Nigerian development plan for 1975.

Murtala Muhammed then carried out a dramatic downsizing of the bloated and inefficient civil service (&quot;Operation Deadwood&quot;). More than 10,000 government employees were dismissed without transitional benefits. Numerous civil servants were tried for corruption and a military governor was executed for gross abuse of office However, due to the drastic nature of the purge, accusations were made that personal scores were also settled in the process of streamlining the civil service.

On 13 February 1976, Muhammed was driving to work in his unarmoured Mercedes-Benz 230.6, unaccompanied by bodyguards or the like. Shortly after 8 a.m., his car was driving slowly through the notorious Lagos traffic when a group of soldiers emerged from a neighbouring petrol station, ambushed the vehicle and murdered the unarmed Muhammed. This was part of an attempted coup d&#x27;état by Lieutenant Colonel Dimka, who was executed on 15 May 1976 for treason. Muhammed&#x27;s successor was the Chief of Staff of the Supreme Headquarters, Olusegun Obasanjo, who had escaped assassination through a case of mistaken identity. The Murtala Muhammed International Airport in Lagos is named after the still popular military ruler, who is also (inaccurately) referred to as the &quot;Nigerian Kennedy&quot;.

=== Dictatorship Obasanjo (1976–1979) ===

Olusegun Obasanjo formed a triumvirate with two other generals and increased general repression. The most famous example is probably the raid on the home of musician Fela Kuti, during which female family members were raped and his mother was thrown out of a window, suffering fatal injuries. Trade union activities were restricted. Dimka and 37 of his comrades-in-arms were executed.

Obasanjo swiftly convened a committee to draft a new constitution, modelling it on the US system. Even before a result was achieved, Obasanjo increased the number of federal states to 19. The draft of the new constitution was very similar to today&#x27;s Nigerian constitution and summarised the position of the head of state and the head of government. The powerful position of the president was balanced by two chambers. The constitution was promulgated in September 1978. The five parties that ran their own presidential candidates in the 1979 election showed less vision than the above committee and focussed - as in the First Republic, but against Obasanjo&#x27;s express wishes - primarily on representing ethnic groups. Despite the past 20 years and a survived civil war, the new party landscape was to a certain extent a copy of the old one:

* The NPN represented the Northern Nigerians and thus took over the legacy of the NPC,
* the NPP represented the South-East (like the NCNC mentioned above, again with Chairman Azikiwe) and
* the UPN represented the South West (like the AG mentioned above, again with Chairman Awolowo).

Accordingly, each party won by over 80 per cent in the state where it represented the majority of the population. The ethnic group that had the largest share of Nigeria&#x27;s population - still Northern Nigerians - won the election with its party and provided the new president, Alhaji Shehu Shagari. So before it had begun, the Second Republic was already suffering from the same problem as the First Republic: a party landscape that had been formed along ethnic lines rather than ideological or programmatic standpoints.

== The Second Republic (1979–1983), President Shagari ==

On 1 October 1979, Shehu Shagari was sworn in as the first President and Commander-in-Chief of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. As his party, the NPN, had barely more than 35% of the seats in the Senate and the House of Representatives, Shagari formed a coalition with the NPP, which had become the third strongest party in the parliamentary elections. This coalition had a slim majority in both chambers.

Shagari relied on large-scale industry and, in agriculture, on the &quot;Green Revolution&quot; that corresponded to the current state of science at the time: preference for large farms, intensive use of fertilisers and pesticides, use of machinery, drilling of deep groundwater, etc. The Green Revolution is viewed rather critically today (2023).

=== Laying of the foundation stone for the Ajaokuta steelworks ===
In 1980, Shagari laid the foundation stone for the Ajaokuta steelworks, which was to be built by a Soviet state-owned company near the Niger River and the Itakpe ore mine. By 1991, 98% of the steelworks, which was to be built to Soviet standards, i.e. on a very large scale, had been constructed. However, by 1991 the Soviet Union had dissolved, world demand for steel had changed unfavourably and technology had developed further. The steelworks was not completed and had still not started operations in 1994 - which, according to Russian Wikipedia articles on the subject, was entirely due to Nigeria. Ajaokuta was seen as a prime example of failed development aid in West Africa. However, by 2017, 40 of the 43 plants were gradually able to start operations. In 2023, Ajaokuta Steel produced around one sixth of the amount of steel produced by the UK. Three other Shagari-era steel plants in Jos, Oshogbo and Katsina appear to no longer be active.

=== Construction of social housing ===
Shagari began the construction of 200,000 social housing units across the country, of which 25,000 were completed during his term of office. A 2017 study by Nnamdi Azikiwe University in Awka criticised the lack of planning (the completed flats were not connected to water, electricity, sewerage or transport or were located in an area with no demand for new flats). The new flats were often never occupied, were not managed and soon fell into disrepair. Shagari&#x27;s successors did not pursue the completion of the remaining flats, which also fell into disrepair.

=== Deportation of West African immigrants ===
In January 1983, Shagari decided to deport West African immigrants under the slogan &quot;Ghana must go!&quot; in the face of an economic slump. An estimated 2 million Ghanaians had to leave the country suddenly and with malice, leaving most of their belongings behind. Provisional bags and suitcases became the symbol of the forced exodus (they are still called &quot;Ghana bags&quot; today). It is not without a certain irony that social and economic development in Ghana after 1983 was to be much more favourable than in Nigeria and that Nigerians, for their part, would look for work and income in Ghana.

=== Economic isolationism ===
Shagari reacted to falling oil prices and the resulting economic downturn by restricting import licences and increasing customs duties. He rejected cooperation with the International Monetary Fund[165].

=== Education, women&#x27;s emancipation, environmental issues ===
Under Shagari, the education system in Nigeria improved. For example, a number of universities were founded. He also promoted the inclusion of women in political life. He filled many offices with women.

=== Re-election ===
Similar to the First Republic, the Northern Party won an absolute majority in parliament after a few years in government and no longer needed coalition partners.

=== Shagari&#x27;s fight against corruption, General Buhari ===
Although Shehu Shagari is cleared of personal involvement in corrupt practices, the Second Republic was plagued by allegations of corruption, including allegations of electoral fraud in the 1983 elections. In his second term, Shagari made attempts to curb corruption through the new Ministry of National Guidance under Yusuf Maitama Sule, which was created solely for this purpose. A new programme called Ethical Revolution was introduced, one of whose initiatives was the famous &quot;war against indiscipline&quot; launched under General Muhammadu Buhari. The ministry was only in office for three months before a coup d&#x27;état in 1983 made Buhari the sole ruler.

== Buhari (1983–1985) and Babangida (1985–1992), two unequal dictators ==
The military coup on 31 December 1983 was coordinated by leading officers of the Nigerian military and led to the overthrow of the government and the installation of Major General Muhammadu Buhari as head of state. The inauguration of Muhammadu Buhari was generally seen as a positive development Buhari promised reforms, but his government performed little better than that of his predecessor. General Buhari was overthrown in 1985 by a military coup led by General Ibrahim Babangida. Buhari would be elected president 30 years later, in the Fourth Republic and now democratically purged.

Babangida was more far-sighted than Nigeria&#x27;s previous military leaders, loosening state control over the press and releasing a number of prisoners. However, he faced the same economic problems that Buhari had faced and the same discontent in the country.

Babangida soon gained a reputation as a clever politician. He asked the Nigerian people whether their country should accept a financial aid package worth billions from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). When, as he had expected, the Nigerian people refused to accept the package, Babangida suspended talks with the IMF. He then offered Nigerians his own economic recovery programme - which included many of the harsh measures proposed by the IMF - and convinced Nigerians to accept it. As a result of this programme, Nigeria received loans from banks and gained economic credibility in Western countries.

According to Forbes, shortly before the Second Gulf War, Babangida diverted twelve billion US dollars in unplanned income (&quot;oil windfall&quot;) into his own pocket (the oil price jumped from 15 to US$41.15/barrel within weeks in 1990 and then plummeted to the old value). However, these funds could never be found. Nevertheless, the additional profit of US$12 billion calculated by Forbes could only have been realised if Nigeria had sold the entire annual production volume of 630 million barrels on the world market exactly on 27 September 1990 at the annual high price of US$41/barrel - 19 more than the officially stated annual average of US$22/barrel (630 million barrels × US$19/barrel = US$11.97 billion). This is unlikely given the sluggishness of the state oil company NNPC and the lack of ex post information for those involved. Babangida commented in 2022 on the above allegations that he and his associates were &quot;saints.&quot; This account should be evaluated as cautiously as Forbes&#x27; calculation.In December 1991, the centrally located Abuja became the capital.

The Babangida regime ensured the establishment of a state security apparatus; it survived two coup attempts. General Mamman Vatsa and Major Gideon Orkar were executed, and the critical journalist Dele Giwa was murdered. In 1989, Babangida promised the transition to the Third Nigerian Republic. Babangida survived the 1990 coup attempt and postponed the promised return to democracy until 1992.

Babangida&#x27;s intelligence cannot be denied and his foreign and economic policies benefited Nigeria. The security apparatus and secret service he set up may be understandable in view of the fate of military ruler Murtala Mohammed - who was shot unarmed and without bodyguards in an unarmoured limousine in 1976 - but it went beyond the vital protection of the president and did not shy away from political murder. Babangida thus created the instruments with which his successor Abacha led Nigeria into its darkest epoch after the civil war.

==The Abortive Third Republic==
Head of State Babangida promised to return the country to civilian rule by 1990 which was later extended until January 1993. In early 1989, a constituent assembly completed a constitution and in the spring of 1989 political activity was again permitted. In October 1989, the government established two parties, the National Republican Convention (NRC) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP); other parties were not allowed to register.

In April 1990, mid-level officers attempted unsuccessfully to overthrow the government and 69 accused plotters were executed after secret trials before military tribunals. In December 1990, the first stage of partisan elections was held at the local government level. Despite the low turnout, there was no violence and both parties demonstrated strength in all regions of the country, with the SDP winning control of a majority of local government councils.

In December 1991, state legislative elections were held and Babangida decreed that previously banned politicians could contest in primaries scheduled for August. These were cancelled due to fraud and subsequent primaries scheduled for September also were cancelled. All announced candidates were disqualified from standing for president once a new election format was selected. The presidential election was finally held on 12 June 1993, with the inauguration of the new president scheduled to take place 27 August 1993, the eighth anniversary of President Babangida&#x27;s coming to power.

In the historic 12 June 1993 presidential elections, which most observers deemed to be Nigeria&#x27;s fairest, early returns indicated that wealthy Yoruba businessman M. K. O. Abiola won a decisive victory. However, on 23 June, Babangida, using several pending lawsuits as a pretence, annulled the election, throwing Nigeria into turmoil. More than 100 were killed in riots before Babangida agreed to hand power to an interim government on 26 August 1993. He later attempted to renege on this decision, but without popular and military support, he was forced to hand over to Ernest Shonekan, a prominent nonpartisan businessman. Shonekan was to rule until elections scheduled for February 1994. Although he had led Babangida&#x27;s Transitional Council since 1993, Shonekan was unable to reverse Nigeria&#x27;s economic problems or to defuse lingering political tension.

== Dictatorship Abacha (1993–1998) ==

Shonekan&#x27;s transitional government, the shortest in the country&#x27;s political history, was overthrown in 1993 by a coup d&#x27;état led by General Sani Abacha. This was the seventh Nigerian coup d&#x27;état in less than 30 years and also (as of 2023) the last military coup in the country.

=== Absolute power, reign of terror ===
Unlike previous military dictators in Nigeria such as Gowon, Murtala, Obasanjo or Buhari, Abacha can only be described as a reign of terror.

After dissolving the government and parliament in November 1993, he also made himself chief justice in September 1994 and thus gained absolute power. Abacha put together a personal security force of 3,000 men trained in North Korea. Nigerian police forces were retrained on a large scale. The state ruthlessly cracked down on perceived political opponents.

In 1995, the writer and civil rights activist Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other defendants (the Ogoni Nine) were executed in Port Harcourt after a spectacular show trial that sparked violent international protests. Nigeria was expelled from the Commonwealth of Nations with immediate effect. The winner of the 1993 presidential election, Moshood Abiola, was arrested and died in unexplained circumstances, in any case due to lack of medical care after four years in prison. Former army chief of staff Shehu Musa Yar&#x27;Adua was also arrested - he also died in prison. Former military ruler Olusegun Obasanjo was also arrested for treason and accused of planning a coup d&#x27;état together with General Oladipo Diya. The Nobel Prize winner Wole Soyinka was charged in absentia with high treason. Even the fatal plane crash of Sani Abacha&#x27;s eldest son Ibrahim on 17 January 1996 and the subsequent assassinations of relatives of the 14 other accident victims were allegedly carried out on the dictator&#x27;s orders; these rumours were strengthened by the fact that Abacha did not release the 15 bodies.

=== Descent into a narco-state ===
During his five years in office, Abacha&#x27;s lack of co-operation in anti-narcotics operations led to the repeated revocation of US certification to combat drugs under Section 481 of the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA). This officially made Nigeria a narco-state. The US voted against Nigeria in six multilateral development banks and refused to provide any assistance to Nigeria under the FAA and the Arms Control Export Act. Direct flights from the US to Nigeria remained banned due to security concerns.

=== Embezzlement of state funds, the &quot;Abacha loot&quot; ===
Under Abacha, the misappropriation of public funds reached epic proportions and is known as the &quot;Abacha loot.&quot; Abacha&#x27;s National Security Adviser, Alhaji Ismaila Gwarzo, submitted fake funding requests for national security, which Abacha approved. The funds were usually sent in cash or travellers cheques from the Central Bank of Nigeria to Gwarzo, who brought them to Abacha&#x27;s house. An estimated $1.4 billion in cash was handed over in this way.

In a list of the ten most self-enriching heads of state, Abacha and his family rank fourth. They are alleged to have embezzled between 1 and 5 billion dollars.

On 7 August 2014, the US Department of Justice announced that $480 million had been seized from the Nigerian government, the largest amount in the country&#x27;s history. Jersey&#x27;s Civil Asset Recovery Fund discovered more than $267 million in funds allegedly laundered through the US banking system and deposited into an account in Jersey (£210 million). The US Department of Justice, the Jersey courts and the Nigerian government made a civil forfeiture of the funds, which will be divided between these countries.

=== End of petrol production for 28 years ===
Due to poor maintenance, incompetent management and the exodus of skilled labour, the last of Nigeria&#x27;s four (state-owned) oil refineries ended its production of petrol in 1996. By September 2024 (when the privately owned Dangote refinery began operations), the country had to import 100% of its refined fuels in exchange for hard currency despite its vast oil reserves, not counting the production of a few thousand very small and extremely dirty illegal refineries in the Niger Delta.

== Democratisation and federalism in 1998 ==
Abacha died of heart failure on 8 June 1998 and was replaced by General Abdulsalami Abubakar. The military Provisional Ruling Council (PRC) under Abubakar commuted the sentences of those accused in the alleged coup during the Abacha regime and released almost all known civilian political detainees. Pending the promulgation of the constitution written in 1995, the government observed some provisions of the 1979 and 1989 constitutions. Neither Abacha nor Abubakar lifted the decree suspending the 1979 constitution, and the 1989 constitution was not implemented. The judiciary system continued to be hampered by corruption and lack of resources after Abacha&#x27;s death. In an attempt to alleviate such problems Abubakar&#x27;s government implemented a civil service pay raise and other reforms.

In August 1998, Abubakar appointed the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) to conduct elections for local government councils, state legislatures and governors, the national assembly, and president. The NEC successfully held elections on 5 December 1998, 9 January 1999, 20 February, and 27 February 1999, respectively. For local elections, nine parties were granted provisional registration with three fulfilling the requirements to contest the following elections. These parties were the People&#x27;s Democratic Party (PDP), the All People&#x27;s Party (APP), and the predominantly Yoruba Alliance for Democracy (AD). The former military head of state Olusegun Obasanjo, freed from prison by Abubakar, ran as a civilian candidate and won the presidential election. The PRC promulgated a new constitution based largely on the suspended 1979 constitution, before the 29 May 1999 inauguration of the new civilian president. The constitution includes provisions for a bicameral legislature, the National Assembly consisting of a 360-member House of Representatives and a 109-member Senate.

==Fourth Republic==
=== Presidency Obasanjo (1999–2007) ===

The emergence of democracy in Nigeria in May 1999 ended 39 years of coups, countercoups and short-lived democracies. Olusegun Obasanjo inherited a country suffering economic stagnation and the deterioration of most democratic institutions. Obasanjo had an adventurous life that also reflected the first 40 years of independent Nigeria: During the civil war, he was a colonel and organised the decisive strike against the Republic of Biafra, as Chief of Staff he escaped an attempt on his life through mistaken identity and was subsequently, between 1977 and 1979, military ruler (without having aspired to this), led Nigeria back to democracy, served time in prison under Abacha and during this time awaited his execution for alleged high treason.

==== First term in office ====
&quot;Securing power&quot;

In the first months of his presidency, Obasanjo retired some 200 military officers, including all 93 who held political office, making a coup by senior officers less likely. He also moved the Ministry of Defence from Lagos to Abuja and ensured that it was placed under more direct government control.

&quot;Active foreign policy&quot;

The IV. Republic was able to repair the damage caused by the Abacha dictatorship through an active foreign policy. In October 2001, Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo, South African President Thabo Mbeki and Algerian President Abd al-Aziz Bouteflika established the New Partnership for Africa&#x27;s Development, or NEPAD, which aims to strengthen Africa&#x27;s growth, development and participation in the global economy. During Obasanjo&#x27;s first term in office, Nigerians&#x27; freedoms increased; freedom of the press allowed for the first time to criticise the president again.

&quot;Communal violence&quot;

Communal violence has plagued the Obasanjo government since its inception. In May 1999, violence erupted in Kaduna State over the succession of an Emir resulting in more than 100 deaths. In November 1999, the army destroyed the town of Odi, Bayelsa State and killed scores of civilians in retaliation for the murder of 12 policemen by a local gang. In Kaduna in February–May 2000, over 1,000 people died in rioting over the introduction of criminal Shar&#x27;ia in the State. Hundreds of ethnic Hausa were killed in reprisal attacks in south-eastern Nigeria. In September 2001, over 2,000 people were killed in inter-religious rioting in Jos. In October 2001, hundreds were killed, and thousands displaced in communal violence that spread across the states of Benue, Taraba, and Nasarawa. On 1 October 2001, Obasanjo announced the formation of a National Security Commission to address the issue of communal violence. Obasanjo was reelected in 2003.

==== Second term in office ====
Obasanjo was re-elected in 2003 in a tumultuous election with violent ethnic and religious undertones.

In his second term, Obasanjo ensured the expansion of the Nigerian police force.

In October 2005, the Obasanjo government repaid all its debts (in exchange for a reduction) under the Paris Club.

&quot;Dispute over the Bakassi Peninsula&quot;

Obasanjo was also faced with resolving an ongoing border dispute with neighbouring Cameroon over the ownership of the Bakassi Peninsula, an oil-rich area with close cultural ties to both countries. According to a 2002 ruling by the International Court of Justice, the region was recognised as belonging to Cameroon. Despite domestic protests, Obasanjo followed the court&#x27;s decision in 2006, renounced his claims to the peninsula and withdrew his troops.

On 12 June 2006, Obasanjo signed the Greentree Agreement with Cameroonian President Paul Biya, which formally ended the border dispute over the Bakassi Peninsula. Even when the Nigerian Senate passed a resolution declaring the withdrawal of Nigerian troops from the Bakassi Peninsula illegal, Obasanjo gave the order to proceed with it as planned. On 14 August 2008, the peninsula was fully handed over to Cameroon.

&quot;Conflict in the Niger Delta&quot;

Demonstrations against the government&#x27;s oil policy and high petrol prices had been on the agenda in Nigeria for some time. The inhabitants of the Niger Delta also protested against the activities of the oil companies in their area, which they felt were exploiting the country and giving back too little of their profits. The protests turned into coordinated militant actions in 2006: Oil company employees were kidnapped and refineries and pipelines were damaged. Rebels tried to disrupt oil production and thus cause economic damage to the companies. The most active of these militant groups was the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND). The movement announced a unilateral ceasefire in 2008 and accepted an amnesty programme proposed by the government in 2009.

Ethnic violence over control of the oil-producing Niger Delta region and an insurgency in the north-east continued. Conflicts between Muslims and Christians in Plateau state prompted Obasanjo to declare a state of emergency in May 2004, suspend the state government and install a six-month military government. Obasanjo was able to largely repair the diplomatic damage caused by the Abacha dictatorship through an active foreign policy (for example, by rejoining the Commonwealth).

==== Plans for a third term in office ====
Obasanjo tried to amend the constitution to allow him a third term in office - a process that often heralds the transition to another dictatorship in other African countries in the region. This led to tensions with the parliament and with Vice President Atiku Abubakar. An autobiography by Condoleezza Rice claims that the then US President George W. Bush ultimately convinced Obasanjo to abandon these plans. Today (2023), Obasanjo comments on Nigerian politics in an idiosyncratic way.

==== Conclusion ====
Although the elections that brought Obasanjo to power and allowed him to run for a second term were condemned as unfree and unfair, Nigeria made significant progress in democratisation. The fact that the National Assembly was able to successfully deny the president a third term despite his influence on the army and security forces is evidence of the checks and balances in the Nigerian Government after 2000.

The federalist structure of the 1999 constitution with 36 federal states(and one Federal Capital Territory, FCT) of roughly equal size, a Senate with three senators from each state, as well as a blocking minority of at least 13 states in the presidential election must be considered a stroke of luck in view of the numerous ethnic groups and the religious division of the country. Since then, every presidential candidate has emphasised in their own interest that they represent not only their own ethnic group/religion, but all Nigerians. Nigerian parties now differentiate themselves primarily in terms of their programmes and no longer according to ethnic affiliations.

=== Presidency Yar&#x27;Adua (2007–2010) ===
As Obasanjo was no longer allowed to run in the 2007 presidential election, Umaru Yar&#x27;Adua entered the race as the Muslim candidate for the PDP. Umaru Yar&#x27;Adua was the brother of Obasanjo&#x27;s deputy during his time as military dictator.

Umaru Yar&#x27;Adua won with a clear majority and was sworn in as the new president on 29 May 2007. International observers strongly condemned the election, which was marred by irregularities and vote rigging. The international community, which had observed the Nigerian elections to promote a free and fair process, condemned these elections as seriously flawed. Outgoing President Olusegun Obasanjo acknowledged fraud and other &quot;shortcomings&quot; in the elections, but stated that the result was in line with the opinion polls. In a nationally televised address in 2007, he added that if Nigerians did not like the victory of his hand-picked successor, they had the option of voting again in four years&#x27; time. However, Yar&#x27;Adua&#x27;s health would soon render this option moot.

In 2009, Yar&#x27;Adua&#x27;s term of office saw the out-of-court settlement of lawsuits under the US Alien Tort Statute against Royal Dutch Shell and Brian Anderson, the head of Shell&#x27;s Nigerian subsidiary. Shell continues to deny liability.

=== Presidency Jonathan (2010–2015) ===

Yar&#x27;Adua died on 5 May 2010. 3 months earlier, Vice President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan had already been sworn in as the successor to Yar&#x27;Adua, who was seriously ill and receiving treatment abroad.

For the remainder of his term in office, his priorities were to solve the country&#x27;s energy problems and to continue peace negotiations with the rebels in the Niger Delta.

Jonathan emerged victorious from the presidential elections. Second place went to former General and Head of State Muhammadu Buhari, who received 32 per cent of the vote. The international media reported that the elections went smoothly, unlike previous elections.

==== Successes against Ebola and in the entertainment industry ====
Jonathan&#x27;s time in office saw the successful fight against Ebola and an economic recovery that made Nigeria the leading economic power in Africa. The Jonathan administration&#x27;s film promotion for high-quality productions created its own commercially successful film industry (&quot;Nollywood&quot;), which can only be compared to the US and India (&quot;Bollywood&quot;).

==== Fight against Boko Haram ====

On the debit side of the balance sheet, on the other hand, is the wave of terror by Boko Haram, which kidnapped 200 schoolgirls in Chibok in 2014 and highlighted the impotence of the Nigerian state (around 100 of the girls are still missing in 2022).

Jonathan, who was criticised during the 2014 election campaign for not having done enough to combat Boko Haram, asked the neighbouring countries of Benin, Cameroon, Chad and Niger for support. A regional army was set up with troops from Nigeria and the aforementioned countries and an offensive was launched against the terrorists. The fight against Boko Haram made significant progress, with armed forces recapturing large areas previously held by the terrorist group.

==== Law against queer people ====
The Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act, signed by Jonathan in 2014, is one of the most repressive laws in the world against LGBT people and those who may be considered by the Nigerian judiciary as their &quot;sponsors&quot;. The law is also supported by the general Nigerian population. They even went on to praise him for ensuring that the law had been passed and signed.

==== Embezzlement of state funds, deselection ====
Above all, however, Jonathan&#x27;s time in office is characterised by embezzlement in office - the misappropriation of state funds. The Nigerian state is said to have lost 20 billion US dollars as a result. The high level of corruption was a decisive factor in the 2015 presidential election, from which opposition candidate Muhammadu Buhari emerged victorious. The elections were originally scheduled for mid-February, but were then postponed by the Nigerian electoral commission by six weeks, as the level of violence emanating from Boko Haram at the time was an obstacle to the elections in the north-east.

Jonathan&#x27;s ouster is (as of 2023) the only case in the IV Republic in which Nigerian voters refused to re-elect an incumbent president. Jonathan&#x27;s party, the PDP, lost power after 16 years in power. At least it can be said of Jonathan that he conceded his electoral defeat without complaint.

=== Presidency Buhari (2015–2023) ===

Since the Second Republic, Buhari has been seen as the clean man of Nigerian politics, as frugal, but also as a representative of northern interests. His party, the &quot;All Progressives&quot;, was only formed shortly before his election in 2015 from a merger of four opposition parties. The election, in which the then 72-year-old Buhari won on his fourth attempt, was described by observers as fair. In 2019, Buhari was elected for a second and final term in office and the Progressives remain the ruling party to this day (November 2024). During Buhari&#x27;s two terms in office, they were able to gradually increase the number of deputies, senators and governors. The Buhari era (as of January 2023) is characterised by a dynamic structural policy, economic diversification, successes against Boko Haram and a decreasing perception of corruption, but also by a rapid increase in armed crime and police attacks. While the COVID-19 pandemic played no role in the young Nigerian population from 2020, in 2022 Nigeria, as the world&#x27;s largest wheat importer, was hit particularly hard by the wheat shortage caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the resulting rise in bread prices.

==== Anti-corruption measures ====
One of Buhari&#x27;s anti-corruption measures promised in the 2015 election was the suspension of the Chief Justice of Nigeria, Walter Onnoghen. Investigations by the Code of Conduct Bureau (CCB, a kind of ethics council) and complaints by a citizens&#x27; initiative had revealed that Onnoghen held secret accounts and did not declare incoming income. After Onnoghen failed to appear on two CCB summonses in January 2019, he was suspended by Buhari. Onnoghen avoided impeachment by the Nigerian Senate (similar to the German Federal Council) by resigning. In December 2019, the Attorney General, Mohammed Bello Adoke, was convicted of corruption in absentia and later extradited from neighbouring Niger. In July 2020 - not without irony - the Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry against Corruption EFCC, Ibrahim Magu, was arrested for corruption. In December 2020, he was followed by the Chairman of the Pension Taskforce, Abdulrasheed Maina, and a senator - Since corruption takes place in secret and is an emotionally charged issue, an objective assessment is difficult. However, unlike in the 2015 election, Nigerians no longer see corruption as the most important political issue in the 2022 polls, but place it behind &quot;fighting crime&quot;, &quot;economy&quot; and &quot;power supply&quot;. This improvement is not reflected in the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) - instead, this assessment of Nigeria by 11 international NGOs has worsened by several points since 2015.

==== Infrastructure policy with Chinese help ====
The Buhari administration has renovated and rebuilt roads, harbours, bridges and railways like no previous government. The construction and profitable operation of the Lagos-Ibadan standard gauge railway since May 2021 as well as the Second Niger Bridge near Onitsha and the Lekki Super Post-Panamax container port, both of which were completed in December 2022, deserve special mention. The Buhari administration has been able to attract or set up processing industries for commodities such as crude oil and rice (e.g. Dangote refinery, Imota rice mill). Major Nigerian entrepreneurs such as Aliko Dangote (cement), Innocent Chukwuma (Innoson, vehicle manufacturing) and Stella Chinyelu Okoli (Emzor Pharma) no longer take their assets abroad, but invest them at home. - Initially, most of the structural improvements were financed and implemented as PPP projects as part of the People&#x27;s Republic of China&#x27;s increased involvement in Africa via the state-owned companies CCECC and CHEC, while Western countries hardly participated in such projects. However, when the Nigerian-Chinese negotiations on further projects failed in 2021, Construction Minister Fashola was able to arrange financing for two new rail projects in a short time via the British Standard Chartered Bank. Nigeria is the only sub-Saharan country that operates more kilometres of rail track in 2023 than in colonial times, and one of the few countries in the world that is expanding its rail network every year instead of closing tracks.

==== Successes against Boko Haram ====
Buhari&#x27;s strategy against Boko Haram was effective despite some setbacks. The terrorist militia was driven out of the most important cities in the afflicted north as early as 2016 (see chapter &quot;Boko Haram&quot;). The situation eased at the beginning of 2022, when Boko Haram, whose militias had terrorised Nigeria&#x27;s north for years and devastated entire regions, was largely disbanded. 40,000 Boko Haram fighters surrendered. However, the splinter group ISWAP remains active. In addition, Nigeria has been hit by a wave of crime and rampant police violence since 2019.

Despite the political stability, the security situation in Nigeria was considered inadequate. 68% of Nigerians felt &quot;not safe&quot; in their country according to a survey by the NOI-Polls opinion research institute in May 2022. 77% do not know a helpline number for emergencies.

According to the above survey, Nigerians fear being robbed (24%) or kidnapped (also 24%), falling victim to armed bandits or being robbed (both 8%) or being harmed in the herdsmen-farmers conflict (also 8%). This is followed by &quot;ritual murders&quot; (4%) and &quot;Boko Haram&quot; (3.5%).

==== Militant groups in the Niger Delta ====
The Buhari administration was able to temporarily appease militant groups in the Niger Delta through &quot;guard contracts&quot; and the associated payments. Critics see this as a modern-day indulgence trade or the subsidisation of criminals. See the relevant chapter.

==== Foreign policy ====
In November 2022, the US State Department removed Nigeria (and India) from the list of Countries of Particular Concern. This was done at the recommendation of the US Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) with reference to attacks by criminals against Christian missionaries in the Islamic north of Nigeria. Nigeria was placed on the aforementioned list in 2020 by then President Trump and his Secretary of State Pompeo.

=== Presidency Tinubu (since 2023) ===
The ruling All Progressives Congress (APC) candidate, Bola Tinubu, won the February 2023 presidential 2023 Nigerian presidential election to succeed Muhammadu Buhari as the next president of Nigeria. This However, the opposition had accusations of electoral fraud in polls and had challenged it in court. The supreme Court however upheld the victory of President Bola Tinubu till date he remains the Current Elected president of Nigeria. On 29 May 2023, Bola Tinubu was sworn in as Nigeria&#x27;s president to succeed Buhari.

In his inaugural speech, Tinubu announced the abolition of state subsidies for fuel, and three weeks later he ended state support for the national currency, which subsequently plummeted to a quarter of its value. The situation since then has been described in the Nigerian media as ‘economic hardship’. According to an opinion poll conducted by API on 29 May 2024, 49% of Nigerians surveyed rate Tinubu&#x27;s work after one year in office as ‘very bad’, 29% as ‘bad’ and only 4% as ‘good’. The biggest personal challenge cited by 36% of respondents was ‘hunger’, 28% were unable to finance ‘basic needs’, 13% were unable to find a job and 9% criticised the poor security situation (multiple answers were not permitted).

The rise in kidnappings is also likely to be a consequence of ‘economic hardship’. According to NOIPolls, 38% of Nigerians personally know a kidnap victim (as of May 2024). Of these 38%, 78% state that the victim was released and 57% that a ransom was paid. 5% of victims were killed. 56% of Nigerians believe that the government is not doing enough to combat the numerous kidnappings. Creating jobs (37%) and improving the security forces (22%) are cited as suitable countermeasures.

==See also==

*History of Africa
*Historiography of the British Empire
*History of West Africa
*List of heads of government of Nigeria
*List of heads of state of Nigeria
*Politics of Nigeria
*Boko Haram
* History of cities in Nigeria:
** Ibadan history and timeline
** Kano history and timeline
** Lagos history and timeline
** Port Harcourt history and timeline
* National Archives of Nigeria

== References ==


==Further reading==

* Abegunrin, Olayiwola. &quot;Nigerian Foreign Policy under Military Rule, 1966–1999&quot; (2003) online 
* Akinola, Anthony A. &quot;Party Coalitions in Nigeria: History, Trends and Prospects&quot; (Safari Books Ltd., 2014).
* Burns, Alan C. &quot;History of Nigeria&quot; (3rd ed. London, 1942) online free.
* Daly, Samuel Fury Childs. &quot;A History of the Republic of Biafra: Law, Crime, and the Nigerian Civil War,&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2020) online review 
* Dibua, Jeremiah I. &quot;Modernization and the crisis of development in Africa: the Nigerian experience&quot; (Routledge, 2017).
* Dike, K. Onwuka. &quot;Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 1830-1885: An Introduction to the Economic and Political History of Nigeria&quot; (1956) online 
* Eghosa Osaghae, E. &quot;Crippled Giant: Nigeria since Independence.&quot; (1998). 
* Ekundare, R. Olufemi. &quot;An Economic History of Nigeria, 1860–1960&quot; (1973).
* Fafunwa, A. Babs. &quot;History of education in Nigeria&quot; (1974) excerpt .
* Falola, Toyin, and Matthew M. Heaton. &quot;A History of Nigeria&quot; (2008) online 
* Falola, Toyin, Ann Genova, and Matthew M. Heaton. &quot;Historical dictionary of Nigeria&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2018) online .
* Falola, Toyin; and Adam Paddock. &quot;Environment and Economics in Nigeria&quot; (2012).
* Forrest, Tom. &quot;Politics and Economic Development in Nigeria&quot; (1995) online 
* Hatch, John. &quot;Nigeria: A History&quot; (1971)
* Hodgkin, T. ed. &quot;Nigerian Perspectives: An Historical Anthology&quot; (1960). 
* Metz, Helen Chapin, ed. &quot;Nigeria: a country study&quot; (U.S. Library of Congress. Federal Research Division, 1992) online free , comprehensive historical and current coverage; not copyright.
* Odeyemi, Jacob Oluwole. &quot;A political history of Nigeria and the crisis of ethnicity in nation-building.&quot; &quot;International Journal of Developing Societies&quot; 3.1 (2014): 1–12. Online 
* Ogbeidi, Michael M. &quot;Political leadership and corruption in Nigeria since 1960: A socio-economic analysis.&quot; &quot;Journal of Nigeria Studies&quot; 1.2 (2012). Online
* Omu, Fred I. &quot;Press and politics in Nigeria, 1880–1937&quot; (1978) 
* Rozario, S. I. Francis. &quot;Nigerian Christianity and the Society of African Missions&quot; (2012).
* Shillington, Kevin. &quot;Encyclopedia of African History&quot;. (U of Michigan Press, 2005) p. 1401.
* Thurston, Alexander. &quot;Boko Haram: the history of an African jihadist movement&quot; (Princeton UP, 2017).

===Primary sources===
* Hodgkin, Thomas, ed. &quot;Nigerian Perspectives: An Historical Anthology&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1960) online 

==External links==
*BBC Timeline: Nigeria - Chronology of key events
*- Offers a view of one of the main sources of income for the country. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1435215" start="4" end="26" title="History of Nigeria" label="history of [[Nigeria]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="151" end="162" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851857" start="182" end="189" title="1500 BC" label="1500 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="245" end="251" title="region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q145749" start="296" end="310" title="Kingdom of Nri" label="Kingdom of Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="316" end="329" title="Kingdom of Benin" label="Benin Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="339" end="349" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637700" start="351" end="372" title="Islam in Nigeria" label="Islam reached Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="385" end="397" title="Bornu Empire" label="Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="420" end="433" title="Hausa Kingdoms" label="Hausa Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q837278" start="465" end="493" title="Christianity in Nigeria" label="Christianity came to Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="522" end="533" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="538" end="552" title="Capuchin Monastery" label="Capuchin monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="558" end="566" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="596" end="610" title="Songhai Empire" label="Songhai Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="705" end="712" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q798812" start="714" end="721" title="Badagry" label="Badagry"/>
<link wikidata="Q604978" start="726" end="731" title="Bonny, Nigeria" label="Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="794" end="819" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="transatlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="899" end="909" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q380452" start="999" end="1014" title="Usman dan Fodio" label="Usman dan Fodio"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="1051" end="1056" title="jihad" label="jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="1094" end="1106" title="Hausa Kingdoms" label="Hausa states"/>
<link wikidata="Q600524" start="1173" end="1192" title="Sokoto Caliphate" label="Caliphate of Sokoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="1253" end="1264" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1270" end="1284" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="1373" end="1378" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="1408" end="1415" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="1478" end="1481" title="Royal Niger Company" label="RNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780743" start="1507" end="1519" title="Mary Slessor" label="Mary Slessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="1743" end="1758" title="Trial by ordeal" label="Trial by ordeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="1810" end="1833" title="Berlin Conference" label="Berlin Congo Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q600524" start="2136" end="2152" title="Sokoto Caliphate" label="Sokoto Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="2336" end="2361" title="Kamerun" label="German colony of Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="2446" end="2464" title="Cartel" label="purchasing cartels"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="2487" end="2495" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="2497" end="2503" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="2508" end="2515" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="2536" end="2541" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="2543" end="2551" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="2556" end="2562" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="2699" end="2708" title="Newspaper" label="Newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="2711" end="2728" title="Political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="2730" end="2741" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="2747" end="2776" title="Higher education" label="higher education institutions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2894" end="2923" title="#Nigeria regiments, advance in Ethiopia" label="East African campaign of 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="2989" end="3000" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088497" start="3068" end="3078" title="Oloibiri Oilfield" label="oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="3233" end="3244" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="3388" end="3398" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Biafra War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500817" start="3772" end="3780" title="Aso Rock" label="Aso Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569328" start="3928" end="3945" title="Boko Haram insurgency" label="Boko Haram revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012066" start="4100" end="4114" title="Ebola in Nigeria" label="Ebola epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099840" start="4242" end="4256" title="Afrobeats" label="Nigerian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065894" start="4261" end="4274" title="Nollywood" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="4290" end="4310" title="Computer programming" label="software programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983877" start="4347" end="4355" title="Unicorn (finance)" label="unicorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="4458" end="4467" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="4816" end="4822" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="4865" end="4874" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="4886" end="4900" title="archaic humans" label="archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q492596" start="4991" end="5009" title="Middle Pleistocene" label="Middle Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140500" start="5447" end="5466" title="Guinean Forests of West Africa" label="West African forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827503" start="5564" end="5580" title="Iwo Eleru people" label="Iwo Eleru people"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827503" start="5594" end="5603" title="Iwo Eleru" label="Iwo Eleru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="5608" end="5615" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="5841" end="5855" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="5861" end="5872" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="6075" end="6091" title="agriculturalists" label="agriculturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312423" start="6098" end="6110" title="Dufuna canoe" label="Dufuna canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q682777" start="6136" end="6146" title="Yobe State" label="Yobe State"/>
<link wikidata="Q681198" start="6395" end="6401" title="Nsukka" label="Nsukka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="6422" end="6429" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="6445" end="6453" title="Igbo people" label="Igboland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568946" start="6488" end="6493" title="Lejja" label="Lejja"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568964" start="6546" end="6549" title="Opi (archaeological site)" label="Opi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673834" start="6563" end="6578" title="Iron metallurgy in Africa" label="Iron metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="6624" end="6635" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q109313124" start="6819" end="6824" title="Daima" label="Daima"/>
<link wikidata="Q125309" start="6867" end="6876" title="Lake Chad" label="Lake Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="6880" end="6891" title="Borno State" label="Borno State"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="7305" end="7316" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7403" end="7424" title="Nok culture#Sculptures" label="terracotta sculptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509134" start="7487" end="7500" title="funerary cult" label="funerary cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673834" start="7505" end="7520" title="Iron metallurgy in Africa" label="Iron metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="7566" end="7577" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="7690" end="7701" title="Niger-Congo" label="Niger-Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="7711" end="7717" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664002" start="7719" end="7724" title="Jukun people (West Africa)" label="Jukun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914004" start="7729" end="7737" title="Dakarkari language" label="Dakakari"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="7871" end="7877" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051642" start="7878" end="7888" title="Ife Empire" label="Ife Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287326" start="7897" end="7901" title="Bini people" label="Bini"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="7902" end="7918" title="kingdom of Benin" label="kingdom of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024641" start="8011" end="8020" title="Igbo-Ukwu" label="Igbo-Ukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785495" start="8724" end="8733" title="Igbo-Ukwu bronzes" label="Igbo-Ukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024641" start="9026" end="9035" title="Igbo-Ukwu" label="Igbo-Ukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134640" start="11106" end="11114" title="Profit and loss sharing" label="mudaraba"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="11376" end="11391" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="11456" end="11473" title="Hausa Kingdoms" label="Hausa city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472901" start="12120" end="12134" title="Kano Chronicle" label="Kano Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="12316" end="12330" title="Songhai Empire" label="Songhai Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="12423" end="12431" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051642" start="15262" end="15272" title="Ife Empire" label="Ife Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="16795" end="16798" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="16803" end="16808" title="Benin Empire" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="16819" end="16822" title="Ifẹ" label="Ife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637037" start="16956" end="16979" title="Ooni of Ife" label="&amp;quot;ooni&amp;quot; of Ife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509418" start="17021" end="17035" title="Yoruba culture" label="Yoruba culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637165" start="17221" end="17228" title="Alaafin of Oyo" label="Alaafin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903979" start="17517" end="17521" title="Nupe Kingdom" label="Nupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q893575" start="17530" end="17535" title="Borgu" label="Borgu"/>
<link wikidata="Q468814" start="17815" end="17822" title="Dahomey" label="Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q887672" start="17829" end="17834" title="Igala people" label="Igala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343978" start="18049" end="18054" title="Kabba" label="Kabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q387745" start="18083" end="18093" title="Kogi State" label="Kogi State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048500" start="18110" end="18114" title="Idah" label="Idah"/>
<link wikidata="Q994085" start="18297" end="18303" title="Lokoja" label="Lokoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q117714" start="18398" end="18405" title="Anambra" label="Anambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="18407" end="18412" title="Delta state" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q429908" start="18417" end="18422" title="Benue State" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412679" start="18451" end="18463" title="Olu of Warri" label="Olu of Warri"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="18530" end="18543" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="18597" end="18602" title="Niger River" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q887672" start="18647" end="18652" title="Igala people" label="Igala"/>
<link wikidata="Q204806" start="18723" end="18728" title="Benue River" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="18835" end="18846" title="Patrilineality" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="19040" end="19051" title="city-states" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="19119" end="19131" title="Urbanisation" label="Urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="19204" end="19214" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="19219" end="19224" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="19286" end="19289" title="Ife" label="Ife"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="19332" end="19342" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268656" start="19435" end="19447" title="Egba people" label="Egba Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19449" end="19462" title="Awori Kingdom" label="Awori Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q468814" start="19518" end="19536" title="Kingdom of Dahomey" label="Kingdom of Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="19553" end="19585" title="Benin" label="the modern day Republic of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086440" start="19617" end="19625" title="Yoruba religion" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021170" start="19655" end="19661" title="Olorun" label="Olorun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021170" start="19682" end="19688" title="Olorun" label="Olorun"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="19811" end="19817" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750413" start="19819" end="19826" title="Oduduwa" label="Oduduwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752938" start="20049" end="20059" title="Yorubaland" label="Yorubaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752938" start="20065" end="20075" title="Yorubaland" label="Yorubaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="20156" end="20168" title="Southwestern" label="Southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="20181" end="20188" title="country" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="20202" end="20213" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos State"/>
<link wikidata="Q503905" start="20215" end="20224" title="Oyo State" label="Oyo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q836654" start="20226" end="20236" title="Ondo State" label="Ondo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q12197965" start="20238" end="20248" title="Osun State" label="Osun State"/>
<link wikidata="Q534917" start="20250" end="20261" title="Ekiti State" label="Ekiti State"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="20266" end="20276" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun State"/>
<link wikidata="Q10262232" start="20395" end="20407" title="Igbo culture" label="Igbo culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="20484" end="20488" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385897" start="20604" end="20607" title="Eri (divine king)" label="Eri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676068" start="20705" end="20711" title="Chukwu" label="Chukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q117714" start="20799" end="20806" title="Anambra" label="Anambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="20851" end="20859" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="21092" end="21096" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="21399" end="21409" title="theocratic" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="21491" end="21496" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21570" end="21575" title="Igbo culture#Twin killing" label="twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723030" start="21878" end="21891" title="Odinani" label="Igbo religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q145749" start="22003" end="22014" title="Kingdom of Nri" label="Nri kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234624" start="22178" end="22186" title="Igboland" label="Igboland"/>
<link wikidata="Q791766" start="22204" end="22208" title="Awka" label="Awka"/>
<link wikidata="Q852238" start="22310" end="22325" title="Onitsha" label="Onitsha Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="22361" end="22365" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765243" start="22440" end="22446" title="Anioma" label="Anioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q887672" start="22489" end="22494" title="Igala people" label="Igala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668214" start="22601" end="22605" title="Aboh" label="Aboh"/>
<link wikidata="Q583619" start="22822" end="22828" title="Owerri" label="Owerri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863480" start="22939" end="22942" title="Aro people" label="Aro"/>
<link wikidata="Q965036" start="23032" end="23041" title="Arochukwu" label="Arochukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795451" start="23068" end="23083" title="Aro-Ibibio Wars" label="Aro-Ibibio Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q761370" start="23127" end="23142" title="Aro Confederacy" label="Aro Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984063" start="23297" end="23309" title="Ibini Ukpabi" label="Ibini Ukpabi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23317" end="23326" title="Long Juju" label="Long Juju"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080605" start="23399" end="23405" title="Ohafia" label="Ohafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28040731" start="23407" end="23411" title="Abam" label="Abam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423090" start="23413" end="23417" title="Ezza" label="Ezza"/>
<link wikidata="Q121144534" start="23839" end="23854" title="Igbo–Igala wars" label="Igbo-Igala Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="24732" end="24739" title="oracles" label="oracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q334486" start="24804" end="24816" title="Mother goddess" label="earth mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="24821" end="24830" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736074" start="24838" end="24841" title="Ala (mythology)" label="Ala"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234624" start="24879" end="24887" title="Igboland" label="Igboland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991617" start="25076" end="25081" title="Ibusa" label="Ibusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q145749" start="25161" end="25175" title="Kingdom of Nri" label="Kingdom of Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q852238" start="25205" end="25212" title="Onitsha" label="Onitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="25259" end="25266" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q288809" start="25290" end="25294" title="Efik people" label="Efik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786924" start="25344" end="25357" title="Calabar river" label="Calabar river"/>
<link wikidata="Q804272" start="25575" end="25582" title="Bakassi" label="Bakassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107538758" start="25599" end="25610" title="Oron Nation" label="Oron Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="25688" end="25708" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566427" start="26322" end="26346" title="Niger Coast Protectorate" label="Niger Coast Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="26401" end="26408" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="26548" end="26561" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="26782" end="26792" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="26883" end="26899" title="kingdom of Benin" label="kingdom of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890419" start="27018" end="27026" title="Manilla (money)" label="manillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="27656" end="27667" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="27766" end="27776" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="27804" end="27809" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q798812" start="28083" end="28090" title="Badagry" label="Badagry"/>
<link wikidata="Q640657" start="28122" end="28134" title="Bonny Island" label="Bonny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="28289" end="28304" title="Kingdom of Benin" label="Empire of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q761370" start="28360" end="28375" title="Aro Confederacy" label="Aro Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="28611" end="28617" title="Fula people" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q380452" start="28797" end="28812" title="Usman dan Fodio" label="Usman dan Fodio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="29552" end="29568" title="Slavery" label="slave population"/>
<link wikidata="Q453644" start="29916" end="29931" title="Hugh Clapperton" label="Hugh Clapperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662556" start="30416" end="30437" title="Samuel Ajayi Crowther" label="Samuel Ajayi Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q60141" start="30504" end="30518" title="Heinrich Barth" label="Heinrich Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="31225" end="31239" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="31420" end="31428" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="31757" end="31765" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226249" start="31824" end="31837" title="John Clarkson (abolitionist)" label="John Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="31896" end="31922" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020194" start="32027" end="32047" title="West Africa Squadron" label="West Africa squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="32155" end="32167" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q798812" start="32351" end="32358" title="Badagry" label="Badagry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="32377" end="32384" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="32500" end="32514" title="Oyo Empire" label="kingdom of Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701083" start="32697" end="32708" title="Akitoye" label="Oba Akitoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q28047984" start="32872" end="32878" title="Kosoko" label="Kosoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="32976" end="32986" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221353" start="33089" end="33102" title="John Beecroft" label="John Beecroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q205022" start="33398" end="33403" title="Bioko" label="Bioko"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="33405" end="33422" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="33648" end="33661" title="Orkney" label="Orkney island"/>
<link wikidata="Q931770" start="33665" end="33677" title="Papa Westray" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="33707" end="33719" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="33738" end="33753" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="33957" end="33975" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="34084" end="34099" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015356" start="34238" end="34254" title="William McCoskry" label="William McCoskry"/>
<link wikidata="Q111947906" start="34398" end="34408" title="HMS Prometheus (1839)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="35530" end="35549" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="35787" end="35795" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345671" start="35813" end="35829" title="tropical disease" label="tropical disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q203133" start="35885" end="35902" title="African trypanosomiasis" label="sleeping sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="36023" end="36030" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="36084" end="36091" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662556" start="36751" end="36772" title="Samuel Ajayi Crowther" label="Samuel Ajayi Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="37004" end="37027" title="Marginalism" label="marginal utility theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402708" start="37302" end="37308" title="demand" label="demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="37312" end="37328" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545092" start="37557" end="37570" title="George Taubman Goldie" label="George Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="37702" end="37721" title="Royal Niger Company" label="Royal Niger Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q600524" start="37854" end="37870" title="Sokoto Caliphate" label="Sokoto Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337777" start="37881" end="37887" title="Gwandu" label="Gwandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q295090" start="38180" end="38193" title="Léon Gambetta" label="Léon Gambetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160600" start="38934" end="38947" title="Jaja of Opobo" label="Jaja of Opobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="40317" end="40332" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="40385" end="40403" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582" start="40592" end="40608" title="Berlin Conference" label="Congo Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="40844" end="40850" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="40867" end="40872" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="40916" end="40923" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="40932" end="40938" title="French colonial empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658023" start="41692" end="41704" title="Ijebu Kingdom" label="Ijebu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="41779" end="41789" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="41839" end="41850" title="Machine gun" label="Machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="41860" end="41865" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q336027" start="41914" end="41920" title="Frederick Lugard, 1st Baron Lugard" label="Lugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="42423" end="42429" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114198" start="43493" end="43503" title="Ovonramwen" label="Ovọnramwẹn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160600" start="43955" end="43968" title="Jaja of Opobo" label="Jaja of Opobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q723992" start="44221" end="44235" title="Harry Rawson" label="Admiral Rawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="44241" end="44256" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q336027" start="44981" end="44987" title="Frederick Lugard, 1st Baron Lugard" label="Lugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="45057" end="45063" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="45068" end="45074" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375006" start="45275" end="45302" title="Royal West African Frontier Force" label="West African Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q722699" start="45441" end="45455" title="Fashoda Incident" label="Fashoda Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="45474" end="45490" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="45615" end="45626" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="45999" end="46015" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast/Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="46047" end="46055" title="Kamerun" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161062" start="46067" end="46071" title="Togoland" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="46125" end="46136" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="46438" end="46457" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58031" start="46919" end="46933" title="Werner Sombart" label="Werner Sombart"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="47143" end="47151" title="Nikolai Bukharin" label="Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="47156" end="47165" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="47267" end="47273" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="47281" end="47291" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q357536" start="47892" end="47906" title="Lever Brothers" label="Lever Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="47938" end="47952" title="Unilever" label="Unilever Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="48039" end="48044" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="48046" end="48054" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="48059" end="48065" title="Natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q761370" start="48382" end="48397" title="Aro Confederacy" label="Aro Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q965036" start="48431" end="48440" title="Arochukwu" label="Arochukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="48622" end="48628" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q617278" start="48957" end="48970" title="Anglo-Aro War" label="Anglo-Aro War"/>
<link wikidata="Q668294" start="49054" end="49069" title="Kamerun" label="German Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="49095" end="49106" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662556" start="50208" end="50229" title="Samuel Ajayi Crowther" label="Samuel Ajayi Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50475" end="50500" title="African Pentecostalism#Nigeria" label="Pentecostal free churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902892" start="50589" end="50616" title="Nigeria Civil Service Union" label="Nigeria Civil Service Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q932368" start="51125" end="51140" title="Rabih az-Zubayr" label="Rabih az-Zubayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164601" start="51291" end="51309" title="Battle of Kousséri" label="Battle of Kousséri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162687" start="51781" end="51795" title="Battle of Kano (1903)" label="Battle of Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q815159" start="52352" end="52369" title="siege of Khartoum" label="siege of Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661443" start="52485" end="52498" title="Indirect rule" label="Indirect Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="52638" end="52644" title="Fula people" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="52668" end="52673" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="53734" end="53740" title="Maliki school" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q68105" start="53791" end="53805" title="Joseph Schacht" label="Joseph Schacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q567057" start="54422" end="54435" title="Malice aforethought" label="malice intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="55114" end="55123" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="55374" end="55387" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="55414" end="55429" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q465022" start="55476" end="55481" title="Enugu (city)" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="55498" end="55502" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="55531" end="55540" title="Petroleum" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="56074" end="56079" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169487" start="56693" end="56713" title="University of Ibadan" label="University of Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q95241" start="56714" end="56724" title="Ulli Beier" label="Ulli Beier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="59575" end="59589" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="59769" end="59774" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="59776" end="59783" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661443" start="59970" end="59983" title="Indirect Rule" label="Indirect Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q957756" start="60976" end="60989" title="Hugh Clifford (colonial administrator)" label="Hugh Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q734986" start="62094" end="62110" title="Herbert Macaulay" label="Herbert Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989646" start="62230" end="62263" title="Nigerian National Democratic Party" label="Nigeria National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325577" start="62452" end="62472" title="Elder Dempster Lines" label="Elder Dempster Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="62526" end="62535" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719272" start="62621" end="62630" title="MV Aureol" label="MV Aureol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974" start="62670" end="62680" title="Las Palmas" label="Las Palmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726" start="62682" end="62699" title="Banjul" label="Bathurst (Banjul)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="62701" end="62709" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="62711" end="62719" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="62724" end="62728" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q617618" start="62763" end="62768" title="Apapa" label="Apapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479777" start="62950" end="62973" title="Officer (The Salvation Army)" label="Salvation Army officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q842271" start="64196" end="64219" title="Marginal utility" label="marginal utility theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q58031" start="64271" end="64299" title="Werner Sombart" label="problem of shrinking markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541336" start="64512" end="64526" title="Graeme Thomson" label="Graeme Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="64847" end="64851" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116016" start="65917" end="65940" title="Nigerian Youth Movement" label="Nigerian Youth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="66078" end="66094" title="Dominion" label="British Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="66128" end="66137" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="66141" end="66147" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="66175" end="66189" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984264" start="66310" end="66328" title="West African Pilot" label="West African Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193463" start="66823" end="66833" title="3 ft 6 in gauge railways" label="Cape gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="67019" end="67030" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q204806" start="67061" end="67072" title="Benue River" label="Benue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="67464" end="67468" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="67653" end="67662" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q21009702" start="67780" end="67794" title="Michael Imoudu" label="Michael Imoudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239778" start="68053" end="68069" title="Donald Charles Cameron (colonial administrator)" label="Governor Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q822463" start="68238" end="68256" title="Bernard Henry Bourdillon" label="Bernard Bourdillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="68628" end="68643" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="68857" end="68865" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="68867" end="68873" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="68875" end="68882" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506544" start="68884" end="68894" title="Fry&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Cream" label="Fry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636439" start="68937" end="68968" title="UTC Nigeria Plc" label="Union Trading Co/Basler Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121247" start="69038" end="69048" title="PZ Cussons" label="PZ Cussons"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="69371" end="69378" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q157485" start="69510" end="69523" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor" label="FW 200 Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="69886" end="69895" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="69937" end="69944" title="Francoist Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q205022" start="69977" end="69982" title="Bioko" label="Bioko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="70138" end="70149" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="70154" end="70167" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="71051" end="71059" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="71069" end="71085" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q206484" start="71657" end="71665" title="Abeokuta" label="Abeokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="71808" end="71814" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="72118" end="72127" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="72129" end="72136" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="72138" end="72144" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="72149" end="72154" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="72279" end="72292" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190184" start="72491" end="72496" title="Harar" label="Harar"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="72502" end="72510" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="72790" end="72801" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="72961" end="72971" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="73039" end="73044" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="73106" end="73112" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="73114" end="73121" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="73123" end="73130" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="73139" end="73152" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="73263" end="73273" title="Volunteering" label="volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="73453" end="73472" title="Corporal punishment" label="Corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="73474" end="73482" title="Flagellation" label="flogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661443" start="73749" end="73762" title="Indirect rule" label="Indirect Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="74503" end="74517" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="74737" end="74742" title="Burma campaign" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="74905" end="74917" title="William Slim, 1st Viscount Slim" label="William Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q711119" start="75430" end="75438" title="Arthur Richards, 1st Baron Milverton" label="Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="75479" end="75485" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q734986" start="76125" end="76133" title="Herbert Macaulay" label="Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21009702" start="76154" end="76160" title="Michael Imoudu" label="Imoudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="76176" end="76183" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="76263" end="76269" title="Clement Attlee" label="Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892622" start="76577" end="76593" title="Oliver Lyttelton, 1st Viscount Chandos" label="Oliver Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="76945" end="76965" title="constituent assembly" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="77006" end="77024" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="colonial ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408534" start="77159" end="77178" title="Social class in the United Kingdom" label="British upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q401032" start="77549" end="77561" title="Ahmadu Bello" label="Ahmadu Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="77732" end="77746" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q960892" start="77825" end="77840" title="Obafemi Awolowo" label="Obafemi Awolowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="78831" end="78835" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="79123" end="79127" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="79138" end="79157" title="Nobility" label="hereditary nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="79174" end="79180" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="79202" end="79208" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="79349" end="79362" title="Supreme court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q355567" start="79428" end="79439" title="Imperial, royal and noble ranks" label="noble title"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088497" start="79972" end="79988" title="Oloibiri Oilfield" label="Olobiri Oilfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="80101" end="80117" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="80166" end="80180" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="80233" end="80244" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="80424" end="80429" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="80583" end="80599" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="80873" end="80895" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61022630" start="81367" end="81374" title="officer" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="81380" end="81394" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="81436" end="81441" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="81443" end="81449" title="Fula people" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q572665" start="81451" end="81457" title="Kanuri people" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="82121" end="82136" title="Racism" label="racial ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="82264" end="82289" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolutist-feudal systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="82311" end="82331" title="Slavery" label="slave-owning systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="82535" end="82546" title="upper class" label="upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="83077" end="83092" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="83116" end="83132" title="Trial by ordeal" label="trials by ordeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="83249" end="83256" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q193777" start="83286" end="83293" title="stoning" label="stoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="83298" end="83308" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019500" start="83344" end="83360" title="Malice (law)" label="intent of malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q466887" start="84101" end="84113" title="Belle Époque" label="Belle Époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="84315" end="84325" title="Autocracy" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379888" start="85329" end="85342" title="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi" label="Agulyi-Ironsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="85346" end="85352" title="Sani Abacha" label="Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="85767" end="85775" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="85887" end="85905" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="86346" end="86360" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145713" start="86400" end="86422" title="James Wilson Robertson" label="James Wilson Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="86444" end="86456" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="86466" end="86479" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="86597" end="86603" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q960892" start="86653" end="86668" title="Obafemi Awolowo" label="Obefemi Awolowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="86738" end="86750" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q338973" start="86807" end="86823" title="Ladoke Akintola" label="Samuel Akíntọ́lá"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="86993" end="87011" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="87546" end="87552" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q804272" start="87744" end="87761" title="Bakassi" label="Bakassi peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="88569" end="88574" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="88579" end="88584" title="Fula people" label="Fulbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="88724" end="88734" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="88768" end="88774" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="88776" end="88780" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235705" start="88814" end="88817" title="Tiv people" label="Tiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="88955" end="88960" title="Jizya" label="Jizya"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="89168" end="89172" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="89488" end="89493" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="89536" end="89541" title="arson" label="arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="89546" end="89553" title="looting" label="looting"/>
<link wikidata="Q534917" start="89618" end="89623" title="Ekiti State" label="Ekiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023726" start="89627" end="89636" title="Ijebu Ode" label="Ijebu-Ode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="89656" end="89661" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053092" start="89706" end="89721" title="Operation Wetie" label="Operation Wetie"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="89822" end="89829" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712433" start="89851" end="89876" title="Christopher Welby-Everard" label="Christopher Welby-Everard"/>
<link wikidata="Q379888" start="89999" end="90020" title="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi" label="Johnson Agulyi-Ironsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116061" start="90269" end="90287" title="Chukwuma Nzeogwu" label="Patrick C. Nzeogwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q995488" start="90416" end="90425" title="Sandhurst, Berkshire" label="Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q646980" start="90430" end="90439" title="Aldershot" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="90621" end="90627" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Balewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q401032" start="90675" end="90680" title="Ahmadu Bello" label="Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q338973" start="90685" end="90694" title="Ladoke Akintola" label="Akíntọ́lá"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402445" start="90901" end="90909" title="Emmanuel Ifeajuna" label="Ifeajuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315729" start="91268" end="91278" title="Don Okafor" label="Don Okafor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335684" start="91616" end="91622" title="Abubakar Tafawa Balewa" label="Balewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379888" start="91710" end="91723" title="Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi" label="Agulyi-Ironsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280478" start="91940" end="91950" title="Directives for military officers and military commanders in the event of an armed attack on Norway" label="directives"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="92033" end="92046" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q401032" start="92766" end="92778" title="Ahmadu Bello" label="Ahmadu Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="92863" end="92879" title="Muhammad" label="Prophet Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q380452" start="92908" end="92917" title="Usman dan Fodio" label="dan Fodio"/>
<link wikidata="Q600524" start="92961" end="92977" title="Sokoto Caliphate" label="Sokoto Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q206484" start="93539" end="93547" title="Abeokuta" label="Abeokuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="93618" end="93624" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20614448" start="93759" end="93766" title="Lalupon" label="Lalupon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782290" start="93814" end="93839" title="Theophilus Danjuma" label="Theophilus Danjuma&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="93865" end="93881" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509379" start="93896" end="93915" title="Shehu Musa Yar&amp;#x27;Adua" label="Shehu Yar&amp;#x27;Adua"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="93917" end="93933" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="93935" end="93952" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Ibrahim Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="93957" end="93968" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q354695" start="94281" end="94312" title="Yakubu Gowon" label="Yakubu (&amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot;) Gowon"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="94811" end="94821" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Biafra War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572480" start="94847" end="94890" title="1966 anti-Igbo pogrom" label="pogroms against the Igbo reached their peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q380670" start="95075" end="95087" title="Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu" label="Emeka Ojukwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="95135" end="95153" title="Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q320704" start="95457" end="95467" title="Benin City" label="Benin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="95639" end="95647" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203301" start="95660" end="95667" title="Umuahia" label="Umuahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803193" start="96331" end="96348" title="Asaba massacre" label="massacre of Asaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q373628" start="98470" end="98486" title="Murtala Muhammed" label="Murtala Muhammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="98491" end="98508" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="99135" end="99139" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="99204" end="99214" title="1973 oil crisis" label="oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="99239" end="99248" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="100137" end="100144" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="100149" end="100157" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="100185" end="100193" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q160645" start="100199" end="100208" title="orphanage" label="orphanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="100240" end="100249" title="Medication" label="Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334063" start="102509" end="102537" title="Nigerian Railway Corporation" label="Nigerian Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="105247" end="105264" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="106966" end="106973" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q960892" start="107066" end="107073" title="Obafemi Awolowo" label="Awolowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="107679" end="107692" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402045" start="108534" end="108553" title="Ajaokuta Steel Mill" label="Ajaokuta steelworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="108582" end="108588" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969355" start="108638" end="108644" title="Itakpe mine" label="Itakpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q321079" start="109378" end="109381" title="Jos" label="Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q868203" start="109383" end="109390" title="Osogbo" label="Oshogbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q937487" start="109395" end="109402" title="Katsina (city)" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="109516" end="109530" title="Public housing" label="social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140900" start="109631" end="109656" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe University" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q791766" start="109660" end="109664" title="Awka" label="Awka"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="111990" end="112006" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="113670" end="113676" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="113697" end="113712" title="Iraq War" label="Second Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671299" start="114440" end="114444" title="NNPC Limited" label="NNPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978037" start="116036" end="116066" title="National Republican Convention" label="National Republican Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550561" start="116081" end="116104" title="Social Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498464" start="116288" end="116300" title="secret trial" label="secret trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528125" start="117375" end="117390" title="M. K. O. Abiola" label="M. K. O. Abiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="117436" end="117445" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q471351" start="117783" end="117798" title="Ernest Shonekan" label="Ernest Shonekan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="118274" end="118285" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q316292" start="119004" end="119017" title="Ken Saro-Wiwa" label="Ken Saro-Wiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41488" start="119696" end="119708" title="Wole Soyinka" label="Wole Soyinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748485" start="122098" end="122114" title="Dangote Refinery" label="Dangote refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q262346" start="122481" end="122501" title="Abdulsalami Abubakar" label="Abdulsalami Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551163" start="123712" end="123742" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647821" start="123754" end="123777" title="All People&amp;#x27;s Party (Nigeria)" label="All People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="123807" end="123813" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q112478410" start="123814" end="123836" title="Alliance for Democracy (Nigeria)" label="Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="123877" end="123894" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="124490" end="124507" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="124794" end="124812" title="Biafra" label="Republic of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="124817" end="124831" title="Chief of staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q101547" start="125712" end="125723" title="Thabo Mbeki" label="Thabo Mbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="125747" end="125769" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Abd al-Aziz Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850911" start="126352" end="126377" title="Odi massacre" label="destroyed the town of Odi"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="126379" end="126392" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa State"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696243" start="126984" end="127012" title="National Security Commission" label="National Security Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="129992" end="130008" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="130043" end="130057" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q171841" start="130171" end="130184" title="Idiosyncrasy" label="idiosyncratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065894" start="133690" end="133699" title="Nollywood" label="Nollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="133762" end="133771" title="Hindi cinema" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011070" start="134579" end="134612" title="Same Sex Marriage (Prohibition) Act 2013" label="Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334063" start="138888" end="138923" title="Nigerian Railway Corporation" label="Lagos-Ibadan standard gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405232" start="138954" end="138973" title="Second Niger bridge" label="Second Niger Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394965" start="139313" end="139326" title="Aliko Dangote" label="Aliko Dangote"/>
<link wikidata="Q38075444" start="139337" end="139354" title="Innocent Chukwuma" label="Innocent Chukwuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q22575096" start="139392" end="139413" title="Stella Chinyelu Okoli" label="Stella Chinyelu Okoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099626" start="139701" end="139706" title="China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation" label="CCECC"/>
<link wikidata="Q62356" start="139885" end="139892" title="Babatunde Fashola" label="Fashola"/>
<link wikidata="Q548278" start="139981" end="140004" title="Standard Chartered" label="Standard Chartered Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177521" start="141870" end="141901" title="Country of Particular Concern" label="Countries of Particular Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889635" start="141946" end="141994" title="United States Commission on International Religious Freedom" label="US Commission on International Religious Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="142179" end="142184" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q473239" start="142212" end="142218" title="Mike Pompeo" label="Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="142314" end="142325" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83974481" start="142362" end="142397" title="2023 Nigerian presidential election" label="2023 Nigerian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="144010" end="144027" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774533" start="144029" end="144065" title="Historiography of the British Empire" label="Historiography of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867197" start="144067" end="144089" title="History of West Africa" label="History of West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243301" start="144091" end="144129" title="List of heads of government of Nigeria" label="List of heads of government of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509851" start="144131" end="144164" title="List of heads of state of Nigeria" label="List of heads of state of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154364" start="144166" end="144185" title="Politics of Nigeria" label="Politics of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="144187" end="144197" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144240" end="144247" title="Ibadan#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207957" start="144252" end="144260" title="Timeline of Ibadan" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144269" end="144276" title="Kano (city)#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18144312" start="144281" end="144289" title="Timeline of Kano" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865208" start="144299" end="144306" title="History of Lagos" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805789" start="144311" end="144319" title="Timeline of Lagos" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144337" end="144344" title="Port Harcourt#History" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394458" start="144349" end="144357" title="Timeline of Port Harcourt" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970450" start="144360" end="144388" title="National Archives of Nigeria" label="National Archives of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q113016994" start="146000" end="146018" title="Helen Chapin Metz" label="Metz, Helen Chapin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21385" wikidata="Q595104" url="?curid=21385" title="Geography of Nigeria">
<text>Nigeria is a country in West Africa. It shares land borders with the Republic of Benin to the west, Chad and Cameroon to the east, and Niger to the north. Its coast lies on the Gulf of Guinea in the south and it borders Lake Chad to the northeast. Notable geographical features in Nigeria include the Adamawa Plateau, Mambilla Plateau, Jos Plateau, Obudu Plateau, the Niger River, Benue River, and Niger Delta.

Nigeria is in the tropics, where the climate is very humid and seasonally wet. Nigeria has majorly four climate types; these climate types are generally gradated from south to north. Nigeria&#x27;s principal streams are the Niger, from which it got its name, and the Benue, the primary tributary of the Niger. The country&#x27;s most elevated point is Chappal Waddi (or Gangirwal) at , situated in the Adamawa mountains in the Gashaka-Gumti Public Park, Taraba State, on the border with Cameroon.

The capital of Nigeria is Abuja, situated in the centre of the country, while Lagos is the country&#x27;s major port, monetary center and largest city. Communicated in dialects are English (official), Hausa, Igbo, and Yoruba. It is assessed that Nigeria has around 250 different ethno-etymological gatherings.
==Area data==
; Area
:* Total: 
:**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 31st
:* Land: 
:* Water: 

; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: slightly smaller than South Australia
:* Canada comparative: slightly smaller than British Columbia
:* United States comparative: slightly less than three times the size of New Mexico

== Climate==
The tropical monsoon climate, designated by the Köppen climate classification as &quot;Am&quot;, is found in the southern part of the country. This climate is influenced by the monsoons originating from the South Atlantic Ocean, which are brought into the country by the (maritime tropical) MT air mass, a warm moist sea-to-land seasonal wind. Its warmth and high humidity gives it a strong tendency to ascend and produce copious rainfall, which is a result of the condensation of water vapour in the rapidly rising air. The tropical monsoon climate has a very small temperature range. The temperature ranges are almost constant throughout the year; for example, Warri in the southern part of Nigeria records a maximum of for its hottest month while its lowest temperature is in its coldest month.

The southern part of Nigeria experiences heavy and abundant rainfall. These storms are usually convectional in nature because of the region&#x27;s proximity to the equatorial belt. The annual rainfall received in this region is very high. Parts of the Niger Delta receives over of annual rainfall, while the southeast receives between . The southern region of Nigeria experiences a double rainfall maxima with two high peaks. The first rainy season starts in March, ending in June. The August break, a short dry season, follows, followed by a short rainy season in September and a long dry season in October.

The tropical savanna climate, characterized by distinct rainy and dry seasons, dominates western to central Nigeria. It has a single peak in the summer and consistently high temperatures above . Abuja, Nigeria&#x27;s capital, experiences a temperature range of . The dry season occurs from December to March and is hot and dry with the Harmattan wind, a continental tropical (CT) air mass laden with dust from the Sahara, prevailing throughout this period.

With the Intertropical Convergence Zone swinging northward over West Africa from the Southern Hemisphere in April, heavy showers coming from pre-monsoonal convective clouds mainly in the form of squall lines also known as the north easterlies formed mainly as a result of the interactions of the two dominant airmasses in Nigeria known as the maritime tropical (south westerlies) and the continental tropical (north easterlies), begins in central Nigeria while monsoons arrive in July, bringing with it high humidity, heavy cloud cover and heavy rainfall lasting until September when the monsoons gradually begin retreating southward to the southern part of Nigeria. Rainfall totals in central Nigeria varies from in the lowlands to over along the south western escarpment of the Jos Plateau.

A hot semi-arid climate (&quot;BSh&quot;) is predominant within the Sahel in the northern part of Nigeria. Annual rainfall totals are low. The rainy season in the northern part of Nigeria lasts for three to four months (June to September). The rest of the year is hot and dry with temperatures climbing as high as . Potiskum, Yobe State in the northeast of Nigeria recorded Nigeria&#x27;s lowest ever temperature of .

Highland climates are found on highlands regions in Nigeria. Highlands over above sea level are cool enough to reach the temperate climate line in the tropics thereby giving the highlands, mountains and the plateau regions standing above this height, a cool mountain climate.

===Annual rainfall ===
Rainfall in the coastal belt of the Niger Delta is heavy due to the closeness of the Delta region to the equator. Annual rainfall totals vary from at Port Harcourt to as much as at Forcados, a coastal town in the Niger Delta, at Bonny, and in Calabar, the rainiest city with over one million people in Nigeria. As one moves northward and eastward, annual rainfall declines steadily to around at Sokoto in the northwest and as low as in the extreme north of Yobe and Borno States, which under the sweltering conditions that prevail is dry enough to be a hot arid climate (Köppen &quot;BWh&quot;).

===Trade winds===
====Tropical maritime air mass====
The tropical maritime air mass (MT) is responsible for Nigeria&#x27;s rainy season. This wind begins in February in the southern part of Nigeria while it takes longer for the wind to fully cover the whole of the country, reaching the northern part of Nigeria in June. Its presence a result of the northward retreat of the Harmattan. The northward retreat of the tropical continental air mass (CT) is caused by the sun&#x27;s northward shift from the tropic of capricorn in the southern hemisphere to the tropic of cancer in the northern hemisphere. This shift begins from February and ends in June, when the sun is fully overhead at the tropic of cancer. During this northward migration of the sun as a result of the earth tilting along its axis, the sun crosses the equator (around March), moving over West Africa. West Africa comes directly under the sun at this time. The whole of West Africa is heated intensely as result of the increased insolation. Temperatures can climb as high as over West Africa during this time. Temperatures in the northern part of Nigeria can go as high as in cities like Maiduguri.

High temperatures and increased insolation cause low pressure in West Africa and Nigeria between March and May. The Saharan continental air mass weakens due to land surface overheating, causing the atmosphere to expand and become lighter. The air mass retreats, and the sun&#x27;s rays enter Nigeria&#x27;s atmosphere more intensely than during Harmattan. The heating of the West Africa land mass creates a low pressure region over West Africa. This low pressure zone aid in the development of the tropical maritime air mass from the south Atlantic.

The tropical maritime air mass is a warm, humid and unstable trade wind. Convection currents form within the airmass whenever there is little instability in the airmass as a result of a slight to a very high orographic uplift in mountainous regions like the Obudu Plateau or the heating of the land which can trigger the formation of cumulonimbus cloud leading to thunderstorms within the air mass. During the dominance of the tropical maritime air mass, mornings are bright and sunny, the sun&#x27;s heating of the land in the mornings and afternoons sets up convectional currents, these currents rise vertically, cumulonimbus clouds are formed, and torrential downpours can occur in the afternoon.

The African easterly wave is another major contributor of rainfall during the summer monsoons months of May to September. The nature of this wave changes at about 15 degrees north latitude. The waves that pass south of this latitude carry moisture and create convection that leads to rain clouds. Nigeria&#x27;s location in the wetter part of the easterly waves south of the 15 degrees north latitude creates wetter climatic conditions for Nigeria, especially during the monsoons.

====Tropical continental air mass====
The tropical continental air mass, locally known as the Harmattan, is a wind originating from North Africa which crosses the Sahara into West Africa. Nigeria&#x27;s dry season from December to March is dominated by a dusty tropical continental air mass, which creates a haze and hinders visibility. Originating near the equator, it generates dust rather than precipitation. Despite its impact on transportation, the low humidity helps farmers dry their crops.

=== Temperature ===
Nigeria&#x27;s seasons and temperature variance are determined by rainfall with rainy season and dry season being the major seasons in Nigeria. The rainy season of Nigeria brings in slightly cooler weather to the country as a result of an increased cloud cover that acts as a blockage of the intense sunshine of the tropics by blocking much of the Suns rays in the rainy season; this in turn cools the land, and the winds above the ground remain cool thereby making for cooler temperatures during the rainy season. Despite the temperatures being cooler in the rainy season, the rainy season also has an increased temperature at night compared to the dry season. Also afternoons in the rainy season can be hot and humid. In the rainy season it is damp, and the rainfalls are usually abundant.

The dry season of Nigeria is a period of less cloud cover in the southern part of Nigeria to virtually no cloud cover in the northern part of Nigeria. The Sun shines through the atmosphere with little obstructions from the clear skies making the dry season in Nigeria a period of warmer weather conditions. In the middle of the dry season around December, the dust brought in by the Harmattan partially blocks the sun&#x27;s rays, which lowers temperatures. But with the withdrawal of this wind around March to April following the onset of the rainy season, temperatures can go as high as in some parts of Nigeria.

Semi-temperate weather conditions prevail on the highlands in central Nigeria above above sea level, namely the Jos Plateau. Temperatures on the Jos plateau ranges between which are cool all year round. Temperate weather conditions occur on the highlands along the Nigeria Cameroon border, in the eastern part of Nigeria. Highlands in these region attain an average height of more than to some standing above above sea level. The climate on these highlands is temperate all year round. The major highlands in this region are the Obudu Plateau above , Mambilla Plateau above and Mt. Chappal Waddi above .

=== Examples ===







== Topography ==

Nigeria&#x27;s most expansive topographical region is that of the Niger and Benue River valleys, which merge into each other and form a &quot;y&quot; shaped confluence at Lokoja. Plains rise to the north of the valleys. To the southwest of the Niger there is &quot;rugged&quot; highland, and to the southeast of the Benue hills and mountains are found all the way to the border with Cameroon. Coastal plains are found in both the southwest and the southeast.

=== Niger Delta ===
The Niger Delta is located in the southern part of Nigeria. It is one of the world&#x27;s largest arcuate fan-shaped river deltas. The riverine area of the Niger Delta is a coastal belt of swamps bordering the Atlantic. The mangrove swamps are vegetated tidal flats formed by a reticulate pattern of interconnected meandering creeks and tributaries of the Niger River. About 70% of Nigeria&#x27;s crude oil and gas production is from the area. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in Nigeria, making it the 27th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.

==Vegetation==

Nigeria is covered by three types of vegetation: forests (where there is significant tree cover), savannahs (insignificant tree cover, with grasses and flowers located between trees), and montane land (least common and mainly found in the mountains near the Cameroon border). Both the forest zone and the savannah zone are divided into three parts.

Some of the forest zone&#x27;s most southerly portion, especially around the Niger River and Cross River deltas, is mangrove swamp. North of this is fresh water swamp, containing different vegetation from the salt water mangrove swamps, and north of that is rain forest.

The savannah zone&#x27;s three categories are divided into Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, made up of plains of tall grass which are interrupted by trees, the most common across the country; Sudan savannah, with short grasses and short trees; and Sahel savannah patches of grass and sand, found in the northeast.

=== Plant ecology ===
Nigeria has numerous tree species, of which the majority of them are native while few are exotic. A high percentage of man-made forests in the country is dominated by exotic species. This culminated from the assumption that exotic trees are fast-growing. However, studies have also investigated the growth of indigenous trees in with that of exotic species. Due to overexploitation, the remaining natural ecosystems and primary forests in Nigeria are restricted to the protected areas which include one biosphere reserve, seven national parks, one World Heritage site, 12 Strict Nature Reserves (SNRs), 32 game reserves/wildlife sanctuaries, and hundreds of forest reserves. These are in addition to several ex-situ conservation sites such as arboreta, botanical gardens, zoological gardens, and gene banks managed by several tertiary and research institutions

Many countries in Africa are affected by Invasive Alien Species (IAS). In 2004, the IUCN–World Conservation Union identified 81 IAS in South Africa, 49 in Mauritius, 37 in Algeria and Madagascar, 35 in Kenya, 28 in Egypt, 26 in Ghana and Zimbabwe, and 22 in Ethiopia. However, very little is known about IAS in Nigeria, with most technical reports and literature reporting fewer than 10 invasive plants in the country. Aside from plant invaders, &quot;Rattus rattus&quot; and Avian influenza virus were also considered IAS in Nigeria. The initial entry of IAS into Nigeria was mainly through exotic plant introductions by the colonial rulers either for forest tree plantations or for ornamental purposes. The entry of exotic plants into Nigeria during the post-independence era was encouraged by increasing economic activity, the commencement of commercial oil explorations, the introduction through ships, and the introduction of ornamental plants by commercial floriculturists.

In the semi-arid and dry sub-humid savannas of West Africa, including Nigeria, numerous species of herbaceous dicots especially from the genera &quot;Crotalaria&quot;, &quot;Alysicarpus&quot;, &quot;Cassia&quot; and &quot;Ipomea&quot; are known to be widely used in livestock production. Quite often they are plucked or cut and fed either as fresh or conserved fodders. The utilization of these and many other herbs growing naturally within the farm environment is opportunistic.

Many other species native to Nigeria, including soybean and its varieties, serve as an important source of oil and protein in this region. There are also many plants with medicinal purposes that are used to aid the therapy in many organs. Some of these vegetations include &quot;Euphorbiaceae&quot;, which serve the purpose of aiding malaria, gastrointestinal disorders respectively and many other infections. Different stress factors such as droughts, low soil nutrients and susceptibility to pests have contributed to Maize plantations being an integral part of agriculture in this region.

As industrialization has increased, it has also put species of trees in the forest at risk of air pollution and studies have shown that in certain parts of Nigeria, trees have shown tolerance and grow in areas that have a significant amount of air pollution

==Natural resources and land use==
Nigeria&#x27;s natural resources include but are not limited to petroleum, tin, columbite, iron ore, coal, limestone, lead, zinc, natural gas, hydropower, and arable land.

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Nigeria, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point – unnamed location on the border with Niger immediately northwest of the town of , Sokoto State.
* Easternmost point – unnamed location on the border with Cameroon immediately east of the village of Munyego, Borno State.
* Southernmost point – unnamed headland south of the town of Egeregere, Bayelsa State.
* Westernmost point – unnamed location on the border with Benin Republic immediately east of the Beninoise town of Jabata, Oyo State.

==See also==
*Climate change in Nigeria

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="0" end="7" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="24" end="35" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="52" end="58" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="81" end="86" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="100" end="104" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="109" end="117" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="135" end="140" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="177" end="191" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q125309" start="220" end="229" title="Lake Chad" label="Lake Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q482274" start="301" end="316" title="Adamawa Plateau" label="Adamawa Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626923" start="318" end="334" title="Mambilla Plateau" label="Mambilla Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q811142" start="336" end="347" title="Jos Plateau" label="Jos Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075587" start="349" end="362" title="Obudu Plateau" label="Obudu Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="368" end="379" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q204806" start="381" end="392" title="Benue River" label="Benue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="398" end="409" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="430" end="437" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="516" end="529" title="Köppen climate classification" label="climate types"/>
<link wikidata="Q976055" start="764" end="777" title="Chappal Waddi" label="Chappal Waddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="1111" end="1116" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="1118" end="1122" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="1128" end="1134" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="1388" end="1403" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="1449" end="1465" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="1539" end="1549" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="1568" end="1592" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1612" end="1641" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="1741" end="1748" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1777" end="1791" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="1858" end="1866" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q574593" start="2227" end="2232" title="Warri" label="Warri"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="2527" end="2542" title="equator" label="equatorial belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214152" start="3309" end="3318" title="Harmattan" label="Harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="3387" end="3393" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="3440" end="3470" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="3516" end="3535" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q841225" start="3626" end="3637" title="squall line" label="squall line"/>
<link wikidata="Q811142" start="4211" end="4222" title="Jos Plateau" label="Jos Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="4227" end="4248" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="4293" end="4298" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234959" start="4541" end="4549" title="Potiskum Emirate" label="Potiskum"/>
<link wikidata="Q682777" start="4551" end="4561" title="Yobe State" label="Yobe State"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="4851" end="4866" title="Plateau" label="plateau regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="5094" end="5107" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467406" start="5125" end="5133" title="Forcados" label="Forcados"/>
<link wikidata="Q604978" start="5173" end="5178" title="Bonny, Nigeria" label="Bonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="5187" end="5194" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q336350" start="5339" end="5345" title="Sokoto (city)" label="Sokoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q682777" start="5401" end="5405" title="Yobe State" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="5410" end="5421" title="Borno State" label="Borno State"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="5497" end="5513" title="hot arid climate" label="hot arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5515" end="5521" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="6044" end="6063" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="tropic of capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="6098" end="6114" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="tropic of cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="6122" end="6141" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="northern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="6537" end="6547" title="Solar irradiance" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221436" start="6696" end="6705" title="Maiduguri" label="Maiduguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="7320" end="7330" title="Trade winds" label="trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q182311" start="7593" end="7611" title="cumulonimbus cloud" label="cumulonimbus cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="7623" end="7636" title="thunderstorms" label="thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q214152" start="8536" end="8545" title="Harmattan" label="Harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="8574" end="8586" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841227" start="10432" end="10447" title="Middle Belt" label="central Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q811142" start="10482" end="10493" title="Jos Plateau" label="Jos Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="10573" end="10582" title="Temperate climate" label="Temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q976055" start="10948" end="10965" title="Chappal Waddi" label="Mt. Chappal Waddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="11174" end="11184" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q994085" start="11188" end="11194" title="Lokoja" label="Lokoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="11295" end="11303" title="highland" label="highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="11410" end="11423" title="Coastal plain" label="Coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="11501" end="11512" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="11614" end="11625" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817834" start="11721" end="11735" title="mangrove swamp" label="mangrove swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="11751" end="11762" title="Mudflat" label="tidal flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178969" start="11879" end="11922" title="Petroleum industry in Nigeria" label="Nigeria&amp;#x27;s crude oil and gas production"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="11957" end="11971" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="12151" end="12161" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="12302" end="12309" title="montane" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141201" start="12557" end="12568" title="Cross River (Nigeria)" label="Cross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504181" start="12580" end="12594" title="Central African mangroves" label="mangrove swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="12795" end="12824" title="Guinean forest–savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest-savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="12982" end="12987" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905347" start="13867" end="13876" title="gene bank" label="gene bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14068" end="14080" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="14088" end="14097" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="14105" end="14112" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="14117" end="14127" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="14135" end="14140" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="14161" end="14166" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="14171" end="14179" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="14191" end="14199" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="14385" end="14398" title="Black rat" label="Rattus rattus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="14409" end="14424" title="Avian influenza" label="Avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q311148" start="15064" end="15074" title="Crotalaria" label="Crotalaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233536" start="15088" end="15099" title="Alysicarpus" label="Alysicarpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161173" start="15136" end="15142" title="Ipomoea" label="Ipomea"/>
<link wikidata="Q156584" start="15674" end="15687" title="Euphorbiaceae" label="Euphorbiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="16346" end="16355" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="16357" end="16360" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899841" start="16362" end="16371" title="columbite" label="columbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="16373" end="16381" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="16383" end="16387" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="16389" end="16398" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="16400" end="16404" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="16406" end="16410" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="16412" end="16423" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="16425" end="16435" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="16441" end="16452" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="16517" end="16524" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="16666" end="16671" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q503941" start="16711" end="16723" title="Sokoto State" label="Sokoto State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="16783" end="16791" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16827" end="16834" title="Munyego" label="Munyego"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="16836" end="16847" title="Borno State" label="Borno State"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16910" end="16919" title="Egeregere" label="Egeregere"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="16921" end="16934" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa State"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="16994" end="17008" title="Benin Republic" label="Benin Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17051" end="17057" title="Jabata, Nigeria" label="Jabata"/>
<link wikidata="Q503905" start="17059" end="17068" title="Oyo State" label="Oyo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q101421920" start="17085" end="17110" title="Climate change in Nigeria" label="Climate change in Nigeria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21386" wikidata="Q2297611" url="?curid=21386" title="Demographics of Nigeria">
<text>Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and the sixth most populous in the world. Nigeria is also one of the most densely populated countries in Africa, with approximately 218.5 million people in an area of .

54.3% of Nigerians are urban dwellers, with the annual rate of urbanisation being estimated at 3.92%. Nigeria is home to 371 ethnic groups speaking over 500 languages and the variety of customs and traditions among them gives the country great cultural diversity. Three largest ethnic groups, namely the Hausa, Yorubas, and Igbos constitute more than 60% of the population. The Ijaw, Efik, Ibibio, Annang, Ogoni, Tiv, Urhobo-Isoko, Edo and Itsekiri are some of the other sizeable ethnic groups. Over 1.2 million people living in Nigeria (0.5% of its total population, or 1 in every 200 people living in Nigeria) are from a continent other than Africa. There are 100,000 people from the United States, 75,000 are from Lebanon, 60,000 are from China and 16,000 are from the United Kingdom.

Nigeria has a young population overall, with 42.54% of inhabitants between the ages of 0–14. There is also a very high dependency ratio at 88.2 dependents per 100 non-dependents. The three main religious groups are Muslims (estimated to be 53.5% of the total population), Christians (estimated at 45.9%), and adherents of indigenous religions (estimated at 0.6%). The predominantly Christian Igbo are found in the south-east. Roman Catholicism is the largest Christian denomination in Igboland, but Anglicanism is also strong, as are Pentecostalism and other Evangelical denominations.

Persons of different ethnic backgrounds most commonly communicate in English, although knowledge of two or more Nigerian languages is widespread. Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba are the most widely used Nigerian languages. Nigerian Pidgin is used widely as an unofficial medium of communication, especially in the Nigerian cities of Warri, Sapele, Ughelli, Benin, and Port Harcourt.

==Population==

Nigeria&#x27;s population has been increasing rapidly for at least the last 5 decades due to very high birth rates, quadrupling its population during this time. Growth was fastest in the 1980s, after child mortality dropped rapidly. It has slowed slightly since then as both the birth rate and total fertility, rate have declined marginally since a 1978 peak. According to the 2017 revision of the World Population Prospects the total population was 191 million in 2016, compared to only 38 million in 1950. The proportion of children under the age of 15 in 2010 was 44.0%, 53.2% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.7% were 65 years or older. There is a large degree of population momentum, with 3.2 per cent growth leading to the projected population of 546 million by 2100.

The federal government has not elected to implement the type of controversial family planning programs that have reduced population growth of other developing nations, a result of low political support for these programs and a cultural preference for large families as well as high levels of social instability. Rising educational levels and health care improvements may enable future parents to plan for smaller families.

The former Nigeria&#x27;s chairman of National Population Commission, Eze Duruiheoma, delivering Nigeria&#x27;s statement in New York City on sustainable cities, human mobility and international migration in the 51st session of Commission on Population and Development, said that &quot;Nigeria remains the most populous in Africa, the seventh globally with an estimated population of over 198 million. The World Population Prospects predicts that by 2050, Nigeria will become the third most populated country in the world. Over the last 50 years, Nigeria&#x27;s urban population has grown at an average annual growth rate of more than 6.5% without commensurate increases in social amenities and infrastructure.&quot; He also stated that the population &quot;grew substantially from 17.3% in 1967 to 49.4% in 2017.&quot;




===Population by sex and age===
Population by sex and age group (Census 21.III.2006)

Population by age group (estimates 1.VII.2016) (Data are projections based on the 2006 Population Census.)

Population by age group (estimates 1.VII.2020) (Source: National Population Commission.)

===Population projections===
The total population in sub-Saharan Africa is projected to increase to almost one billion people, making it the most populated region outside of South-Central Asia. According to the United Nations, the population of Nigeria will reach 375 million by 2050. Nigeria might then be the 3rd most populous country in the world. In 2100, the population of Nigeria may reach 541 million. While the overall population is expected to increase, the growth rate is estimated to decrease from 1.2 per cent per year in 2010 to 0.4 per cent per year in 2050. The birth rate is also projected to decrease from 20.7 to 13.7, while the death rate is projected to increase from 8.5 in 2010 to 9.8 in 2050. By 2050, 69.6% of the population is estimated to be living in urban areas compared to 50.6% in 2010.

==Vital statistics==

Registration of vital events in Nigeria is not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates (&quot;UN World Population Prospects 2022&quot;).

===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total fertility rate (TFR) (Wanted TFR) and crude birth rate (CBR):



Fertility data as of 2013 (DHS Program):

Source: Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)

====Fertility rate by state====

∗ MICS surveys

====Contraceptive prevalence====

∗ UNICEFs state of the worlds children and child info, United Nations population divisions world contraceptive use, household surveys including demographic and health surveys and multiple indicator cluster surveys.

=== Life expectancy at birth ===
Life expectancy from 1950 to 2015 (&quot;UN World Population Prospects&quot;):



== Ethnic groups ==
==Emigration==


Today millions of ethnic Nigerians live abroad, the largest communities can be found in the United Kingdom (500,000–3,000,000) and the United States (600,000–1,000,000 Nigerians), other countries that followed closely are South Africa, Gambia, and Canada respectively. There are also large groups in Ireland, Portugal and many other countries.
Inspiration for emigration is based heavily on socio-economical issues such as warfare, insecurity, economical instability and civil unrest.

Between 1400 and 1900, of 1.4 million of 2 million emigrants were slaves sent to the Americas with the other 600,000 being sent to other destinations via the trans-Saharan, Red Sea and Indian Ocean routes. This is due to the fact that the land now known as Nigeria was a central point for 4 slave trades during the 19th century. Though bondage represented a great deal, an estimated 30,000 Nigerian inhabitants would relocate to Kano City and Gambia to take advantage of financial opportunities afforded by fertile land and available natural resources. What&#x27;s more, the presence of gold mines and rail lines along the Gold Coast, present-day Ghana, attracted an estimated 6,500 Nigerian citizens to attain financial gain and opportunity. The population of Nigerians in Ghana rose to roughly 149,000 before the 1969 alien expulsion order would displace nearly the entire population to surrounding countries.

==Religion==
:50% Muslim, 48.2% Christian, 1.8% other

Nigeria is nearly equally divided between Islam and Christianity. The majority of Nigerian Muslims are Sunni and mostly live in the northern, central and south-western states of the country, while Christians dominate in some central states (especially Plateau and Benue states), and the south-east and south-south regions. Other religions practised in Nigeria include African Traditional Religion, Hinduism, Baháʼí Faith, Judaism, The Grail Movement, and the Reformed Ògbóni Fraternity, one of the traditional socio-religious institutions of the Yorùbá people and their Òrìṣà religion known as Ẹ̀sìn Òrìṣà Ìbílẹ̀ in the Yorùbá language.

According to a 2009 Pew survey, 50.4% of Nigeria&#x27;s population were Muslims. A later Pew study in 2011 calculated that Christians now formed 50.8% of the population. Adherents of other religions made up 1% of the population.

The shift of population balance between Muslims and Christians is a result of northern and southern Nigeria being in different stages of demographic transition. The Muslim-dominated north is in an earlier stage of the demographic transition with much higher fertility rates than the south, whose split Christian/Muslim population is further along in the transition, and whose fertility rates are declining. Decreasing fertility can be linked to more access to education, use of contraceptives, and differing beliefs regarding family planning.

The 1999 introduction of Sharia law in twelve northern Nigerian states led to massive violence and unrest and caused an ethnic and religious rift between Sharia and Non-Sharia states, a divide that has deepened with time.

== Notes ==
== See also ==
* 2023 census of Nigeria
* National Bureau of Statistics of Nigeria

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* Reed, H. E., &amp; Mberu, B. U. (2014). Capitalizing on Nigeria&#x27;s demographic dividend: reaping the benefits and diminishing the burdens. Etude de La.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="0" end="7" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153211" start="11" end="46" title="List of African countries by population" label="the most populous country in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="55" end="87" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="sixth most populous in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="152" end="158" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q919083" start="365" end="383" title="Languages of Nigeria" label="over 500 languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="521" end="526" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="528" end="535" title="Yoruba people" label="Yorubas"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="541" end="546" title="Igbo people" label="Igbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q528981" start="595" end="599" title="Ijaw people" label="Ijaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q288809" start="601" end="605" title="Efik people" label="Efik"/>
<link wikidata="Q239577" start="607" end="613" title="Ibibio people" label="Ibibio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845328" start="615" end="621" title="Annang" label="Annang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478209" start="623" end="628" title="Ogoni people" label="Ogoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235705" start="630" end="633" title="Tiv people" label="Tiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109453" start="635" end="647" title="Urhobo-Isoko" label="Urhobo-Isoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287326" start="649" end="652" title="Edo people" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477983" start="657" end="665" title="Itsekiri people" label="Itsekiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="934" end="941" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="1398" end="1402" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1432" end="1449" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="1475" end="1487" title="Denominations of Christianity" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234624" start="1491" end="1499" title="Igboland" label="Igboland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1505" end="1516" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="1540" end="1554" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="1565" end="1576" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="1739" end="1744" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="1746" end="1750" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="1755" end="1761" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33655" start="1807" end="1822" title="Nigerian Pidgin" label="Nigerian Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q574593" start="1917" end="1922" title="Warri" label="Warri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495356" start="1924" end="1930" title="Sapele, Delta" label="Sapele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509166" start="1932" end="1939" title="Ughelli" label="Ughelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q320704" start="1941" end="1946" title="Benin City" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="1952" end="1965" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249459" start="2382" end="2408" title="World Population Prospects" label="World Population Prospects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229810" start="2663" end="2682" title="population momentum" label="population momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="2848" end="2863" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648433" start="3232" end="3262" title="National Population Commission" label="National Population Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3319" end="3332" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q652360" start="3336" end="3354" title="sustainable cities" label="sustainable cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936732" start="3375" end="3398" title="international migration" label="international migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="4879" end="4889" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="4949" end="4959" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="5368" end="5388" title="Total fertility rate" label="Total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="5412" end="5428" title="crude birth rate" label="crude birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="5612" end="5618" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="5859" end="5874" title="Life expectancy" label="Life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="5996" end="6012" title="Nigerians" label="ethnic Nigerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="6214" end="6220" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="6287" end="6295" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="7535" end="7540" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="7800" end="7828" title="Traditional African religions" label="African Traditional Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063616" start="7830" end="7838" title="Hinduism in Nigeria" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="7840" end="7852" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542048" start="7867" end="7881" title="Grail Movement" label="Grail Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="7978" end="7991" title="Yorùbá people" label="Yorùbá people"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="8052" end="8067" title="Yorùbá language" label="Yorùbá language"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8142" end="8149" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="8869" end="8879" title="Sharia law" label="Sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937196" start="9096" end="9118" title="2023 census of Nigeria" label="2023 census of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971159" start="9121" end="9161" title="National Bureau of Statistics of Nigeria" label="National Bureau of Statistics of Nigeria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21387" wikidata="Q1154364" url="?curid=21387" title="Politics of Nigeria">
<text>The federal government of Nigeria is composed of three distinct branches: the executive, the legislative, and the judicial, whose powers are vested and bestowed upon by the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. One of the primary functions of the constitution is that it provides for separation and balance of powers among the three branches and aims to prevent the repetition of past mistakes made by the government. Other functions of the constitution include a division of power between the federal government and the states, and protection of various individual liberties of the nation&#x27;s citizens.

Nigerian politics takes place within a framework of a federal and presidential republic and a representative democracy, in which the president holds executive power. Legislative power is held by the federal government and the two chambers of the legislature: the House of Representatives and the Senate. The legislative branch of Nigeria is responsible for and possesses powers to legislate laws. Together, the two chambers form the law-making body in Nigeria, called the National Assembly, which serves as a check on the executive arm of government. The National Assembly of Nigeria (NASS) is the democratically elected body that represents the interests of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and its people, makes laws for Nigeria, and holds the Government of Nigeria to account. The National Assembly (NASS) is the nation&#x27;s highest legislature, whose power to make laws is summarized in chapter one, section four of the 1999 Nigerian Constitution. Sections 47–49 of the 1999 Constitution state, among other things, that &quot;There shall be a National Assembly (NASS) for the federation which shall consist of two chambers: the Senate and the House of Representatives.&quot; The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Nigeria a &quot;hybrid regime&quot; in 2019. The federal government, state, and local governments of Nigeria aim to work cooperatively to govern the nation and its people. Nigeria became a member of the British Commonwealth upon its independence from British colonial rule on 1 October 1960.

==Legal system==

The law of Nigeria is based on the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, and British common law (due to the long history of British colonial influence). The common law in the legal system is similar to common-law systems used in England and Wales and other Commonwealth countries. The constitutional framework for the legal system is provided by the Constitution of Nigeria.

The major influences on Nigeria&#x27;s legal system are:

*English law, derived from its colonial past with Britain: Nigeria belongs to the common law family. This is because English law makes up a substantial part of the Nigerian law. Nigeria, though now a sovereign nation, was once under British rule. Upon gaining independence in 1960, numerous English laws were copied, and most of the laws have since been repealed in England. Nigeria also adopted all laws that were in force in England on 1 January 1900.
*Common law, case law has developed since colonial independence; common law can be defined as that unwritten body of laws based on judicial precedents. For unusual and irregular occurring cases where the result can in no way be resolved by the basis of current laws or written law regulations, common law guides the decision-making process.
*Customary law, which is derived from Indigenous traditional norms and practices. In Nigeria, customary law can be divided, in terms of nature, into two different classes, which are the ethnic or non-Muslim customary law and the Muslim law (Sharia). The ethnic customary law in Nigeria is Indigenous, and this system of customary law applies and is valid to members of a specific ethnic group. Muslim law is a religious law that is solely based on the Muslim faith and applies to the members of such faith. In the nation of Nigeria, it is not an indigenous law; it is a received customary law introduced into the country as part of Islam.
*Sharia law, law used in some states in the northern region. In two principal respects the sharia law greatly differs from Western systems of law. First things first in terms of scope the sharia law possesses a much wider scope since it regulates the individual&#x27;s relationship not only with his or her neighbors and the state, which is perceived as the limit of most other legal systems, but also with God and with the individual&#x27;s own conscience. Ritual practices—such as the daily prayers (&quot;ṣalāt&quot;), almsgiving (&quot;zakāt&quot;), fasting (&quot;ṣawm&quot;), and pilgrimage (hajj)—are an integral part of sharia law and usually occupy the first chapters in legal manuals. The sharia is concerned as much with ethical standards as with legal rules, indicating not only what an individual is entitled or bound to do in law but also what one ought, in conscience, to do or to refrain from doing.

===Legislation as a source of Nigerian law===
The two fundamental sources of Nigerian law through legislation are:

(1) Acts of British parliament, popularly referred to as statutes of general application during the period before independence.

(2) Local legislation (comprising enactments of the Nigerian legislatures from colonial period to date). There were other sources which, though subsumed in Nigerian legislations, were distinctly imported into the Nigerian legal systems. They are called the &quot;criminal and penal codes&quot; of Nigeria.

=== Nigerian statutes as sources of Nigerian law===
Nigerian legislation may be classified as follows: &quot;The colonial era until 1960, post-independence legislation 1960–1966, the military era 1966–1999&quot;.

=== Post-independence legislation 1960–1966===
The grant of independence to Nigeria was a milestone in the political history of the country. This period witnessed the consolidation of political gains made during the colonial era. Politicians genuinely focused their lapses on the polity. It achieved for herself a republican status by shaking off the last vestiges of colonial authority. However, despite the violent violation of its provisions, the constitution remained the subsequent administrations (military or otherwise).

=== Military regime, 1966–1999 ===
The Armed Forces of Nigeria assumed the rulership of Nigeria in 1966–1979 and 1983–1999, except in August – September 1992. The breakdown of law and order which occurred in the period under review would not be attributed to any defect in the Nigerian legal system. Corrupt practices both in the body politics and all aspects of Nigerian life eroded efficiency and progress. There were eight coups generally; five were successful and three were unsuccessful.

==Executive branch==

The president is elected through universal suffrage which is regarded as more than a privilege extended by the state to its citizenry, and it is rather thought of as an inalienable right that inheres to every adult citizen by virtue of citizenship. In democracies it is the primary means of ensuring that governments are responsible to the governed. The president is head of both the state and government, and heads the cabinet of Nigeria, the Federal Executive Council. The constitution also sanctions the president&#x27;s status as commander-in-chief of the armed forces in Section 130. The constitution of 1999 vests all the executive powers of the federation in the person of the president which can be exercised directly by him or his vice president or members of his cabinet. Section 5(1)(b) provides that the executive powers of the president extends to the maintenance of the provisions of the constitution, acts of the national assembly and on items on which the national assembly has power for the time being to make law. The president is elected to see that the Nigerian Constitution is enacted and that the legislation is applied to the people. The elected president is also in charge of the nation&#x27;s armed forces and can serve no more than two four-year elected terms. The current president of Nigeria is Bola Tinubu, who was elected in 2023, and the current vice president is Kashim Shettima.

The executive branch is divided into Federal Ministries, each headed by a minister appointed by the president, Federal Ministries are those civil service departments which were made responsible for delivering various types of government service and each ministry is headed by a permanent secretary who reports to a minister in the Federal Cabinet. Nigeria has 24 Federal Ministries. The president must include at least one member from each of the 36 states in his cabinet. The president&#x27;s appointments are confirmed by the Senate of Nigeria. In some cases, a federal minister is responsible for more than one ministry (for example, Environment and Housing may be combined), or a minister may be assisted by one or more ministers of state. Each ministry also has a permanent secretary, who is a senior civil servant.

The ministries are responsible for various parastatals (government-owned corporations), such as universities, the National Broadcasting Commission, and the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation. However, some parastatals are the responsibility of the Office of the Presidency, such as the Independent National Electoral Commission, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission and the Federal Civil Service Commission.

==Legislative branch==
The legislature is said to be the first among the three arms of government – the legislature, executive, and the judiciary. These arms are characterized by the principle of separation of power as each is supposed to be independent of the other. The legislature derives its powers from the 1999 Constitution (as amended) in Sections 4(1) and 4(2). The legislature is vested with the powers to make laws for the peace, order and good governance of the Federation.

“It is also vested with investigatory powers, financial powers, confirmation and impeachment powers. It would not be out of place for me to use this occasion to remind us that the Legislature is the symbol of democracy all over the world. Under Section 4 (1) of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (as amended) (the &quot;Constitution&quot;), the National Assembly of Nigeria often called NASS is vested with the legislative powers of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. That is the power to make laws for the peace, order, and good government of the Federation with respect to any matter included in the Exclusive Legislative List and the Concurrent List – a list of 12 items that both NASS and states&#x27; house of assembly can legislate on. This legislative power is typically exercised through bills passed by the NASS which are assented to by the president. Bills generally come in two forms – either a private bill which affects private citizens, corporate entities and/or a particular class of people or public bills which affect the general public. A bill can be introduced into either chamber of the NASS by members of the respective chambers or the executive arm of government. The National Assembly of Nigeria has two chambers: the House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of Representatives is the lower chamber of Nigeria&#x27;s bicameral National Assembly and is presided over by the speaker of the House of Representatives. It has 360 members each of the federal constituencies of the country, who are elected for four-year terms in single-seat constituencies. The Senate, which has 109 members, is presided over by the president of the Senate. A total of 108 members are elected for four-year terms in 36 three-seat constituencies, which correspond to the country&#x27;s 36 states. One member is selected in the single-seat constituency of the federal capital.

The legislators are elected to either the House of Representatives or the Senate to be representatives of their constituencies and to pass legislation to benefit the public. The legislative process consists of bills being drafted and presented in either of the two chambers. These bills can only become national law once they are approved by the president of Nigeria who can veto bills.

The president of the Senate is currently Ahmed Ibrahim Lawan, who was elected to the senate in 2007, and the speaker of the House is Femi Gbajabiamila, who has been Nigeria&#x27;s 9th speaker of the House of Representatives since 2019. Each member of the National Assembly of Nigeria can be elected to more than two four-year terms. Recently, the legislative branch has been misusing its position as a check on the power of the president and his cabinet. Legislators have been known to utilize their power for not only law-making, but as a means of political intimidation and a tool to promote individual monetary success.

Senators are paid a salary equivalent to over $2,200 USD a month, supplemented by expenses of $37,500 USD a month (2018 figures).

==Judicial branch==
The judicial branch is made up of the Supreme Court of Nigeria, the Court of Appeals, the high courts, and other trial courts such as the magistrates&#x27;, customary, Sharia and other specialized courts. The National Judicial Council serves as an independent executive body, insulating the judiciary from the executive arm of government. According to the 1999 constitution, the Supreme Court has both original and appellate jurisdictions (the power to reverse, modify and change a decision or ruling made by a lower court). Appellate jurisdiction exists for both the civil law and criminal law, the supreme court has the sole authority and jurisdiction to entertain appeals from Court of Appeal, having appellate jurisdiction over all lower federal courts and highest state courts. Decisions and rulings by the court are binding and absolute on all courts in Nigeria except the Supreme Court itself. The Supreme Court is composed of the chief justice of Nigeria and other justices not more than 21 including the chief justice, appointed by the president of Nigeria on the recommendation of the National Judicial Council. These justices are subject to confirmation by the Senate.

The judicial branch of the Nigerian government is the only one of the three branches of government in which its members are not elected but are appointed. The judiciary, and the Supreme Court in particular, are intended to uphold the principles and laws of the nation&#x27;s constitution that was written in 1999. Its goal is to protect the basic rights of the citizens. The current chief justice of the Supreme Court is Olukayode Ariwoola.
== Democracy in Nigeria ==
After achieving its independence and republican status in 1960 (becoming the fourth largest democratic country in the world) and 1963 respectively, Nigeria experienced its first military coup in 1966 followed by a civil war which lasted until 1970. It was made possible to bring back the democratic ideal for a few of years in the year 1978. Though this certain period of democratic ideal did not last very long and was soon over in 1983 as a result of some military rulers who came into power via coup d&#x27;état promised to return the country to democracy.

Nevertheless, only General Abdulsalami Abubakar took the control of the nation after the death of Sani Abacha and stuck to his word. The country&#x27;s modern Constitution became official in 1999. The elections in the year 1999 were more successful compared to that of the previous military ruler. The newly emerged President of Nigeria Olusegun Obasanjo put a stop to the military regimes that kept switching one after the other for almost 30 years. The end of the military rule culminated in a new era of regular elections as well as the return of civil liberties, a free press, and an end to arbitrary arrests and maltreatment, although human rights violations still occur regularly. Nigeria democratized in 1999 with the start of the Fourth Republic, but has suffered some setbacks to becoming fully democratic. Elites in Nigeria have been found to have more power and influence than average citizens, and as a consequence of this, there has been a great deal of corruption in Nigerian politics and general life. A good sign of democracy in Nigeria is the fact that elections are becoming less fraudulent and there is more party competition. Another indicator of a strong democracy is the presence of a civil society in which citizens have the right to act and speak freely in concert with a strong use of media for everyday life. Furthermore, Nigeria has seen a heightened use of media within the realm of political issues, particularly with the recent [Special Anti-Robbery Squad] SARS protest, indicating a sense of freedom for the public to voice their opinions to the government and the world.

=== Level of freedom ===
According to the 2020 World Press Freedom Index, Nigeria is the 115th most free nation in the world. It has been noted as a nation with perpetuating violence against freedom of speech and press. Nigeria has been found to be a vulnerable nation, both at risk of modern slavery and corruption. The nation is vulnerable due to the effects of inner conflict and governance issues. Freedom House has rated Nigeria as a &quot;partly free&quot; nation. In the last presidential election, the process was tainted by violence, intimidation and vote buying, which have been prevalent in many of the recent elections within Nigeria. Similarly, in the most recent legislative elections, citizens claimed the process was also characterized by intimidation and other inconsistencies. The electoral process and related laws are thought to be enacted in a mostly fair fashion, but there have been instances of intentionally complicating voting and effecting turnout. The people of Nigeria feel as though there is more freedom in their right to have different political parties to represent their opinions. This is exemplified by the vast number of legitimate parties seen in elections. Similarly, Nigerian opposition parties have a legitimate chance to participate in politics and win official positions. In regards to freedom of political expression, Freedom House indicates that opinions and institutions are often heavily influenced by non-governmental, external entities or individuals. In Nigeria, all ethnic groups and religious backgrounds have an equal opportunity to participate in politics, however, there is a lack of women elected into the government, and same-sex relationships were criminalized in 2014. The Nigerian federal government&#x27;s officials like the president and legislators are elected to enact policy and laws, and are usually allowed to do so without interruption, but in recent years, their ability to legislate has been marred by corruption and instability. Corruption has been a major problem for the Nigerian government since its independence from colonial rule. In particular, the oil sector has allowed a great deal of corruption to take place. The government has tried to enact measures to combat corruption that infringes upon the functioning of the state, but have only been quasi-successful. The government has also been rated as lacking in transparency, often not allowing records to be available to the public that should be readily available. Journalism and the media in Nigeria are somewhat free, they are allowed to function independently from the government, but oftentimes those who criticize public figures or offices are arrested or censored. A mafia-like organisation, Black Axe, is involved in international corruption using especially on-line fraud, as reported in BBC article. Religious freedom is allowed in Nigeria, however, the government and even non-governmental organizations have been known to violently respond to groups that openly dissent to the federal government. Religion is a contentious topic in Nigeria because of heated, ongoing conflicts between Christians and Muslims within the state. Freedom House rated the Nigerian federal government well in the category of allowing academic freedom, and the public&#x27;s ability to express their views even if they disagree without the government without fearing a negative reaction from the government. The Nigerian government was rated moderately on people&#x27;s ability to assemble, ability to work with human rights, and the existence of unions. The judiciary was rated as moderately free from the government, and lacking in due process in trials and equal treatment of all members of society. People in Nigeria do not have great freedom of movement, and are often subjected to curfews set by the federal government in areas that are at a risk of violence or instability. There is a lack of protection for women in regards to rights to abortion, rape, and domestic abuse under the Nigerian federal government. Lastly, there is a pervasive human-trafficking problem in Nigeria and frequent exploitation of citizens that the federal government has done a poor job to prevent.

== Political parties ==
There are 18 recognized political parties in Nigeria. There are a great number of parties as a direct result of corruption and chaos that has ensued in Nigeria surrounding the federal government and elections for years. The vast number of parties has proved to be difficult to monitor. The two major parties are the Peoples Democratic Party and the All Progressives Congress, both of which have held the presidency and seats in the National Assembly for extended periods of time. As opposed to parties in other nations that represent a slew of political opinions that the public can align themselves with, parties in Nigeria act more so as a means through which prominent figures can gain power and influence, and there are so many because they often switch parties to find the one to give them the best chance of achieving authority.

Political parties have been an important aspect of Nigerian government both before and after independence was achieved from the British in 1960. Parties allow for political competition to take place, for the citizenry to find people who represent their ideas and interests in government, and for the introduction of new leaders and perspectives into Nigerian life. Many Nigerians do not understand the political party system because there are so many options and their platforms are unclear to the public. This remains an issue in Nigeria because it marginalizes those who are uneducated or uninvolved in government. Also, there seems to be a tendency for people in Nigeria to support parties based on ethnic of religious divisions, particularly along the Muslim-Christian line of division.

The 18 political parties are: Accord, Action Alliance, Action Democratic Party, Action Peoples Party, African Action Congress, African Democratic Congress, All Progressives Congress, All Progressives Grand Alliance, Allied Peoples Movement, Boot Party, Labour Party, National Rescue Movement, New Nigeria Peoples Party, Peoples Democratic Party, Peoples Redemption Party, Social Democratic Party, Young Progressive Party, Zenith Labour Party.

== Electoral system and recent elections ==
The president and members of the National Assembly of Nigeria are elected by members of the population who are at least 18 years old. The National Electoral Commission is responsible for monitoring elections and ensuring that the results are correct and not fraudulent. The winner of a position is elected through the first-past-the-post system that is used in Great Britain.

Nigeria has faced numerous bouts with fraudulent elections, particularly noteworthy is the general election that took place in 2007. This election was reportedly marred by ballot-rigging, underage voting, violence, intimidation, and an overall absence of clarity and accuracy from the National Electoral Commission.

===Presidential elections of Nigeria, 2015===

===House of Representatives===
===Senate===
=== Presidential election of Nigeria, 2019 ===
== Christian–Muslim relations ==

Islamic law has found its way into the heart of many Nigerian state governments, particularly in the northern sect of the country. There is a deep rift between Christians and Muslim in Nigeria, and therefore the government has taken on a hybrid of English common law and Islamic law when dealing with legal issues to appease the diverse national population. Nigeria has the largest population of Christians and Muslims cohabitating in the world. These two religions were introduced in Nigeria largely during the colonial period, and since then, many Africans have merged their own traditional religions with these two institutionalized ones.

Religious tensions between Christians and Muslims in Nigeria has often been used by politicians and other powerful people to incite violence and create fear and chaos among Nigerians. This has led to many citizens questioning why Nigeria remains one federal state, and that it should possibly split along the Christian–Muslim divide. The northern section of the country is largely Islamic, with 12 states that live under Sharia law, while the southern area is mostly Christian. There have been multiple attempts by Nigerian Muslims to add Sharia concepts to the Constitution which has alarmed the Christian population within the nation. Many Christians have deemed the rise in Islam in Nigeria to be dangerous and that it could possibly lead to increased terrorism and instability. This conflict is threatening the stability of Nigeria&#x27;s democracy, internal structure, and civil society, and many political scientists and Nigerian leaders hope the two religions can engage in a peaceful dialogue that hopefully pacifies both sides.

== Terrorism in Nigeria ==
The greatest terrorist threat in Nigeria is from the organization Boko Haram, and became a prevalent issue in the summer of 2009. Boko Haram is a radical jihadist Islamist terrorist group from the northern sect of Nigeria. This organization has launched terror attacks that have largely targeted the Nigerian federal government, non-Muslim religious organizations, and average citizens. The rise and growing effects of Boko Haram have been attributed to the instability and fragility of the Nigerian state. They are upset by the government corruption and policy failures of Nigeria, and in particular, the poverty and lack of development of the north of Nigeria which is predominantly Muslim. The impact of Boko Haram on Nigeria has been devastating, over 37,000 individuals have died due to their terrorist attacks since 2011, and over 200,000 Nigerians have been displaced. Boko Haram was responsible for the kidnapping of hundreds of school girls in 2014, triggering the #BringBackOurGirls movement across the globe. The terrorist organization became a part of ISIS in 2015, drawing concerns to the safety and stability of Nigeria. Many world powers including the United States have contributed military resources to help fight against Boko Haram because Nigeria&#x27;s oil industry is crucial to the international economy. The Nigerian federal government has launched programs and tactics to combat Boko Haram because of their prevalence. There has also been a recent rise in citizen-created, and in particular youth-led groups that are taking action against Boko Haram to protect themselves and their communities. Both the actions of Boko Haram and the government&#x27;s efforts to combat terrorism have led to a growing refugee crisis in Nigeria.

== Commonwealth membership ==
Nigeria&#x27;s membership in the British Commonwealth began in 1960 and was suspended from 1995 to 1999 when the country became a state under military rule. It was reinstated in 1999 when democracy was established with the Presidential Constitution and Fourth Republic of Nigeria, and it remains a part of the Commonwealth to this day. The Commonwealth Secretariat aims to help Nigeria detect and deter corruption within its federal government. In 2018, they taught numerous government officials and financial officers how to combat and condemn corruption within the nation. The Secretariat&#x27;s involvement both in governmental and financial affairs created a better system for the transaction of goods and services in Nigeria with less risk of corruption. As of 2017, the Commonwealth has provided Nigeria with policies and resources for Great Britain&#x27;s exit from the European Union and outlined the possible effects on Commonwealth nations and trade. The Commonwealth Secretariat has helped Nigeria in its natural resource fields such as oil and mining. They have helped with negotiations and the creation of fair bargains. The Commonwealth Secretariat has also provided Nigeria with access to their Connectivity Agenda, which allows nations under the Commonwealth to communicate and exchange ideas and policies to help each other with economic and domestic productivity.

== States of Nigeria ==

Nigeria is made up of 36 states and 1 capital territory: the Federal Capital Territory, Abia, Adamawa, Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi, Bayelsa, Benue, Borno, Cross River, Delta, Ebonyi, Edo, Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo, Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos, Nasarawa, Niger, Ogun, Ondo, Osun, Oyo, Plateau, Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe, and Zamfara state.

===Local governments===
Each state is further divided into local government areas (LGAs). These states and their local governments are essential to the function of a federal government because they have a pulse on the local population and can therefore assess the needs of constituents and enact policy or infrastructure that is helpful. They are also important because the federal government has the time and resources to take on national projects and international affairs while local governments can take care of the Nigerians native to their respective states. The devolution of power between the states and the federal government helps the functionality of Nigeria. 774 local governments oversee the collection of local taxes, education, health care, roads, waste, and planning. The local government look after the affairs of the common men and women in the Nigeria society. The creation of local government reform started in 1968, 1970 during the military government but was fully 1976.

== Federal Government&#x27;s handling of COVID-19 ==
As Africa&#x27;s most populated nation, the coronavirus pandemic ravaged across Nigeria. Nigeria proved that it could detect, respond to, and prevent the COVID-19 outbreak in a very restricted, poor fashion. Nigeria lacks the resources to conduct the widespread testing the nation needs to keep up with the number of cases surging across the state. Nigeria also lacks the necessary number of other resources for fighting the virus such as hospital workers, rooms, and ventilators.

The federal government&#x27;s response to the virus has been fairly weak and ineffective. Former President Buhari passed numerous lockdowns, mask mandates, and travel bans to decrease the number of cases in the country. However, the lockdowns, mandates, and travel restrictions have led to negative economic effects for a great number of citizens who have lost their jobs and source of income. In response to this, the federal government passed economic stimulus packages to promote important production sectors such as agriculture and oil. The government also passed food assistance measures and cash transfers to aid those in poverty who are going hungry. They also pushed for fundraising efforts to secure funds from donors to support the federal budget and economic sector.

==Military==

The military of Nigeria has played a major role in the country&#x27;s history, often seizing control of the country and ruling it for long periods of time. Its last period of rule ended in 1999, following the death of the leader of the previous military junta Sani Abacha in 1998.

Active duty personnel in the three Nigerian armed services totals approximately 76,000. The Nigerian Army, which is the largest of the services, has about 60,000 personnel, deployed between two mechanized infantry divisions, one composite division (airborne and amphibious), the Lagos Garrison Command (a division-size unit), and the Abuja-based Brigade of Guards. The Nigerian Navy (7,000) is equipped with frigates, fast attack craft, corvettes, and coastal patrol boats. The Nigerian Air Force (9,000) flies transports, trainers, helicopters, and fighter aircraft; however, most of their vehicles are currently not operational.

==Foreign relations==

Nigeria currently has better foreign relations with its neighbors, due to its current state of democracy. It is a member of the African Union and sits on that organization&#x27;s Peace and Security Council.

The current minister of foreign affairs of Nigeria is Yusuf Tuggar. Much of Nigeria&#x27;s foreign affairs, both during the colonial era and post-independence has relied on oil-production. Nigeria&#x27;s relationships with both its continental neighbors in Africa and throughout the world have improved a great deal since it has transitioned from military rule to a democratic state. Nigeria is hoping to gain a permanent seat on the UN Security Council in the near future. Despite these achievements, Nigeria continues to face challenges in its foreign relations, such as the fight against terrorism and insurgency in the region, the challenge of migration and human trafficking, and the need to increase economic cooperation and integration with its neighbors.

== Media ==

Nigeria&#x27;s media scene is characterized by state and private broadcasters, popular international brands like the BBC and CC and more than a 100 national and local print titles state and private broadcasters. Radio and televised media in Nigeria is mostly state-owned by the National Broadcasting Commission. This is often used as a tactic of the government to assert control over and sway public opinion in favor of the incumbent party and his policies. However, most newspaper are privately owned and the internet is not restricted to the public. Given that a majority (70%) of citizens are under 30, it is fitting that mobile news consumption (84%) is more than twice as high as computer consumption (41%), with tablet consumption trailing at 11%.

==See also==

*Senate of Nigeria
*National Assembly of Nigeria
*List of Nigerian state governors
*Nigerian Civil Service
*States of Nigeria
*Nigerian Prisons Services
*Chief Justice of Nigeria

==Further reading==

* Carl Levan and Patrick Ukata (eds.). 2018. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Nigerian Politics&quot;. Oxford University Press.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154364" start="4" end="33" title="Politics of Nigeria" label="federal government of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440298" start="74" end="87" title="Federal Ministries of Nigeria" label="the executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="93" end="104" title="National Assembly (Nigeria)" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509369" start="114" end="122" title="Supreme Court of Nigeria" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="173" end="220" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="258" end="270" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="417" end="427" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="608" end="616" title="Citizenship" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="673" end="680" title="Federation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="685" end="697" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="698" end="706" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="713" end="737" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="785" end="802" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q665693" start="882" end="906" title="Nigerian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="915" end="921" title="Nigerian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="1174" end="1202" title="National Assembly (Nigeria)" label="National Assembly of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="1803" end="1830" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1853" end="1866" title="Democracy Index#Definitions" label="hybrid regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2040" end="2060" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="2159" end="2166" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="2183" end="2194" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="2220" end="2229" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="2235" end="2253" title="British common law" label="British common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="2262" end="2308" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="the long history of British colonial influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="2387" end="2404" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757823" start="2415" end="2437" title="Commonwealth countries" label="Commonwealth countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="2508" end="2531" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="Constitution of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="2593" end="2604" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2623" end="2631" title="British Empire" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="3047" end="3057" title="Common law" label="Common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="3388" end="3401" title="Customary law" label="Customary law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520506" start="3628" end="3634" title="Sharia in Nigeria" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="4027" end="4037" title="Sharia law" label="Sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q234869" start="4534" end="4539" title="Salah" label="ṣalāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="4559" end="4578" title="Zakat" label="(&amp;quot;zakāt&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="4624" end="4628" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="5769" end="5781" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q250774" start="6277" end="6300" title="Armed Forces of Nigeria" label="Armed Forces of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="6664" end="6669" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="6787" end="6805" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="7288" end="7306" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510872" start="8077" end="8088" title="Bola Tinubu" label="Bola Tinubu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83974481" start="8098" end="8113" title="2023 Nigerian presidential election" label="elected in 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q42178" start="8131" end="8145" title="vice president" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440298" start="8204" end="8222" title="Federal Ministries of Nigeria" label="Federal Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="8267" end="8276" title="President of Nigeria" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015542" start="8498" end="8513" title="Cabinet of Nigeria" label="Federal Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="8695" end="8712" title="Senate of Nigeria" label="Senate of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111759032" start="8936" end="8955" title="Permanent Secretary" label="permanent secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="9032" end="9042" title="parastatal" label="parastatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186151" start="9085" end="9097" title="List of universities in Nigeria" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671299" start="9145" end="9184" title="Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation" label="Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091794" start="9280" end="9321" title="Independent National Electoral Commission (Nigeria)" label="Independent National Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q431302" start="9327" end="9367" title="Economic and Financial Crimes Commission" label="Economic and Financial Crimes Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124560" start="9376" end="9408" title="Civil Service Commission of Nigeria" label="Federal Civil Service Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="11108" end="11136" title="National Assembly of Nigeria" label="National Assembly of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="11145" end="11153" title="Bicameralism" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q665693" start="11204" end="11228" title="Nigerian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574275" start="11324" end="11363" title="Speaker of the Nigerian House of Representatives" label="speaker of the House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="11486" end="11500" title="Constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="11506" end="11512" title="Nigerian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376676" start="11561" end="11584" title="President of the Nigerian Senate" label="president of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="11658" end="11672" title="Constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q465842" start="11716" end="11722" title="States of Nigeria" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="11786" end="11801" title="Abuja" label="federal capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695864" start="12233" end="12252" title="Ahmed Lawan" label="Ahmed Ibrahim Lawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442793" start="12325" end="12342" title="Femi Gbajabiamila" label="Femi Gbajabiamila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="12869" end="12872" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="12918" end="12921" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509369" start="13005" end="13029" title="Supreme Court of Nigeria" label="Supreme Court of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="13035" end="13051" title="Appellate court" label="Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128539" start="13057" end="13067" title="high court" label="high court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125101" start="13080" end="13091" title="trial court" label="trial court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="13105" end="13115" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479995" start="13124" end="13133" title="Custom (law)" label="customary"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="13135" end="13141" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203185" start="13176" end="13201" title="National Judicial Council (Nigeria)" label="National Judicial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="13287" end="13304" title="Separation of powers" label="arm of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509369" start="13872" end="13885" title="Supreme Court of Nigeria" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511642" start="13905" end="13929" title="Chief Justice of Nigeria" label="chief justice of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="14012" end="14032" title="president of Nigeria" label="president of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="14139" end="14145" title="Senate of Nigeria" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062940" start="14569" end="14587" title="Olukayode Ariwoola" label="Olukayode Ariwoola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346503" start="15817" end="15840" title="Human rights in Nigeria" label="human rights violations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="16209" end="16218" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="16828" end="16853" title="Press Freedom Index" label="World Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="17183" end="17196" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="18297" end="18309" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511520" start="18780" end="18790" title="Corruption in Nigeria" label="Corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="19907" end="19917" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="19922" end="19929" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938959" start="20846" end="20863" title="Human trafficking in Nigeria" label="human-trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="21030" end="21047" title="Political party" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551163" start="21322" end="21346" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party (Nigeria)" label="Peoples Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729266" start="21355" end="21380" title="All Progressives Congress" label="All Progressives Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091794" start="23260" end="23289" title="Independent National Electoral Commission (Nigeria)" label="National Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="23483" end="23496" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="24236" end="24254" title="English law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="24259" end="24270" title="Sharia" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189816" start="24569" end="24590" title="Ethnic religion" label="traditional religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="25052" end="25062" title="Sharia" label="Sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="25762" end="25772" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26670" end="26688" title="#BringBackOurGirls" label="#BringBackOurGirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="26760" end="26764" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="26863" end="26876" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="27422" end="27429" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="27513" end="27533" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153854" start="28445" end="28469" title="Commonwealth Secretariat Act 1966" label="Commonwealth Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q509300" start="28949" end="28974" title="Federal Capital Territory, Nigeria" label="Federal Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q320852" start="28976" end="28980" title="Abia State" label="Abia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337514" start="28982" end="28989" title="Adamawa State" label="Adamawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q424388" start="28991" end="29000" title="Akwa Ibom State" label="Akwa Ibom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117714" start="29002" end="29009" title="Anambra State" label="Anambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q503936" start="29011" end="29017" title="Bauchi State" label="Bauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="29019" end="29026" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q429908" start="29028" end="29033" title="Benue State" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="29035" end="29040" title="Borno State" label="Borno"/>
<link wikidata="Q739676" start="29042" end="29053" title="Cross River State" label="Cross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q503910" start="29055" end="29060" title="Delta State, Nigeria" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q506808" start="29062" end="29068" title="Ebonyi State" label="Ebonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q682704" start="29070" end="29073" title="Edo State" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q534917" start="29075" end="29080" title="Ekiti State" label="Ekiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817714" start="29082" end="29087" title="Enugu State" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q376241" start="29089" end="29094" title="Gombe State" label="Gombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q842939" start="29096" end="29099" title="Imo State" label="Imo"/>
<link wikidata="Q682691" start="29101" end="29107" title="Jigawa State" label="Jigawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878284" start="29109" end="29115" title="Kaduna State" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q682571" start="29117" end="29121" title="Kano State" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q657821" start="29123" end="29130" title="Katsina State" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q748523" start="29132" end="29137" title="Kebbi State" label="Kebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q387745" start="29139" end="29143" title="Kogi State" label="Kogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q464953" start="29145" end="29150" title="Kwara State" label="Kwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="29152" end="29157" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q836645" start="29159" end="29167" title="Nasarawa State" label="Nasarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503932" start="29169" end="29174" title="Niger State" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="29176" end="29180" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q836654" start="29182" end="29186" title="Ondo State" label="Ondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12197965" start="29188" end="29192" title="Osun State" label="Osun"/>
<link wikidata="Q503905" start="29194" end="29197" title="Oyo State" label="Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q503928" start="29199" end="29206" title="Plateau State" label="Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q503923" start="29208" end="29214" title="Rivers State" label="Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q503941" start="29216" end="29222" title="Sokoto State" label="Sokoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q463959" start="29224" end="29230" title="Taraba State" label="Taraba"/>
<link wikidata="Q682777" start="29232" end="29236" title="Yobe State" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q145793" start="29242" end="29249" title="Zamfara State" label="Zamfara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639634" start="29317" end="29338" title="Local Government Areas in Nigeria" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="30349" end="30369" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87718451" start="30459" end="30467" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Nigeria" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="31834" end="31839" title="military dictatorship" label="junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="31840" end="31851" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510333" start="32231" end="32244" title="Nigerian Navy" label="Nigerian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q577801" start="32270" end="32278" title="MEKO" label="frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707397" start="32340" end="32358" title="Nigerian Air Force" label="Nigerian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="32645" end="32658" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q300085" start="32696" end="32722" title="Peace and Security Council" label="Peace and Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088520" start="32779" end="32791" title="Yusuf Tuggar" label="Yusuf Tuggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="32816" end="32831" title="Foreign policy" label="foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085639" start="33780" end="33812" title="National Broadcasting Commission" label="National Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993611" start="34272" end="34289" title="Senate of Nigeria" label="Senate of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="34291" end="34319" title="National Assembly of Nigeria" label="National Assembly of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149621" start="34321" end="34353" title="List of Nigerian state governors" label="List of Nigerian state governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032878" start="34355" end="34377" title="Nigerian Civil Service" label="Nigerian Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q465842" start="34379" end="34396" title="States of Nigeria" label="States of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204010" start="34398" end="34423" title="Nigerian Prisons Services" label="Nigerian Prisons Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511642" start="34425" end="34449" title="Chief Justice of Nigeria" label="Chief Justice of Nigeria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21388" wikidata="Q1140374" url="?curid=21388" title="Economy of Nigeria">
<text>The economy of Nigeria is a middle-income, mixed economy and emerging market with expanding manufacturing, financial, service, communications, technology, and entertainment sectors. It is ranked as the 53rd-largest economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP, the sixth largest in Africa and the 27th-largest in terms of purchasing power parity.

The country&#x27;s re-emergent manufacturing sector became the largest on the continent in 2013, and it produces a large proportion of goods and services for the region of West Africa. Nigeria&#x27;s debt-to-GDP ratio was 36.63% in 2021 according to the IMF.

Although oil revenues contributed 2/3 of state revenues, oil only contributes about 9% to the GDP. Nigeria produces only about 2.7% of the world&#x27;s oil supply. Although the petroleum sector is important, as government revenues still heavily rely on this sector, it remains a small part of the country&#x27;s overall economy. The largely subsistence agricultural sector has not kept up with the country&#x27;s rapid population growth. Nigeria was once a large net exporter of food, but currently imports some of its food products. Mechanization has led to a resurgence in the manufacturing and exporting of food products, and there was consequently a move towards food sufficiency. In 2006, Nigeria came to an agreement with the Paris Club to buy back the bulk of its owed debts from them, in exchange for a cash payment of roughly US$12 billion.

According to a Citigroup report published in February 2011, Nigeria would have the highest average GDP growth in the world between 2010 and 2050. Nigeria is one of two countries from Africa among the 11 Global Growth Generators countries.

==Overview==
In 2014, Nigeria rebased its GDP to account for fast-growing contributors such as telecommunications, banking, and its film industry to its economy. Human capital is underdeveloped, as Nigeria ranked 161 out of 189 countries in the United Nations Development Index in 2019—and non-energy-related infrastructure is inadequate.

Nigeria has advanced efforts to provide universal primary education, and protect the environment.

A requirement for achieving many of its objectives is reducing endemic corruption, which obstructs development and stains Nigeria&#x27;s business environment. However, while broad-based progress has been slow, these efforts are becoming visible in international surveys of corruption. Nigeria&#x27;s ranking has mostly improved since 2001, ranking 154 out of 180 countries in Transparency International&#x27;s 2021 Corruption Perceptions Index.

The Nigerian economy suffers from an ongoing supply crisis in the power sector. Despite a rapidly growing economy, some of the world&#x27;s largest deposits of coal, oil, and gas and the country&#x27;s status as Africa&#x27;s largest oil producer, power supply difficulties are frequently experienced by residents. Two-thirds of Nigerians expect living conditions to improve in the coming decades. According to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) Nigeria&#x27;s GDP grew by 3.19% in Q2 2024. The non-oil sector drove growth, expanding by 4.13%, while the oil sector contracted by -3.83%.

== Economic history ==

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1990–2023 (with IMF staff estimates in 2024–2029). Inflation under 10% is in green.


NOTES:

The US dollar exchange rate is an estimated average of the official rate throughout a year and does not reflect the parallel market rate at which the general population accesses foreign exchange. This rate ranged from a high of 520 in March 2017 to a low of 350 in August 2017, due to a scarcity of forex (oil earnings had dropped by half), and speculative activity as alleged by the Central Bank. All the while the official rate was pegged at 360.

Per capita income (as % of USA) is calculated using data from estimates in the PPP link above, and census estimates, based on growth rates between census periods. For instance, 2017 GDPs were 1,125 billion (Nigeria) vs. 19,417 billion (USA) and populations were estimated at 320 million vs 190 million. The ratio is, therefore (1125/19417) / (190/320), which roughly comes to 0.0975. These are estimates and are intended to get a feel for the relative wealth and standard of living, as well as the market potential of its middle class.

This is a chart of trends of the global ranking of the Nigerian economy, in comparison with other countries of the world, derived from the historical List of countries by GDP (PPP).
This chart shows the variance in the parallel exchange rate at which the Dollar can be obtained with Naira in Lagos, with &quot;Best&quot; being cheaper for a Nigerian (i.e. stronger Naira).

For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar is exchanged at US$1 to 314.27 Nigerian naira (as of 2017).

The current GDP per capita of Nigeria expanded 132% in the sixties reaching a peak growth of 283% in the seventies. But this proved unsustainable, and it consequently shrank by 66% in the 1980s. In the 1990s, diversification initiatives finally took effect and decadal growth was restored to 10%. Although GDP on a PPP basis did not increase until the 2000s.

In 2012, the GDP was composed of the following sectors: agriculture: 40%; services: 30%; manufacturing: 15%; oil: 14%. By 2015, the GDP was composed of the following sectors: agriculture: 18%; services: 55%; manufacturing: 16%; oil: 8%

In 2005 Nigeria&#x27;s inflation rate was an estimated 15.6%. Nigeria&#x27;s goal under the National Economic Empowerment Development Strategy (NEEDS) program is to reduce inflation to the single digits. By 2015, Nigeria&#x27;s inflation stood at 9%. In 2005, the federal government had expenditures of US$13.54 billion but revenues of only US$12.86 billion, resulting in a budget deficit of 5%. By 2012, expenditures stood at $31.61 billion, while revenues were $54.48 billion. In 2024, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) raised the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) again, this time to 18.5%, the 6th consecutive increase since September 2022.

== Agriculture ==
The agricultural sector suffers from extremely low productivity, reflecting reliance on antiquated methods. Agriculture has failed to keep pace with Nigeria&#x27;s rapid population growth, so the country, which once exported food, now imports a significant amount of food to sustain itself. However, efforts are being made towards making the country food sufficient again. Africa&#x27;s most populous country has failed to grow more food for its fast-rising population who must be fed with staples ranging from rice, beans, maize etc.

=== Crop production ===

Nigeria ranks sixth worldwide and first in Africa in farm output. The sector accounts for about 18% of GDP and almost one-third of employment. Though Nigeria is no longer a major exporter, due to local consumer boom, it is still a major producer of many agricultural products. Further agricultural products include palm oil and rubber.

==== Roots and tubers ====

Counting by weight, this &quot;underground food&quot; is the largest group of food produced in Nigeria, with 118 million tonnes in 2020. This group includes yam, cassava, potatoes and sweet potatoes. These food products are cultivated mostly in the south of Nigeria (&quot;Roots economy&quot;).

==== Cereals ====
The group of sorghum, pear millet etc. is the second-largest group of food produced in Nigeria, with 28.6 million tonnes in 2020. 50% or 14 million tonnes of this is sorghum. The sugar cane production adds another 1.5 million tonnes to this. Cereals are mostly cultivated in the savannah zone of the country, and on the 23rd of June Nigeria&#x27;s grain market report, the International Grains Council (IGC) placed Nigeria&#x27;s total 2022-23 grains production at 21.6 million tonnes, this specific figure was reviewed from the previous month&#x27;s forecast which was 21.1 million, It set the production in the year 2021–22 at 21.5 million which demonstrates and proves that there is an increase in the production of grains on the 23rd of June 2022 – 2023.

==== Rice and paddy ====

The third-largest group of food produced in Nigeria is rice and paddy. In 2020, 8.2 million tonnes were produced.

==== Oil crops ====
Nigeria produced a good 4 million tonnes of oil crops in 2020. These are e.g. soybeans, sunflower seed, canola and peanuts.

==== Citrus fruit ====
Nigeria produced close to 4 million tonnes of citrus fruit in 2020. Main Nigerian citrus fruits are tangerine, grape, lemon and lime.

==== Cocoa ====
Cocoa production, mostly from obsolete varieties and overage trees has increased from around 180,000 tons annually to 350,000 tons.

==== More products ====
Beans, melons, pepper and vegetables are grown on chopping fields. Oil palms, rubber and bananas are grown for export. Palm oil plays a major role in Nigeria&#x27;s burgeoning personal care products industry.

=== Livestock ===

==== Cattle ====

In total, about 15 million head are kept. In addition, about five million pigs are kept. Small livestock such as sheep, goats and chickens are kept mainly for subsistence.

==== Poultry and Eggs ====
An estimated 42% of Nigerians own chicken. As a result, poultry and eggs represent a popular commodity within the food industry. 46% of the poultry is kept in an extensive / free-range system. 300 thousand tonnes of poultry meat and 650 thousand tonnes of eggs are produced annually in Nigeria (estimation).

=== Fishing ===

In 2003, Nigeria recorded a fish production of 505.8 metric tons. In 2015, production stood at 1 027 000 tonnes.

=== Timber ===
Roundwood removals totaled slightly less than 70 million cubic meters, and sawn wood production was estimated at 2 million cubic meters.

The paper industry in Nigeria has a long history that dates back to the 1960s and 1970s, when the government established three integrated pulp and paper mills: the Nigerian Paper Mill in Jebba; the Nigeria Newsprint Manufacturing Company, Oku Iboku; and the Iwopin Pulp and Paper Company. These mills were meant to meet the domestic demand for paper products and reduce import dependence.

However, these mills have faced various challenges over the years, such as lack of maintenance, obsolete equipment, inadequate power supply, and scarcity of raw materials. As a result, they have either become moribund or are operating at low capacity. According to a report by allAfrica.com, only the Jebba mill still has a shoath of life.

The local production of paper products in Nigeria is estimated at 265,000 metric tons per year, while the domestic demand is estimated at 3 million metric tons per annum. This means that Nigeria relies heavily on importation of paper products to meet its needs, which costs the country about N182 billion annually. Importing paper products also exposes the country to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and international market prices.

=== Food processing ===

==== Peeling / Milling ====
Until now, Nigeria exported unhusked rice but imported husked rice, the country&#x27;s staple food. The rice mill in Imota, near Lagos, is expected to do the relevant processing domestically, improve the balance of trade and the labour market, and save unnecessary costs for transport and middlemen. It began operations in 2023 at low levels, and is expected to employ 250,000 people and produce 2.4 million 50-kg bags of rice annually when fully operational.

==== Coconut oil milling and refining ====
A multi-billion Naira coconut oil refinery, first of its kind in Africa started business in Akwa Ibom State. The &quot;St.Gabriel Coconut Refinery&quot; in Mkpat Enin was inaugurated in May 2022. The governor of Akwa Ibom promised to commence immediate training of indigenous hands to man the refinery, said the facility has a daily capacity to crack 1,000,000 coconuts and will employ no fewer than 3,000 direct and indirect staff. Coconut oil goes for $1,326 per barrel, according to Governor Emmanuel.

==== Dairy and meat ====
Nigeria has 19 million head of cattle, the largest number in Africa. Yet the dairy sector in Nigeria is only able to supply less than 10% of the country&#x27;s demand for dairy products (as of June 2021), a gap expected to grow in line with population growth.

Fan Milk, a Danone Group company, manufacturer of popular frozen dairy and ice cream brands, unveiled its newly completed model dairy in Odeda, Ogun state, in June 2022. This dairy farm is Danone&#x27;s first investment in dairy farming in sub-Saharan Africa to boost local milk production in Nigeria. Fan Milk will launch a world-class dairy farm and training institute, leveraging the expertise of parent company Danone.

In Lekki&#x27;s Free Trade Zone, the Dano Milk Factory (Arla) opened in 2022. - In 2021 farmer owned dairy co-operative Arla Foods started to build a dairy farm in Kaduna state with 200 hectares. It will keep 400 dairy cows and will have modern milking parlors and technology, also grass lands and living facilities for 25 employees.

==== Bakery, household cereals, etc. ====
Nigeria&#x27;s bread sector is growing rapidly, with 72 percent dominated by small- and medium-scale bakers, according to a 2016 KPMG report. The bakery market of Nigeria is a $621 million industry.

&quot;Fresh bread and miscellaneous bakery&quot; is the bakery product group with the highest consumption (8.5M tonnes), which is 91% of total volume. &quot;Fresh bread and miscellaneous bakery&quot; exceeded the figures recorded for the second-largest product group &quot;gingerbread, sweet biscuits and waffles&quot; (689K tonnes), more than tenfold. The Nigerian bakery product market size is expected to show significant growth in the forecast period 2020–2026.

Primera Food in cooperation with Michael Foods started production of noodles on a big scale in Ogun state in 2022.

Kellogg&#x27;s opened a production plant for her products in the Lekki Free Trade Zone in Lagos in 2022. It is the second factory Kellogg&#x27;s has built in Africa.

In Jos, NASCO Foods produces biscuits and corn flakes. In 2022 they expanded their Jos factory.

== Mining and fossil fuel ==

=== Mining ===

The mining of minerals in Nigeria accounts for 0.3% of its gross domestic product. The domestic mining industry is largely underdeveloped, and minerals that it could produce domestically, such as salt or iron ore, are imported. Rights to ownership of mineral resources is held by the Federal Government of Nigeria, which grants titles for mineral exploration, mining, and sale of mineral resources.

Mining regulation is handled by the Ministry of Solid Minerals Development, which oversees the management of all mineral resources. Mining law is codified in the Federal Minerals and Mining Act of 1999.

=== Oil ===
The types of crude oil exported by Nigeria are Bonny light oil, Forcados crude oil, Qua Ibo crude oil and Brass River crude oil. The U.S. remains Nigeria&#x27;s largest buyer of crude oil, accounting for 40% of the country&#x27;s total oil exports; Nigeria provides about 10% of overall U.S. oil imports and ranks as the fifth-largest source of U.S. imported oil.

The United Kingdom is Nigeria&#x27;s largest trading partner followed by the United States. The stock of U.S. investment is nearly $7 billion, mostly in the energy sector. ExxonMobil and Chevron are the two largest U.S. corporations in offshore oil and gas production.

=== Natural gas pipeline Nigeria–Morocco ===
The supply of natural gas to Europe, which is threatened by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, is pushing projects to transport Nigerian natural gas via pipelines to Morocco or Algeria. In December 2022, Morocco&#x27;s National Office of Hydrocarbons and Mines signed Momoranda of Understanding with Nigeria, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Ghana to start building the pipeline through the countries.

=== Process and Industrial Developments dispute ===
Process and Industrial Developments Ltd (P&amp;ID) entered into a 20-year contract with the Nigerian government for natural gas supply and processing. Nigeria was to provide the gas, which PI&amp;D was to refine so that it could be used to power the Nigerian electrical grid. PI&amp;D could keep valuable byproducts for its own use. In 2012, PI&amp;D demanded arbitration in London, alleging that Nigeria had not supplied the agreed quantity of gas or to construct the infrastructure it had agreed to build. The arbitral tribunal awarded damages of more than £4.8 billion. The compensation was valued £8.15 billion with interest when the case was heard in London High Court in December 2022.

== Industry ==

=== Cement ===
Dangote and BUA are the dominating companies in the cement market of Nigeria. In May 2022, BUA opened a new, large scale cement plant in Sokoto, including its own 50 MW power station.

=== Oil based products ===
Historically, Nigeria has exported crude oil but imported the majority of petroleum products consumed in the country. In September 2024, Dangote Oil Refinery began operations with capacity to produce 650,000 barrels (~103 m liters) of petrol per day and the potential to significantly reduce Nigeria&#x27;s reliance on imported petroleum products. NNPC, Nigeria&#x27;s state-owned oil firm, is the sole customer of the refinery.

=== Fertiliser and paint ===
On 3 May 2022, after years of construction, a fertiliser production plant was commissioned near Lagos that will produce 3 million tonnes of fertiliser a year. With no more Russian fertiliser coming onto the world market in 2022 due to the invasion of Ukraine, Nigeria is filling a gap in the market. &quot;The fertiliser market is a seller&#x27;s market&quot;, enthused company boss Dangote at the plant&#x27;s opening. &quot;People are begging for us to sell and we are choosy about who we sell to.&quot;

A stone&#x27;s throw away from the Dangote refinery BASF opened a factory in Lekki. BASF is mostly known for fertilisers, paints, and lacquers.

=== Bodycare products, cleaning detergents ===
The Colgate factory in the Lekki Free Trade Zone close to Lagos started to produce body care products in 2022.

=== Pharmaceutical industry ===
Nigeria hosts about 60 percent of the pharmaceutical production capacity in Africa (status 2022) and is projected to grow between $60 billion to $70 billion after COVID-19, experts say. The pharmaceutical industry in Nigeria has headroom for growth and can potentially reach $4 billion over the next 10 years. Goldstein Market Intelligence analyst forecast the Nigeria pharmaceuticals market size is set to grow at a CAGR of 9.1% over the forecast years of 2017–2030. Most large pharmaceutical companies in Nigeria are located in Lagos.

The pharmaceutical producer with the most employees in Nigeria appears to be &quot;Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd&quot;. They produce more than 140 pharmaceutical products, including painkillers, vitamins, haematinics, antimalarials, tussives, antibiotics, anthelmintics, antihistamines, antacids and cardioprotectants.

&quot;Fidson Healthcare Plc&quot; produces painkillers, anti-allergies, blood pressure medicines, digestive aids, sleeping pills and cough syrup. &quot;May &amp; Baker Nig. Plc&quot; produces remedies against malaria, hypertension, diabetes, depressions and pain. &quot;Swiss Pharma Nigeria&quot; produces pharmaceutical products of BAYER.

=== Vehicle industry ===

Nigerians buy 720,000 cars per year. Of those, less than 20% of these are produced within Nigeria itself.

&quot;Indigenous manufacturers&quot;

Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing is located in Nnewi. It produces buses, SUVs and since May 2022 tricycles which are locally known as &quot;kekes&quot;.

&quot;Nord Automobiles Ltd&quot; has two assembly plants: one in Sangotedo, where all eight models are currently assembled; a plant in Epe is still under construction. The company currently manufactures its own plastic parts and plans to add steel stamping in the future.

30 km north-east of Lagos &quot;Proforce Ltd.&quot; produces armoured vehicles. Proforce sold an unknown number of armoured vehicles to Belarus in March 2022. This is the first time that vehicles manufactured in Nigeria have been supplied to a European country.

&quot;Jet Motor Company&quot; in Epe, Lagos State, is producing Nigeria&#x27;s first electric-powered delivery trucks in partnership with GIG Logistics.

In Idah, Kogi State, &quot;Electric Motor Vehicle Company&quot; manufactures electrically powered vehicles. The company is owned by Prince Mustapha Mona Audu, a Glasgow-educated computer specialist and son of a former governor. In May 2022, Audu unveiled the four-seater &quot;Adoja&quot;, which he claims is the most environmentally friendly vehicle in Nigeria.

&quot;Foreign manufacturers&quot;

The &quot;Stallion Group&quot; assembles 45,000 Volkswagen models in Lagos per annum.

&quot;Peugeot Automobiles Nigeria (PAN)&quot; operates in Kaduna. In April 2022, Peugeot left the conglomerate and Aliko Dangote bought its shares. The company name was changed to DPAN. DPAN will assemble mainly the Chinese brands Chery and Higer using pre-produced parts. A new production line, Greenfield, will increase the output to 120 cars per day.

=== Toolmaking industry ===
In Oshogbo, there is a modest toolmaking industry. Products are e.g. CNC turning machines and industrial drilling machines, but also stud bolts and flanges. Target market is the oil industry in the Niger delta.

=== Electronics ===
The most successful manufacturer of laptops in Nigeria is, by their own admission, the indigenous Zinox Technologies in Lagos.

=== Steel production ===
According to its website, Ajaokuta Steel Company Limited produces 1.3 million tonnes of steel per year. Steel plants in Katsina, Jos and Osogbo no longer appear to be active.

== Services ==

Nigeria ranks 27th worldwide and first in Africa in services output.

=== Finance sector ===
Nigeria is the largest financial market in Africa. As of November 2018, 21 commercial banks were licensed by the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN). Nigeria has a relatively well-developed banking sector by regional standards, with regionally high level of banking penetration (44.2% vs. regional average of 17.8% for West Africa) and robust use of advanced financial instruments in the local economy. The country is also well connected to international financial markets and following the 2016–17 oil crisis, the country has seen an increasing influx of foreign capital over the past 12–18 months – capital importation in Nigeria jumped to US$6.3 billion in Q1–18 (594% yoy growth) vs. $12.3 billion for full year 2017 and $5.1 billion in 2016). However, the country is weighed down by high lending rates, which limits access to credit for smaller firms, particularly in the non-oil economy. In 2024, the country&#x27;s National Assembly denied that it had proposed to strip the central bank of the power to set interest rates.

Nigeria leads the fintech sector, accounting for 28% of all fintech companies on the continent. As of January 2024, Africa has over 1,263 active fintech companies.

=== Telecommunication ===

The Nigerian Communications Commissions (NCC) said on January 14, 2022, the telecommunications sector contributed 12.45per cent to Nigeria&#x27;s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The commission through its chief executive officer (CEO), Prof Umar Garba Danbatta, during his convocation lecture, titled, &quot;Empowering the Nigeria Youth Through Information and Communications Technology (ICT)&quot; held at Fountain University, Osogbo, made this known. Prof Garba disclosed that the ICT sector has been consistently contributing above 10% of Nigeria&#x27;s GDP for over 10 years. He noted, &quot;Nigeria is Africa&#x27;s largest ICT market with 82per cent of the continent&#x27;s telecoms subscribers and 29per cent of internet usage.&quot;

Nigeria ranks 11th in the world in the absolute number of internet users and 7th in the absolute number of mobile phones.

=== Transport sector, forwarding, shipment ===

Due to Nigeria&#x27;s location in the centre of Africa, transport plays a major role in the national service sector.

The Buhari administration made improvements to the infrastructure after 2015. Extensive road repairs and new construction have been carried out gradually as states in particular spend their share of increased government allocations. Representative of these improvements is the Second Niger Bridge at Onitsha, which is nearly completed in May 2022.

Since 2009, Nigeria has been laying new railway tracks. These are operated by the state-owned Nigerian Railway Corporation. This has apparently generated a surplus since 2019, despite the covid epidemic.

Principal ports are at Lagos (Apapa and Tin Can Island), Port Harcourt (Onne), and Calabar. A deep seaport in Lekki, 50 km east of Lagos, is about to open in 2022.

Five of Nigeria&#x27;s airports (Lagos, Kano, Port Harcourt, Enugu and Abuja) currently fly to international destinations. The new national airline, &quot;Nigeria Air&quot;, was scheduled to start operations in mid-2022. It was suspended indefinitely in 2024.

=== Entertainment ===

==== Movie industry, Television, Streaming ====

From Nollywood, films and soaps are broadcast to the whole of Africa. Nigeria is the second largest film nation in the world after India and ahead of the US.

==== Music industry ====

Perhaps Nigeria&#x27;s most famous musician is the inventor of Afrobeat Fela Anikulapo Kuti, who gave legendary concerts with his band &quot;Africa 70&quot; at the &quot;Shrine&quot; in Lagos. Other characteristic musical styles include Jùjú, Apala, Fuji and Sakara. In the field of pop music, Nigerian musicians living in Europe such as Sade Adu or Dr. Alban were very successful in the 1980s and 1990s. In Europe, Nneka is one of the best-known Nigerian pop musicians. One of the very few Nigerian artists living in Nigeria who has had commercial success in Europe is D&#x27;Banj. He even reached the European singles charts in summer 2012 with Oliver Twist. Wizkid reached number 1 in 2016 alongside Drake.

==== Social media ====
Nigerians are passionate users of social media. In 2021 Nigerians spent 3 hours and 41 minutes on social media in average every day. This is much higher than the global average of 2 hours 22 minutes. The number of active social media users in Nigeria increased in 2021 by 22 percent, compared with a global average increase of 13 per cent. WhatsApp and Facebook are the most used social media platforms in Nigeria.

=== Fashion ===
The &quot;Lagos Leather Fair&quot; is the largest leather fair in West Africa. Nigeria is the sixth largest leather exporter in the world, with brands such as Prada, Gucci and Louis Vuitton sourcing their goods here. Fashion journalist Waridi Schrobsdorff even puts ‘Milan, Paris, Lagos’ on the same level on news channel N-tv.

=== Tourism ===
== Data ==
Electricity – production:
18.89 billion kWh (2009)

Electricity – production by source:
&quot;fossil fuel:&quot;
61.69%
&quot;hydro:&quot;
38.31%
&quot;nuclear:&quot;
0%
&quot;other:&quot;
&lt;.1% (1998)

Electricity - consumption:
17.66 billion kWh (2009)

Electricity - exports:
40 million kWh (2003)

Electricity - imports:
0 kWh (1998)

Oil - production: 
 (July 2006 est.)

Oil - consumption:
 (2003 est.)

== Overseas remittances ==
A major source of foreign exchange earnings for Nigeria are remittances sent home by Nigerians living abroad. In 2014, 17.5 million Nigerians lived in foreign countries, with the UK and the USA having more than 2 million Nigerians each. From 2015, remittances overtook tax as a source of revenues.

According to the International Organization for Migration, Nigeria witnessed a dramatic increase in remittances sent home from overseas Nigerians, going from US$2.3 billion in 2004 to $17.9 billion in 2007, representing 6.7% of GDP. The United States accounts for the largest portion of official remittances, followed by the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada, Spain and France. On the African continent, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Chad, Libya, and South Africa are important source countries of remittance flows to Nigeria, while China is the biggest remittance-sending country in Asia.

==Labour force==
In 2015, Nigeria had a labour force of 74 million. In 2003, the unemployment rate was 10.8% overall; by 2015, unemployment stood at 6.4%.

Since 1999, the Nigerian Labor Congress (NLC) a union umbrella organization, has called six general strikes to protest domestic fuel price increases. However, in March 2005 the government introduced legislation ending the NLC&#x27;s monopoly over union organizing. In December 2005, the Nigerian Labour Congress (NLC) was lobbying for an increase in the minimum wage for federal workers. The existing minimum wage, which was introduced six years earlier but has not been adjusted since, has been whittled away by inflation to only US$42.80 per month.

According to the International Organization for Migration, the number of immigrants residing in Nigeria has more than doubled in recent decades – from 477,135 in 1991 to 971,450 in 2005. The majority of immigrants in Nigeria (74%) are from neighbouring Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and that this number has increased considerably over the last decade, from 63% in 2001 to 97% in 2005.

The government has to pay a high interest rate on bonds in part because of the high fertility rate; there are many children and less savings.

===Human capital===

As of 2019, Nigeria&#x27;s HDI (Human Development Index) is ranked 161st at 0.539. The comparative value for Sub-Saharan Africa is 0.547, 0.926 for the US, and 0.737 for the world average.

The value for the education index is 0.499, compared to the average in the US of 0.900. The expected years of schooling in Nigeria is 10.0 (16.3 in the US), while the mean years of schooling for adults over 25 years is 6.7 years (13.4 years in the US). Additionally, Nigeria is also facing a relatively high inequality, worsening the problem regarding the formation of human capital.

===Child labour===
== Government policy ==

=== Inflation ===
In 2016, the black-market exchange rate of the Naira was about 60% above the official rate. The central bank releases about $200 million each week at the official exchange rate. However, some companies cite that budgets now include a 30% &quot;premium&quot; to be paid to central bank officials to get dollars.

Nigeria&#x27;s inflation rate rose to 15.63 per cent in December 2021 compared to 15.40 per cent in November, the National Bureau of Statistics announced on January 17, 2022. The statistics office said the prices of goods and services, measured by the Consumer Price Index, increased by 15.63 per cent in December 2021 when compared to December 2020. According to the NBS, this rise in the food index was caused by increases in prices of bread and cereals, food products, meat, fish, potatoes, yam and other tubers, soft drinks and fruits.

In 2024 President Bola Tinubu sought to increase the 2024 budget by $13.7 billion to $77.3 billion. The proposed additional funds were $7.1 billion for infrastructure projects and $6.7 billion for recurrent expenditure.

==Foreign economic relations==
Nigeria&#x27;s foreign economic relations revolve around its role in supplying the world economy with oil and natural gas, even as the country seeks to diversify its exports, harmonize tariffs in line with a potential customs union sought by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and encourage inflows of foreign portfolio and direct investment. In October 2005, Nigeria implemented the ECOWAS common external tariff, which reduced the number of tariff bands.

Prior to this revision, tariffs constituted Nigeria&#x27;s second largest source of revenue after oil exports. In 2005 Nigeria achieved a major breakthrough when it reached an agreement with the Paris Club to eliminate its bilateral debt through a combination of write-downs and buybacks. Nigeria joined the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries in July 1971 and the World Trade Organization in January 1995.

If the global transition to renewable energy is completed and international demand for Nigeria&#x27;s petroleum resources ceases, Nigeria will be significantly weakened. It is ranked 149 out of 156 countries in the index of Geopolitical Gains and Losses after energy transition (GeGaLo).

===External trade===

In 2017, Nigeria imported about US$34.2 billion of goods. In 2017 the leading sources of imports were China (28%), the Belgium-Luxembourg (8.9%), the Netherlands (8.3%), South Korea (6.4%), the United States (6.0%) and the India (4.6%). Principal imports were manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, and food and live animals.

In 2017, Nigeria exported about US$46.68 billion worth of goods. In 2017, the leading destinations for exports were India (18%), the United States (14%), Spain (9.7%), France (6.0%) and the Netherlands (4.9%). In 2017 oil accounted for 83% of merchandise exports. Natural rubber and cocoa are the country&#x27;s major agricultural exports.

In 2005, Nigeria posted a US$26 billion trade surplus, corresponding to almost 20% of gross domestic product. In 2005, Nigeria achieved a positive current account balance of US$9.6 billion. The Nigerian currency is the naira (NGN). As of June 2006, the exchange rate was about US$1=NGN128.4. As of June 2019, it stands at US$1 =NGN357. In recent years, Nigeria has expanded its trade relations with other developing countries such as India. Nigeria is the largest African crude oil supplier to India – it annually exports to India valued at US$10 billion annually.

India is the largest purchaser of Nigeria&#x27;s oil which fulfills 20% to 25% of India&#x27;s domestic oil demand. Indian oil companies are also involved in oil drilling operations in Nigeria and have plans to set up refineries there.

The trade volume between Nigeria and the United Kingdom rose by 35% from USD6.3 billion in 2010 to USD8.5 billion in 2011.

In Q1 2024, Nigeria&#x27;s exports were dominated by petroleum products, including crude oil and liquefied natural gas. Major export destinations included China, India, and the Netherlands.

This period saw a notable increase in energy exports, reinforcing Nigeria&#x27;s role as a key player in the global energy market. The Apapa Port in Lagos handled the bulk of these exports, showcasing the port&#x27;s significance in the country&#x27;s trade infrastructure.

=== Foreign trade statistics ===
===External debt===
In 2012, Nigeria&#x27;s external debt was an estimated $5.9 billion and N5.6 trillion domestic, putting total debt at $44 billion.

In April 2006, Nigeria became the first African country to fully pay off its debt owed to the Paris Club. This was structured as a debt write off of approximately $18 billion and a cash payment of approximately $12 billion.

===Foreign investment===

In 2012, Nigeria received a net inflow of US$85.73 billion foreign direct investment (FDI), much of which came from Nigerians in the diaspora. Most FDI is directed toward the energy and banking sectors. Any public designed to encourage inflow of foreign capital is capable of generating employment opportunities within the domestic economy. The Nigerian Enterprises Promotion (NEP) Decree of 1972 (revised in 1977) was intended to reduce foreign investment in the Nigerian economy.

The stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Nigeria was valued at $97.75 billion on 15 February 2008 by the Nigerian Stock Exchange.

===Swiss Banks to return Abacha Stolen Funds===
The Swiss foreign ministry says it has done all it can to ensure that funds stolen by the late Nigerian dictator Sani Abacha were used properly in his homeland. The authorities were responding to allegations that $200 million (SFr240 million) of $700 million handed back by the Swiss Banks to Nigeria had been misappropriated.

==See also==
* Poverty in Nigeria
* Steel industry in Nigeria
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

==References==
==Sources==
* Nigerian Federal government Recruitment careerwatch.ng 23 February 2020

==Further reading==
*The World Bank Economic Report on Nigeria, May 2013 

==External links==

*World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Nigeria 
*Nigeria latest trade data on ITC Trade Map 
*Invest In Knowledge Based Economy In Nigeria 
*Tariffs applied by Nigeria as provided by ITC&#x27;s ITC Market Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140374" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Nigeria" label="economy of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="43" end="56" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="61" end="76" title="emerging market" label="emerging market"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="202" end="259" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="53rd-largest economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="297" end="346" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="27th-largest in terms of purchasing power parity."/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="520" end="531" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559695" start="548" end="565" title="debt-to-GDP ratio" label="debt-to-GDP ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="602" end="605" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q912281" start="747" end="770" title="List of countries by oil production" label="world&amp;#x27;s oil supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="819" end="829" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="1340" end="1350" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="1474" end="1483" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636342" start="1662" end="1686" title="3G (countries)" label="Global Growth Generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="2514" end="2540" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="2553" end="2581" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104869" start="2629" end="2662" title="Nigerian energy supply crisis" label="supply crisis in the power sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="2724" end="2762" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="largest deposits of coal, oil, and gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="4490" end="4520" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q203567" start="4800" end="4814" title="Nigerian naira" label="Nigerian naira"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="5450" end="5459" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627120" start="5919" end="5942" title="Central Bank of Nigeria" label="Central Bank of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699707" start="6653" end="6664" title="List of countries by agricultural output" label="ranks sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="6688" end="6694" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="6973" end="6979" title="Natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="7167" end="7170" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="7172" end="7179" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="7181" end="7187" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="7194" end="7206" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="7337" end="7344" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q50840653" start="7346" end="7357" title="Pearl millet" label="pear millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="7503" end="7513" title="Sugarcane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="8323" end="8330" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076906" start="8333" end="8347" title="sunflower seed" label="sunflower seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="8349" end="8355" title="Rapeseed oil" label="canola"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="8360" end="8366" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q516494" start="8493" end="8502" title="tangerine" label="tangerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="8504" end="8509" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="8511" end="8516" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="8544" end="8549" title="Cocoa bean" label="Cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="8701" end="8705" title="Bean" label="Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881191" start="8708" end="8713" title="melon" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="9182" end="9189" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="9204" end="9211" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="9216" end="9220" title="Egg as food" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755357" start="9322" end="9332" title="Free range" label="free-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="9763" end="9770" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="9839" end="9849" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509021" start="9928" end="9933" title="Jebba" label="Jebba"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="10258" end="10270" title="power supply" label="power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837437" start="10408" end="10421" title="AllAfrica" label="allAfrica.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="10546" end="10557" title="metric tons" label="metric tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="10856" end="10872" title="Foreign exchange market" label="foreign exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q110588079" start="11070" end="11088" title="Imota rice mill" label="rice mill in Imota"/>
<link wikidata="Q424388" start="11562" end="11571" title="Akwa Ibom State" label="Akwa Ibom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6885516" start="11626" end="11636" title="Mkpat-Enin" label="Mkpat Enin"/>
<link wikidata="Q329426" start="12274" end="12280" title="Danone" label="Danone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077620" start="12399" end="12404" title="Odeda" label="Odeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q674575" start="12806" end="12816" title="Arla Foods" label="Arla Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q878284" start="12850" end="12856" title="Kaduna State" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233641" start="13763" end="13776" title="Michael Foods" label="Michael Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q836657" start="13825" end="13835" title="Ogun State" label="Ogun state"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="13846" end="13860" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247514" start="13911" end="13932" title="Lekki" label="Lekki Free Trade Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q321079" start="14016" end="14019" title="Jos" label="Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="14215" end="14237" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="14352" end="14356" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="14360" end="14368" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="14695" end="14698" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="14785" end="14794" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035310" start="14819" end="14834" title="Bonny light oil" label="Bonny light oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14836" end="14854" title="Forcados crude oil" label="Forcados crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14856" end="14873" title="Qua Ibo crude oil" label="Qua Ibo crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14878" end="14899" title="Brass River crude oil" label="Brass River crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="15309" end="15319" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="15324" end="15331" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="15516" end="15543" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216192" start="16645" end="16652" title="Dangote Cement" label="Dangote"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372931" start="16657" end="16660" title="BUA Cement" label="BUA"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="16697" end="16703" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748485" start="16994" end="17014" title="Dangote Refinery" label="Dangote Oil Refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671299" start="17205" end="17209" title="NNPC Limited" label="NNPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="17362" end="17372" title="fertiliser" label="fertiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9401" start="17875" end="17879" title="BASF" label="BASF"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247514" start="17900" end="17905" title="Lekki" label="Lekki"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247514" start="18042" end="18063" title="Lekki" label="Lekki Free Trade Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674893" start="18349" end="18383" title="pharmaceutical industry in Nigeria" label="pharmaceutical industry in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152051" start="19356" end="19361" title="Bayer" label="BAYER"/>
<link wikidata="Q21279288" start="19535" end="19564" title="Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing" label="Innoson Vehicle Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="19979" end="19984" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="20095" end="20102" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023707" start="20255" end="20258" title="Epe, Lagos State" label="Epe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="20260" end="20271" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048500" start="20379" end="20383" title="Idah" label="Idah"/>
<link wikidata="Q387745" start="20385" end="20389" title="Kogi State" label="Kogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="20537" end="20544" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597322" start="20785" end="20799" title="Stallion Group" label="Stallion Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="20823" end="20833" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="20844" end="20849" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="20920" end="20926" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742" start="20943" end="20950" title="Peugeot" label="Peugeot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394965" start="20977" end="20990" title="Aliko Dangote" label="Aliko Dangote"/>
<link wikidata="Q591001" start="21093" end="21098" title="Chery Automobile" label="Chery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617677" start="21103" end="21108" title="Higer Bus" label="Higer"/>
<link wikidata="Q868203" start="21248" end="21255" title="Osogbo" label="Oshogbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560600" start="21275" end="21294" title="Tool and die maker" label="toolmaking industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q258127" start="21314" end="21325" title="Turning" label="CNC turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q890886" start="21350" end="21358" title="drilling" label="drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q955957" start="21393" end="21399" title="flange" label="flange"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402045" start="21656" end="21686" title="Ajaokuta Steel Mill" label="Ajaokuta Steel Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699707" start="21830" end="21840" title="List of countries by GDP sector composition" label="ranks 27th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="22831" end="22848" title="National Assembly (Nigeria)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405232" start="24438" end="24468" title="Second Niger bridge" label="Second Niger Bridge at Onitsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334063" start="24604" end="24632" title="Nigerian Railway Corporation" label="Nigerian Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="24738" end="24743" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q617618" start="24745" end="24750" title="Apapa" label="Apapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585317" start="24755" end="24769" title="Tin Can Island Port" label="Tin Can Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="24772" end="24785" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="24798" end="24805" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="24920" end="24924" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="24926" end="24939" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q465022" start="24941" end="24946" title="Enugu (city)" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="24951" end="24956" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065894" start="25218" end="25227" title="Nollywood" label="Nollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q388296" start="25461" end="25469" title="Afrobeat" label="Afrobeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="25470" end="25489" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Anikulapo Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="25736" end="25744" title="Sade (singer)" label="Sade Adu"/>
<link wikidata="Q313366" start="25748" end="25757" title="Dr. Alban" label="Dr. Alban"/>
<link wikidata="Q291431" start="25814" end="25819" title="Nneka (singer)" label="Nneka"/>
<link wikidata="Q944365" start="25968" end="25979" title="D&amp;#x27;banj" label="D&amp;#x27;Banj"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233663" start="26059" end="26065" title="Wizkid" label="Wizkid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33240" start="26101" end="26106" title="Drake (musician)" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q265027" start="26886" end="26890" title="N-tv" label="N-tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="27419" end="27430" title="remittances" label="remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="27675" end="27715" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="27758" end="27769" title="remittances" label="remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q495604" start="28684" end="28708" title="Nigeria Labour Congress" label="Nigerian Labour Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="28966" end="29006" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="29022" end="29032" title="immigrants" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="29202" end="29243" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="29549" end="29552" title="Human Development Index" label="HDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="29631" end="29649" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="31482" end="31495" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="31510" end="31551" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820592" start="31676" end="31698" title="common external tariff" label="common external tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="32051" end="32100" title="Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries" label="Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="32122" end="32146" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q203567" start="33390" end="33395" title="naira" label="naira"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="33424" end="33437" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="34047" end="34050" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="34073" end="34076" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="34253" end="34258" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="34260" end="34265" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="34275" end="34286" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768955" start="34424" end="34434" title="Apapa Port Complex" label="Apapa Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q461736" start="34843" end="34853" title="Paris Club" label="Paris Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="35059" end="35084" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625220" start="35345" end="35375" title="Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree" label="Nigerian Enterprises Promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="35493" end="35514" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q838766" start="35602" end="35625" title="Nigerian Stock Exchange" label="Nigerian Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="35789" end="35800" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="35954" end="35965" title="Swiss Banks" label="Swiss Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235857" start="36019" end="36037" title="Poverty in Nigeria" label="Poverty in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633936" start="36040" end="36065" title="Steel industry in Nigeria" label="Steel industry in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="36068" end="36113" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21389" wikidata="Q4411280" url="?curid=21389" title="Telecommunications in Nigeria">
<text>Nigeria is Africa&#x27;s largest ICT market, accounting for 82% of the continent&#x27;s telecoms subscribers and 29% of internet usage. Globally, Nigeria ranks 11th in the absolute number of internet users and 7th in the absolute number of mobile phones.

Economically, the ICT sector has contributed over 10% to Nigeria&#x27;s gross national product for over 10 years.

Telecommunications in Nigeria include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==
Nigeria&#x27;s media scene is one of the most vibrant in Africa. Television and radio remain the most important medium of mass communication and information, with Social media rapidly emerging as the next big medium. International broadcasters, including the BBC, are popular.

There are nearly 70 federal government-controlled national and regional TV stations. All 36 states operate TV stations. Roughly 40 state government-owned radio stations typically carry their own programs except for news broadcasts.

Several private TV stations are operational. Cable and satellite TV subscription services are available. Nigeria has about 20 private radio stations; transmissions of international broadcasters are available. Digital broadcasting migration process has been completed in three states in 2018.

=== Government-owned stations ===

The largest broadcasting companies are the government-owned Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN) and the Nigerian Television Authority (NTA). The NTA has two television services, one is NTA 1, which is distributed among NTA&#x27;s six television zones. The other is NTA 2, which is distributed nationwide and is funded mostly by advertising. NITEL owns a majority of the transmitters that broadcast FRCN and NTA programming.

Each state also has a broadcasting company that broadcasts one or two locally operated terrestrial stations. This means that there are about 50 government owned, but partly independent television stations.

=== Commercial stations ===
Private players in the Nigerian television scene include: Silverbird Television (STV), Africa Independent Television (AIT), Channels Television, Superscreen Television, and several others. Most of their programming is aimed for the African and global markets and is broadcast globally from Lagos, Abuja, and Port Harcourt centres with affiliated TV stations in other cities in Nigeria and several African countries. African Independent Television (AIT) is a high-profile satellite television station broadcasting globally from its Lagos and Abuja centres. Other direct satellite television stations with international reach operating in Nigeria are Murhi International Television, ON Television, Galaxy TV, TV Continental, etc. all in Lagos.

There is general access to cable television like GOtv, DSTV, HiTV, DaarSat, StarTimes and Infinity TV and other cable TVs in Nigeria.

=== Statistical data ===
Radio stations:
* network of federal government-owned national, regional, and state radio stations; roughly 40 state government-owned radio stations typically carry their own programs except for news broadcasts; about 20 private radio stations; transmissions of international broadcasters are available (2007);
* 83 AM, 36 FM, and 11 shortwave stations (2001).
Radios:
23.5 million (1997).

Television stations: nearly 70 federal government-owned national and regional TV stations; all 36 states operate TV stations; several private TV stations operational; cable and satellite TV subscription services are available (2007).

Television sets:
56.9 million (2007).

===Media control and press freedom===
Although the government censors the electronic media through the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC), which is responsible for monitoring and regulating broadcast media, there&#x27;s no established proof towards Government&#x27;s control of the media. Radio stations remain susceptible to attacks by political groups. For example, in January 2012 some media figures alleged the NBC warned radio stations not to broadcast stories about fuel subsidy protests.
Libel is a civil offense and requires defendants to prove the truth of opinion or value judgment contained in news reports or commentaries, or pay penalties. However, the media is allowed to broadcast &quot;fair comment on matters of public interest&quot;. Penalties for defamation of character include two years&#x27; imprisonment and possible fines.

The law requires local television stations to limit programming from other countries to 40 percent and restricts foreign content of satellite broadcasting to 20 percent. The NBC&#x27;s 2004 prohibition of live broadcasts of foreign news and programs remains in force, but does not apply to international cable or satellite services.

On numerous occasions in the past, especially, during military regime, security forces and police have arrested and detained journalists who criticized the government. Reporting on matters such as political corruption and security issues are particularly sensitive. Politicians and political parties harass journalists perceived as reporting on them or their interests in a negative manner. During local and state elections, journalists have been intimidated for covering certain election-related events. The militant group Boko Haram threatens media outlets and has killed members of the press. On 20 January 2012, unknown gunmen killed Channels TV reporter Enenche Akogwu while he was reporting on the Boko Haram attacks and bombings in Kano that day. Journalists practice self-censorship.

==Telephones==
The number of fixed-line connections is insignificant and also in sharp decline (2016: 349,000, 2020: 107,000).

Mobile services, on the other hand, are growing rapidly, partly in response to fixed-line inadequacies; several mobile operators operate across the country, with subscribers at 92 per 100 people (2019). This ranks Nigeria 8th in the world.

Deregulation of the mobile phone market has led to the introduction of Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) network providers operating on the 900/1800MHz spectrum, MTN Nigeria, Airtel Nigeria, Globacom, and 9mobile (Etisalat). Use of cell-phones has soared, and has mostly replaced the unreliable fixed line services of Nigerian Telecommunications Limited (NITEL).

With the expiration of the exclusivity period of the main GSM network providers, Nigeria&#x27;s telecom regulator, the Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC), introduced the Unified Licensing Regime. It was hoped that telecoms with unified licences would be able to provide fixed and mobile telephony and Internet access as well as any other communications service they choose to offer. In March 2011 the NCC started registering SIM cards. The exercise was expected to last until 28 September 2011.

In 2015 the NTC fined MTN Nigeria a record $5.2 billion for issuing 5.2 million unregistered and pre-registered subscriber Identification Module Cards (SIMs). In 2017 the NTC sett up a 12-member task force in response to renewed proliferation of Unregistered and pre-registered SIM cards. The unregistered cards are considered a threat to Nigerian national security.

After a decade of failed privatization attempts, the incumbent national telecom NITEL and its mobile arm have been sold to NATCOM and now rebranded as NTEL.

Nigeria concluded its first 5G spectrum auction in 2021 and granted licences to two firms: MTN Nigeria and Mafab Communications. MTN Nigeria and Airtel Nigeria are the only mobile network operators that have launched 5G services in Nigeria. The companies have rolled out 5G in these 8 states - Lagos, Abuja, Port Harcourt, Ibadan, Ogun, Kano, Owerri, and Maiduguri, and plan to expand 5G coverage to other states in the future. 

In Q1 2024, the telecommunications sector in Nigeria experienced a growth rate of 15.70%, up from 14.10% in Q4 2023. According to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), this growth was driven by increased mobile phone penetration, higher internet usage, and the rollout of 4G and 5G networks. The sector contributed 8.90% to Nigeria&#x27;s GDP during this period.

=== Statistical data ===
Calling code: +234

International call prefix: 009

Connected lines:
* 348,933 fixed wired/wireless lines (July 2016).
* 222,440,207 mobile cellular (GSM) lines (July 2016).
* 3,611,926 mobile (CDMA) lines (July 2016).
* 226,426,215 total connected lines

Active lines:
* 164,114 fixed wired/wireless lines (July 2016).
* 149,708,077 Mobile cellular (GSM) lines (July 2016).
* 371,613 mobile (CDMA) lines (July 2016).
* 150,262,066 total active lines

Installed capacity:
* 11,384,677 fixed wired/wireless lines (June 2013).
* 204,242,114 mobile (GSM) lines (June 2013).
* 18,400,000 mobile (CDMA) lines (June 2013).
* 234,026,791 total lines

Teledensity: 
* ~86 combined fixed and mobile lines per 100 persons (June 2013).
* ~1 fixed line per 100 persons (2010).
* ~60 mobile lines per 100 persons (2010).

Satellite earth stations: 3 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) (2010);

Submarine cables: 
* SAT-3/WASC/SAFE links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and on to Europe and Asia,
* ACE links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and on to France,
* GLO-1 links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and on to the United Kingdom, 
* Main One links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and on to Portugal.

==Internet==

Nigeria is one of the larger telecom markets in Africa subject to sporadic access to electricity. Most Internet connections are via mobile networks. The government is committed to expanding broadband penetration. The operators deploy fiber optic cable in six geopolitical zones and Lagos and invest in base stations to deplete network congestion.

A submarine cable break in 2020 slowed speeds and interrupted connectivity.

=== Statistical data ===
Top-level domain: .ng

Internet users: 
*159.5 million users, 6th in the world (May 2023);
*122 million users, 7th in the world (2019);&quot;&quot;
* 67.0 million users, 8th in the world (2015);
* 55.9 million users, 8th in the world; 32.9% of the population, 128th in the world (2012);
* 44.0 million users, 9th in the world (2009); 
* 5.0 million users, 40th in the world (2005).

Fixed broadband: 15,311 subscriptions, 136th in the world; less than 0.05% of the population, 185th in the world (2012).

Wireless broadband: 17.3 million subscriptions, 18th in the world; 10.2% of the population, 91st in the world (2012).

Internet hosts: 
* 1,234 hosts, 169th in the world (2012);
* 1,549 hosts, 134th in the world (2006).

IPv4: 1.0 million addresses allocated, 75th in the world, less than 0.05% of the world total, 5.9 addresses per 1000 people (2012).

Internet service providers:
* 108 ISPs (2023);
* 100 ISPs (2018);
* 400 ISPs (2010);
* 11 ISPs (2000).

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

Listed by the OpenNet Initiative as no evidence of Internet filtering in all four areas for which they test (political, social, conflict/security, and Internet tools) in October 2009.

There are few government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. Although the constitution and law provide for freedom of speech, including for members of the press, the government sometimes restricts these rights in practice. Libel is a civil offense and requires defendants to prove the truth of opinion or value judgment contained in news reports or commentaries. Penalties include two years&#x27; imprisonment and possible fines. Militant groups such as Boko Haram threaten, attack, and kill journalists in connection with their reporting of the sect&#x27;s activities. Journalists practice self-censorship.

Reporting on political corruption and security issues has proved to be particularly sensitive. On 24 October 2012 police in Bauchi State arraigned civil servant Abbas Ahmed Faggo before a court for allegedly defaming the character of Governor Isa Yuguda after he posted messages on his Facebook account accusing the governor of spending public funds on his son&#x27;s wedding. On 4 November, the court discharged Faggo, but media reported the state government fired him later that month.

During 2012 several Internet news sites critical of the government experienced server problems, which site owners attributed to government interference. Such disruptions usually lasted a few hours.

In 2008 two journalists were arrested for publishing online articles and photos critical of the government.

On 4 June 2021, the Minister of Information and Culture announced that the federal government would &quot;suspend&quot; all operations of Twitter in the country for performing actions that &quot;[undermine] Nigeria’s corporate existence&quot;, and that the federal government would order the National Broadcasting Commission to &quot;immediately commence the process of licensing all OTT and social media operations&quot; in the country. This came after Twitter deleted posts by and suspended the account of President Muhammadu Buhari for violating its abuse policy, for making threats against the separatist group Indigenous People of Biafra which had invoked the Nigerian Civil War as a theme. Buhari criticised the actions for infringing his freedom of speech. Pursuant to this action, Twitter has been blocked in Nigeria as of 5 June, and use of the service was made a prosecutable offence. On 13 January 2022, Nigerian government revoked the ban on Twitter after the company agreed to set up a subsidiary in Nigeria for judicial compliance.

==See also==
* Nigerian weather and communications satellites
* Media in Nigeria
* Terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Nigeria
* Digital divide in Nigeria
*satellite internet
*satellite internet constellation
*rural internet

==References==
* 
==External links==
* Nigeria Information &amp; Technology Development Agency (NITDA), the government clearing house for all IT projects in the public sector in Nigeria. 
* Nigeria Communication Commission, the independent National Regulatory Authority for the telecommunications industry in Nigeria.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4411280" start="371" end="400" title="Telecommunications in Nigeria" label="Telecommunications in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="409" end="414" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="416" end="426" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="438" end="455" title="mobile telephones" label="mobile telephones"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="465" end="473" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="558" end="564" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="664" end="676" title="Social media" label="Social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="760" end="763" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440356" start="1400" end="1436" title="Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria" label="Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341382" start="1452" end="1481" title="Nigerian Television Authority" label="Nigerian Television Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954392" start="1689" end="1694" title="NITEL" label="NITEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1917" end="1927" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020520" start="2066" end="2087" title="Silverbird Television" label="Silverbird Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q979027" start="2095" end="2124" title="Africa Independent Television" label="Africa Independent Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858956" start="2132" end="2151" title="Channels TV" label="Channels Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="2298" end="2303" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="2305" end="2310" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="2316" end="2329" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q979027" start="2424" end="2454" title="Africa Independent Television" label="African Independent Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518144" start="2704" end="2713" title="Galaxy Television (Nigeria)" label="Galaxy TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q91989304" start="2800" end="2804" title="GOtv" label="GOtv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155790" start="2806" end="2810" title="DSTV" label="DSTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750321" start="2812" end="2816" title="HiTV" label="HiTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="2911" end="2925" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="2929" end="2936" title="Network address translation" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="3272" end="3278" title="Receiver (radio)" label="Radios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="3302" end="3321" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="3537" end="3551" title="Television set" label="Television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085639" start="3679" end="3711" title="National Broadcasting Commission" label="National Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="4075" end="4080" title="Libel" label="Libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143465" start="4086" end="4099" title="civil offense" label="civil offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="4346" end="4369" title="defamation of character" label="defamation of character"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="5286" end="5296" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q23945363" start="5421" end="5435" title="Enenche Akogwu" label="Enenche Akogwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="5466" end="5476" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="5501" end="5505" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="5537" end="5552" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="5995" end="6033" title="Global System for Mobile Communication" label="Global System for Mobile Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813361" start="6097" end="6108" title="MTN Nigeria" label="MTN Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79594897" start="6110" end="6124" title="Airtel Nigeria" label="Airtel Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570033" start="6126" end="6134" title="Globacom" label="Globacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q543449" start="6149" end="6157" title="Etisalat by e&amp;amp;" label="Etisalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954392" start="6253" end="6288" title="NITEL" label="Nigerian Telecommunications Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109214" start="6418" end="6452" title="Nigerian Communications Commission" label="Nigerian Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="6730" end="6738" title="SIM card" label="SIM card"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="7079" end="7087" title="SIM card" label="SIM card"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954392" start="7249" end="7254" title="NITEL" label="NITEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971159" start="7891" end="7920" title="National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria" label="National Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="8149" end="8161" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242551" start="8169" end="8194" title="International call prefix" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="8299" end="8302" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="8343" end="8347" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="8958" end="8982" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="8986" end="8994" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="8998" end="9012" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="9019" end="9031" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="9042" end="9058" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="Submarine cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492221" start="9063" end="9073" title="SAT-3/WASC (cable system)" label="SAT-3/WASC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492219" start="9074" end="9078" title="SAFE (cable system)" label="SAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="9150" end="9156" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="9161" end="9165" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650617" start="9169" end="9172" title="ACE (cable system)" label="ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9244" end="9250" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513631" start="9254" end="9259" title="GLO-1 (cable system)" label="GLO-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9335" end="9349" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736028" start="9354" end="9362" title="Main One (cable system)" label="Main One"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="9434" end="9442" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="9909" end="9925" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43151" start="9927" end="9930" title=".ng" label=".ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="9932" end="9946" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="10292" end="10307" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="10414" end="10432" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="10533" end="10547" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211867" start="10635" end="10639" title="List of countries by IPv4 address allocation" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="10768" end="10793" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861440" start="10930" end="10948" title="OpenNet Initiative" label="OpenNet Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="11209" end="11215" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="11228" end="11238" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="11286" end="11303" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="11402" end="11407" title="Libel" label="Libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="11633" end="11643" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="11770" end="11785" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q503936" start="11912" end="11924" title="Bauchi State" label="Bauchi State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075740" start="12031" end="12041" title="Isa Yuguda" label="Isa Yuguda"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="12074" end="12082" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="12723" end="12730" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085639" start="12877" end="12909" title="National Broadcasting Commission" label="National Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48838743" start="13068" end="13077" title="Twitter suspensions" label="suspended"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="13103" end="13119" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q22936432" start="13200" end="13227" title="Indigenous People of Biafra" label="Indigenous People of Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="13250" end="13268" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967794" start="13647" end="13693" title="Nigerian weather and communications satellites" label="Nigerian weather and communications satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805920" start="13696" end="13712" title="Media in Nigeria" label="Media in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13715" end="13764" title="List of terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Africa#Nigeria" label="Terrestrial fibre optic cable projects in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779428" start="13767" end="13792" title="Digital divide in Nigeria" label="Digital divide in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q877159" start="13794" end="13812" title="satellite internet" label="satellite internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q54806917" start="13814" end="13846" title="satellite internet constellation" label="satellite internet constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380523" start="13848" end="13862" title="rural internet" label="rural internet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21390" wikidata="Q4462084" url="?curid=21390" title="Transport in Nigeria">
<text>Nigeria’s transport network has expanded in recent years to accommodate a growing population. The transport and storage sector was valued at N2.6trn ($6.9bn) in current basic prices in 2020, down from N3trn ($8bn) in 2019, according to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). This was reflected in a lower contribution to GDP, at 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2020, down from 2.1% during the same period the previous year but higher than the 0.8% recorded in the third quarter of 2020. One of the most significant challenges facing the sector is meeting the needs of both large coastal cities and rural inland communities in order to fully unlock the country’s economic potential. This is especially the case with mining and agriculture, both of which are expected to benefit from two large-scale projects: the Lekki Port in Lagos and the Kano-Maradi rail line in the north of the country.

Although transport networks have historically been underfunded, the government is prioritising their development, as enhanced connectivity is key to supporting growth in non-oil sectors such as manufacturing and agriculture. This will help the country diversify its sources of income away from oil, and connect rural and underserved communities to commercial centres. Moreover, planned intra-city mass transit projects are expected to improve the quality of life for Nigeria’s 102.8m urban residents.

== Railways ==


Improving rail links is also central to the NIIMP, with the master plan noting at the time that the network “needs to be almost completely rehabilitated or rebuilt”. The longer-term vision is to expand routes to a create multi-modal system linked with facilities such as ports and airports. The prioritisation of rail development has continued, with the 2021 budget earmarking N71.2bn ($3.2m) for the construction and N11.6bn ($31m) for the rehabilitation of railways.

The NRC is responsible for rail services across the country – both for freight and passengers – with little participation from the private sector, as most intercity rail routes are not commercially viable. According to the latest data from the NBS, the rail system carried 2.6m passengers in 2017, 3m in 2018 and 723,995 in the first quarter of 2019. Revenue generated from passenger tickets amounted to N1.2bn ($3.2m) and N1.9bn ($5.1m) for 2017 and 2018, respectively, and N520.8m ($1.4m) for the first three months of 2019. In terms of cargo, 141,186 tonnes were moved in 2017 for a revenue of N374m ($999,000) – figures that grew by 132% and 32%, respectively, in 2018. Some 54,100 tonnes were moved by the rail system in the first quarter of 2019, generating revenue of N102.6m ($274,000).

In August 2017 the federal government announced a $41bn programme to expand the rail network. The two headline projects unveiled at the time were a second railway connecting Lagos in the south to Kano in the north and a railway spanning the coast, from Lagos to Calabar. Work on both projects was ongoing as of early 2021. Moreover, in January of that year construction began on a new line linking Kano to Maradi, in neighbouring Niger. The 387-km line will pass through Kazaure, Daura, Katsina and Jibiya, and a 93-km branch from Kano to Dutse will facilitate traffic from Jigawa State. The second Lagos-Kano line is intended to connect with the new Kano-Maradi artery, eventually creating an uninterrupted network across Nigeria.
== Roads ==

Nigeria’s roads and highways form the backbone of the country’s transport network, as these arteries handle 90% of all passenger and freight traffic, according to the NIIMP. As it is the largest segment – contributing N2.4trn ($6.4bn) to GDP in 2020, down from N2.7trn ($7.2bn) the year before – the government is focused on both servicing existing roads – many of which are in poor condition or unpaved – and constructing new ones. Towards this end, the 2021 budget earmarked N168bn ($451.2m) for the construction, rehabilitation and dualisation of roads. The package also set aside N54bn ($144.2m) for building and renovating bridges, and N4bn ($10.7m) specifically for the rehabilitation of a mainland bridge in Lagos.

One key project is the rehabilitation and expansion of the 35-km Apapa-Oshodi-Oworonshoki-Ojota Expressway in Lagos, linking the city’s largest port to the Ojata district. As vehicle ownership is on the rise, traffic is common in the country’s most populous city. In January 2021 Funso Adebiyi, director of highway construction and rehabilitation at the Ministry of Works and Housing, told local press that the first phase of the project was set to be completed in April of that year, with the entirety of the expansion delivered in December. Nigerian conglomerate Dangote Group began work on the expressway in 2018, and the overhaul is the artery’s first since it was built in 1978, with the group adding 10 lanes and repairing connections with other roads. Another priority project was the 43-km Obajana-Kabba link in Kogi State. Completed in January 2021, it is Nigeria’s largest concrete road and links the north and south of the country. As concrete is more durable than asphalt, it is less susceptible to potholes and, as such, requires less maintenance.

The government has worked to attract private partners and investment to carry out and finance key projects. For example, the Dangote Group received a 10-year tax rebate worth N73bn ($194.9m) for the Apapa-Oshodi-Oworonshoki-Ojota Expressway as part of a government programme to offer incentives such as tax breaks to private companies to help execute necessary roadworks. Moreover, in May 2020 the government issued its third &quot;sukuk&quot; (Islamic bond), worth N162.6bn ($434.1m), to fund infrastructure projects such as road rehabilitation.

In 2024, the Federal government of Nigeria started the construction of 700km coastal highway from Lagos - Calabar which will pass through 9 states and reduce travel times among the 9 states.

===International highways===

Nigeria&#x27;s strategic location and size results in four routes of the Trans-African Highway network using its national road system:
* The Trans-Sahara Highway to Algeria is almost complete but border security issues may hamper its use in the short term.
* The Trans-Sahelian Highway to Dakar is substantially complete.
* The Trans–West African Coastal Highway starts in Nigeria, connecting it westwards to Benin, Togo, Ghana and Ivory Coast with feeder highways to landlocked Burkina Faso and Mali. When construction in Liberia and Sierra Leone is finished, the highway will continue seven other Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations further west.
*The Lagos-Mombasa Highway has been awaited for many decades to kick-start trade across the continent. It does provide improved highway links to neighbouring Cameroon, but its continuation across DR Congo to East Africa is lacking, as are highways from Cameroon to Central Africa and Southern Africa, which could boost trade within the continent.

== Waterways ==

Nigeria has 8,600 km of inland waterways. The longest are the Niger River and its tributary, the Benue River but the most used, especially by larger powered boats and for commerce, are in the Niger Delta and all along the coast from Lagos Lagoon to Cross River.

== Pipelines ==
In 2004 Nigeria had 105 kilometers of pipelines for condensates, 1,896 kilometers for natural gas, 3,638 kilometers for oil, and 3,626 kilometers for refined products. Various pipeline projects are planned to expand the domestic distribution of natural gas and to export natural gas to Benin, Ghana, Togo through the West African Gas Pipeline, and, potentially, even to Algeria (where Mediterranean export terminals are located) by proposed Trans-Saharan gas pipeline. Energy pipelines are subject to sabotage by militant groups or siphoning by thieves.

crude oil 2,042 km; petroleum products 3,000 km; natural gas 500 km

== Ports and harbors ==
The six Nigeria’s seaports are: 

* Apapa Port and Tin Can Island Port in Lagos State; 
* Onne Port and Port Harcourt in Rivers State; 
* Warri Port in Delta State; and 
* Calabar Port in Cross River State.

According to the most recent data published by the Nigerian Port Authority (NPA), inbound tonnage across all ports expanded from around 9m tonnes in 2016 to 10.4m in 2017 and 10.9m in 2018, with the first quarter of 2019 recording 2.8m tonnes. Outbound tonnage over the same period also rose, from 2.1m in 2016 to 2.3m in 2017 and 2.4m in 2018. Nigerian ports shipped out some 487,000 tonnes in the first three months of 2019.

One notable maritime project is the Lekki Port, located in the Lagos Free Trade Zone. Slated to be Nigeria’s first deepsea port and the deepest such facility in sub-Saharan Africa, work on Lekki began in March 2018 and is targeted to be complete in 2022. The port will help meet rising demand for containers in Nigeria, the compound annual growth rate of which is forecast to be 12.9% between 2016 and 2025. It will also create 170,000 jobs and bring the government $200bn in revenue, according to Lekki Port LFTZ Enterprise, the port’s developer. This would leave the city with a capacity shortfall of 5.5m twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) by 2025. The deepsea port will have a capacity of 2.7m TEUs per year, with three container berths, three liquid berths and one dry bulk berth. The draught will be 16.5 metres with a 600-metre turning circle.

Lekki Port LFTZ Enterprise is a joint venture between the Lagos State government, the NPA and Lekki Port Investment Holdings, a group of investors including China Harbour Engineering Company and Singapore-headquartered holding company Tolaram Group. Unlike in rail, the private sector plays a notable role in the port segment. The privatisation of port operations began in late 2003, and today the private sector is active in areas such as cargo handling, warehousing, the development and maintenance of port structures, safety and security within the terminals, and towing, mooring, bunkering and repairing ships.

In May 2022, the new Dala Dry Port opened for business, close to Kano. The dry port will take over tasks from Nigerias sea ports. It has the capacity of 20.000 TEU&#x27;s.

== Bridges ==
Thirty-seven Bridges nationwide are undergoing maintenance and repairs in 2022, some of which have been due for decades. Among those the bridge from the mainland to Bonny Island, from which the crude oil of the same name is loaded. Furthermore, the Loko-Oweto bridge project, the Third Mainland Bridge in Lagos, the Murtala Mohammed Bridge in Koton Karfi and the Isaac Boro Bridge in Port Harcourt. Others include Chanchangi Bridge in Niger State and the Tambuwara Bridge in Kano.
After decades of political discussions the Second Niger bridge is nearing completion (as of January 2022).

== Merchant marine ==

The Nigerian Merchant Navy is not a legally recognized body, but the senior officers are represented by the Merchant Navy Officers&#x27; and Water Transport Senior Staff Association.
The maritime industry is regulated by the Nigerian Maritime Administration and Safety Agency (NIMASA), which is responsible for regulations related to Nigerian shipping, maritime labor and coastal waters. The agency also undertakes inspections and provides search and rescue services.

&quot;total:&quot;
40 ships ( or over) totaling /
&lt;br&gt;&quot;ships by type:&quot;
bulk carrier 1, cargo ship 12, chemical tanker 4, petroleum tanker 22, specialized tanker 1 (1999 est.)

== Airport and airlines ==

Nigeria&#x27;s principal airports are Murtala Muhammed International Airport in Lagos and Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport in Abuja. Three other international airports are Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport in Kano, Akanu Ibiam International Airport in Enugu and Port Harcourt International Airport in Port Harcourt. 

The air transport industry was particularly affected by the pandemic, as many countries closed their borders at various points throughout 2020 to reduce the spread of the virus. Nigeria’s aviation segment entered the pandemic in a relatively strong position, according to FAAN. Arrivals to Nigeria’s 30-some airports totalled 8.8m in 2019, while 8.7m departures were logged. This represented a 7.4% increase from the 16.4m total passenger movements recorded in 2018. Meanwhile, cargo traffic grew in 2019 – from 164.9m kg in 2018 kg to 174.9m kg – while mail by air rose from 47.3m kg to 55.6m kg. The domestic terminals of airports in Abuja and Lagos accounted for 25% of passenger movements and 30% of aircraft movements each in 2019, while Murtala Muhammed International Airport (MMIA) in Lagos handled 81% of all cargo.

Priority aviation projects in the 2021 budget include N10bn ($26.7m) for a second runway at Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport (NAIA) in Abuja, N1bn ($2.7m) for a new terminal building at the airport in Enugu, and N900m ($2.4m) for extending and repaving the runway at MMIA. Laying a second runway at NAIA follows the December 2018 opening of the new international terminal. The terminal is the first in the country to be connected to a rail system, with Abuja’s light rail train taking passengers to the city centre.

== References ==
=== General references ===
* 

==External links==
* UN Map
* Nigeria Roads map
* Nigeria Map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6971159" start="240" end="269" title="National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria" label="National Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231050" start="812" end="822" title="Lekki Port" label="Lekki Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013553" start="4710" end="4723" title="Dangote Group" label="Dangote Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583618" start="6050" end="6079" title="Trans-African Highway network" label="Trans-African Highway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449946" start="6118" end="6138" title="Trans-Sahara Highway" label="Trans-Sahara Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="6142" end="6149" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157732" start="6240" end="6262" title="Trans-Sahelian Highway" label="Trans-Sahelian Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="6266" end="6271" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157731" start="6305" end="6339" title="Trans–West African Coastal Highway" label="Trans–West African Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="6350" end="6357" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="6386" end="6391" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="6393" end="6397" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6399" end="6404" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="6409" end="6420" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="6456" end="6468" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="6473" end="6477" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="6500" end="6507" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="6512" end="6524" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="6576" end="6617" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406553" start="6654" end="6675" title="Lagos-Mombasa Highway" label="Lagos-Mombasa Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="6807" end="6815" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="6845" end="6853" title="DR Congo" label="DR Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="6857" end="6868" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="6914" end="6928" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="6933" end="6948" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="7076" end="7087" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q204806" start="7111" end="7122" title="Benue River" label="Benue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="7206" end="7217" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q499414" start="7247" end="7259" title="Lagos Lagoon" label="Lagos Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141201" start="7263" end="7274" title="Cross River (Nigeria)" label="Cross River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984259" start="7610" end="7635" title="West African Gas Pipeline" label="West African Gas Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584545" start="7734" end="7760" title="Trans-Saharan gas pipeline" label="Trans-Saharan gas pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="7848" end="7857" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="7868" end="7877" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="7897" end="7908" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q617618" start="7977" end="7987" title="Apapa Port" label="Apapa Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585317" start="7992" end="8011" title="Tin Can Island Port" label="Tin Can Island Port"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8031" end="8040" title="Onne Port" label="Onne Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="8045" end="8058" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8079" end="8089" title="Warri Port" label="Warri Port"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8113" end="8125" title="Calabar Port" label="Calabar Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033005" start="8200" end="8223" title="Nigerian Ports Authority" label="Nigerian Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q25247514" start="8640" end="8661" title="Lekki" label="Lagos Free Trade Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="10111" end="10115" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297310" start="10121" end="10129" title="dry port" label="dry port"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="10206" end="10209" title="Twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="TEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407815" start="10487" end="10492" title="Agatu massacres" label="Oweto"/>
<link wikidata="Q567962" start="10513" end="10534" title="Third Mainland Bridge" label="Third Mainland Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405232" start="10757" end="10776" title="Second Niger bridge" label="Second Niger bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109225" start="10849" end="10871" title="Nigerian Merchant Navy" label="Nigerian Merchant Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032923" start="11070" end="11120" title="Nigerian Maritime Administration and Safety Agency" label="Nigerian Maritime Administration and Safety Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="11179" end="11186" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276" start="11401" end="11413" title="bulk carrier" label="bulk carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="11417" end="11427" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="11432" end="11447" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="11451" end="11467" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043631" start="11572" end="11610" title="Murtala Muhammed International Airport" label="Murtala Muhammed International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="11614" end="11619" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q525030" start="11624" end="11660" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="11664" end="11669" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431654" start="11710" end="11749" title="Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport" label="Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="11753" end="11757" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497354" start="11759" end="11792" title="Akanu Ibiam International Airport" label="Akanu Ibiam International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q465022" start="11796" end="11801" title="Enugu (city)" label="Enugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432453" start="11806" end="11841" title="Port Harcourt International Airport" label="Port Harcourt International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="11845" end="11858" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21391" wikidata="Q250774" url="?curid=21391" title="Nigerian Armed Forces">
<text>The Nigerian Armed Forces (NAF) are the military forces of Nigeria. The forces consist of three service branches: the Nigerian Army, Nigerian Navy, and Nigerian Air Force. The President of Nigeria functions as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, exercising his constitutional authority through the Ministry of Defence, which is responsible for the management of the military and its personnel. The operational head of the AFN is the Chief of Defence Staff, who is subordinate to the Nigerian Defence Minister. With a force of more than 230,000 active personnel, the Nigerian military is one of the largest uniformed combat services in Africa. According to Global Firepower, the Nigerian Armed Forces are the most powerful military in sub-saharan Africa, third-most powerful military in Africa, and ranked 31st on its list, internationally. 

The Nigerian Armed Forces were established in 1960 as the successor to the combat units of the Royal West African Frontier Force stationed in the country, which had previously served as the British Empire&#x27;s multi-battalion field force, during Nigeria&#x27;s protectorate period. Since its creation, the Nigerian military has fought in a civil war – the conflict with Biafra in 1967–70 – and sent peacekeeping forces abroad, both with the United Nations and as the backbone of the Economic Community of West African States Cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Liberia and Sierra Leone. It has also seized power twice at home (1966 &amp; 1983). Nigeria&#x27;s armed forces would continue to remain an active element in combat operations throughout the African continent over the proceeding decades, with 
notable engagements including its 2017 involvement as part of the ECOWAS military intervention in the Gambia.

==Legal standing==
The roles of a country&#x27;s armed forces are entrenched in her constitution. The defence of the territorial integrity and other core interests of the nation, form the major substance of such roles. Section 217-220 of the 1999 Constitution of Nigeria thus addresses the Nigerian Armed Forces:
*(1) There shall be an armed forces for the federation, which shall consist of an army, a navy, an air force, and such other branches of the armed forces of the federation, as may be established by an Act of the National Assembly.
*(2) The federation shall, subject to an Act of the National Assembly made in that behalf, equip and maintain the armed forces as may be considered adequate and effective for the purpose of –
*(a) defending Nigeria from external aggression.
*(b) maintaining its territorial integrity and securing its borders from violation on land, sea, or air;
*(c) suppress insurrection and act in aid of civil authorities to restore order, when called upon to do so by the President, but subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by an Act of the National Assembly; and
*(d) perform such other functions as may be prescribed by an act of the National Assembly.
*(3) The composition of the officer corps and other ranks of the armed forces of the Federation shall reflect the federal character of Nigeria.

==History==

The origin of the Nigerian Armed Forces lies in the elements of the Royal West African Frontier Force, that became Nigerian when independence was granted in 1960. In 1956, the Nigeria Regiment of the Royal West African Frontier Force (RWAFF) was renamed the Nigerian Military Forces, RWAFF, and in April 1958, the colonial government of Nigeria took over from the British War Office control of the Nigerian Military Forces. 

Shortly after its formation, the NAF was engaged in combat operations against the secessionist state of Biafra, during the Nigerian Civil War from 1967 to 1970. At this point, the Nigerian military ballooned in strength from 85,000 personnel in 1967 to more than 250,000 troops by the war&#x27;s end. In the years following the civil war, the Nigerian Armed Forces were halved in size from its post-war height to approximately 125,000 men. Despite this contraction in the size and funding of its armed forces, Nigeria would boast the only military in West Africa capable of engaging in foreign military operations, such as during its intervention in Liberian civil war in 1990.

The great expansion of the military during the civil war further entrenched the existing military hold on Nigerian society, carried over from the first military regime. In doing so, it played an appreciable part in reinforcing the military&#x27;s nearly first-among-equals status within Nigerian society, and the linked decline in military effectiveness. Olusegun Obasanjo, who by 1999, had become president, bemoaned the fact in his inaugural address that year: &quot;... Professionalism has been lost... my heart bleeds to see the degradation in the proficiency of the military.&quot;

Today, the NAF faces a number of domestic challenges which continue to undermine stability within Nigeria and the region as a whole. Some of these threats include the ongoing conflict against the jihadist rebel group, Boko Haram in northeastern Nigeria, which has been in effect since July 2009. Likewise, Nigeria has been engaged in a long-running anti-piracy campaign in the Niger Delta, which has threatened the vital petroleum industry in the country, which is the source of 90% of Nigeria&#x27;s exports and 35% of the government&#x27;s revenue. Compounding this state of affairs is the role corruption plays in the ongoing attempts to strengthen the armed forces. Corruption has historically weakened the Nigerian military&#x27;s capacity to face internal security threats and is cited as being responsible for the continued longevity of rebels and terrorists operating throughout the nation.

In spite of these challenges to its operational readiness, the Nigerian Armed Forces have committed to a number of wide-ranging modernization programs to bolster the discipline and firepower of its troops. This includes the acquisition of new armored vehicles, combat aircraft and aerial reconnaissance drones, and the refurbishing of naval vessels, which had suffered from prolonged periods of poor or minimal maintenance. These trends in the development of the armed forces as a fighting force, as well as efforts to combat corruption within the ranks of military personnel and government bureaucracy, have been critically important in the ability of Nigeria to confront challenges to its national security and stability in the wider region of West Africa as a whole.

== Structure ==
=== Command structure ===
The President of Nigeria functions as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, exercising his constitutional authority through the Ministry of Defence, which is responsible for the management of the military and its personnel. The operational head of the AFN is the Chief of the Defence Staff, who is subordinate to the Nigerian Defence Minister. The current chief is General Christopher Gwabin Musa.

The National Defence Council has been in existence since 1979 and advises the President on matters relating to the armed forces. The NDC is chaired by the president, and its members include the Vice President of Nigeria, the National Security Adviser, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State for Defence, the Chief of Defence Staff, the Chief of Army Staff, the Chief of Naval Staff and the Chief of Air Staff, as well as others the president is empowered to appoint. 

=== Service branches ===
==== Army ====

The Nigerian Army (NA) is the land branch of the Nigerian Armed Forces and the largest among the armed forces. Its major formations include the 1st Division, 2nd Division, 3rd Armoured Division, 81st Division, 82nd Division and the newly formed 8th, 7th and 6th Divisions. The Nigerian army is headed currently by Lieutenant General Taoreed Abiodun Lagbaja, who was appointed by President Bola Ahmed Tinubu. The Nigerian Army has been playing a major role in defence of Nigerian Democracy since the first republic till date.

==== Navy ====

The Nigerian Navy (NN) is the sea branch of the Nigerian Armed Forces. The Nigerian Navy command structure today consists of the Naval Headquarters in Abuja as well as three other operational commands with headquarters in Lagos, Calabar and Bayelsa. The training command headquarters are located in Lagos, the commercial capital of Nigeria, but with training facilities spread all over Nigeria. There are five operational bases; five forward operational bases (with two more soon to come on stream), two dockyards located in Lagos and Port Harcourt and two fleets based in Lagos and Calabar. The Nigerian Navy is currently headed by Vice Admiral Emmanuel Ikechukwu Ogalla.

==== Air Force ====
The Nigerian Air Force was formally established in January 1964, with technical assistance from West Germany. The Air Force started as a transport unit, with the aircrew being trained in Canada, Ethiopia and Pakistan. The Air Force did not get combat capability until a number of MiG-17 aircraft were presented by the Soviet Union in 1966.

In 2007, the Air Force had a strength of 10,000. It flies transport, trainer, helicopter, and fighter aircraft. By 2021, the number of Air Force personnel had increased to 18,000.

The Air Force sponsors the Air Force Military School, Jos, Nigeria and the Air Force Institute of Technology. Nigeria also has pursued a policy of developing domestic training and military production capabilities. Nigeria has continued a strict policy of diversification in its military procurement from various countries. The Nigerian Air force is currently headed by Air Marshal Hassan Bala Abubakar.

=== Training establishments ===
Training establishments in Nigeria include the prestigious officer entry: Nigerian Defence Academy at Kaduna, the Armed Forces Command and Staff College, Jaji, and the National War College at Abuja. The U.S. commercial military contractor, Military Professional Resources Inc. has been involved around 1999–2000 in advising on civil-military relations for the armed forces.

== Nigerian military operations abroad ==
In December 1983, the new Major General Muhammadu Buhari regime announced that Nigeria could no longer afford an activist anti-colonial role in Africa. Anglophone ECOWAS members established ECOMOG, dominated by the Nigerian Army in 1990, to intervene in the civil war in Liberia. The Army has demonstrated its capability to mobilize, deploy, and sustain brigade-sized forces in support of peacekeeping operations in Liberia. Smaller army forces have been previously sent on UN and ECOWAS deployments in the former Yugoslavia, Guinea-Bissau, and Sierra Leone. This doctrine of African military intervention by Nigeria is sometimes called Pax Nigeriana.

That policy statement did not deter Nigeria under Generals Ibrahim Babangida in 1990 and Sani Abacha in 1997, from sending ECOMOG peacekeeping forces under the auspices of ECOWAS into Liberia and later Sierra Leone, when the civil wars broke out in those countries. President Olusegun Obasanjo in August 2003, committed the Nigerian troops once again to Liberia, at the appeal of the United States, to provide an interim presence until the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) arrived. Charles Taylor was subsequently eased out of power and exiled to Nigeria.

In October 2004, the Nigerian troops were deployed to Darfur, Sudan, to spearhead an African Union force, to stop the genocide in Darfur. Nigeria has contributed more than 20,000 troops/police to various UN missions since 1960. The Nigerian Police Force and troops have participated in:

* UNIPOM – India and Pakistan, 1965
* UNIFIL – Lebanon, 1978 
* UNIIMOG – Iran and Iraq, 1988 
* UNPROFOR – Former Yugoslavia, 1998 
* UNMISET – East Timor, 1999 
* MONUC – Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2004

Nigerian officers have served as Chiefs of Defence in other countries, with Brigadier General Maxwell Khobe, serving as Sierra Leone Chief of Staff in 1998–1999, and Nigerian officers acting as Command Officer-in-Charge of the Armed Forces of Liberia from at least, 2007.
==References==

*List of Military Health Care Facilities Under DHML – for unit locations
*Military Ranks of the Nigerian Army Military Ranks of the Nigerian Army

==Further reading==

*Idang, Gordon J. &quot;The Politics of Nigerian Foreign Policy: The Ratification and Renunciation of the Anglo-Nigerian Defence Agreement.&quot; African Studies Review 13, no. 2 (1970): 227–251.
*Robin Luckham, The Nigerian military; a sociological analysis of authority &amp; revolt 1960–67, Cambridge [Eng.] University Press, 1971.
*N.J. Miners, ‘The Nigerian Army 1956–66,’ Methuen and Co. Ltd, London, 1971
*Jimi Peters, &#x27;The Nigerian Military and the State,&#x27; 1997, 
*Nigerian Army Education Corps and School, History of the Nigerian Army 1863–1992, Abuja, 1992

== External links ==
* Nigerian Defence Staff
* Nigerian Army
* Nigerian Navy
* Nigerian Air Force</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q250774" start="4" end="25" title="Nigerian Armed Forces" label="Nigerian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="40" end="55" title="Military" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="59" end="66" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="118" end="131" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510333" start="133" end="146" title="Nigerian Navy" label="Nigerian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707397" start="152" end="170" title="Nigerian Air Force" label="Nigerian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="176" end="196" title="President of Nigeria" label="President of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="214" end="232" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="269" end="293" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="constitutional authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097054" start="441" end="463" title="Chief of Defence Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251230" start="491" end="516" title="Defence Minister of Nigeria" label="Nigerian Defence Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="794" end="800" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375006" start="945" end="978" title="Royal West African Frontier Force" label="Royal West African Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446907" start="1078" end="1089" title="field force" label="field force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="1113" end="1132" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="protectorate period"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="1192" end="1201" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="1208" end="1228" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="conflict with Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1335" end="1376" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="1388" end="1404" title="Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group" label="Monitoring Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="1417" end="1424" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="1429" end="1441" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033039" start="1483" end="1498" title="Nigerian military juntas of 1966-1979 and 1983-1998" label="1966 &amp;amp; 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1727" end="1733" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28444896" start="1734" end="1755" title="ECOWAS military intervention in the Gambia" label="military intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="1759" end="1769" title="the Gambia" label="the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856156" start="2019" end="2042" title="Constitution of Nigeria" label="Constitution of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="2167" end="2171" title="Nigerian Army" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510333" start="2175" end="2179" title="Nigerian Navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707397" start="2184" end="2193" title="Nigerian Air Force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="2297" end="2314" title="National Assembly (Nigeria)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635070" start="2951" end="2969" title="National Assembly (Nigeria)" label="National Assembly."/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="3084" end="3091" title="Federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375006" start="3196" end="3229" title="Royal West African Frontier Force" label="Royal West African Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032817" start="3304" end="3320" title="Nigeria Regiment" label="Nigeria Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375006" start="3328" end="3361" title="Royal West African Frontier Force" label="Royal West African Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="3500" end="3510" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q178469" start="3658" end="3664" title="Biafra" label="Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q829875" start="3677" end="3695" title="Nigerian Civil War" label="Nigerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="4105" end="4116" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477500" start="4204" end="4222" title="First Liberian Civil War" label="Liberian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="4588" end="4605" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757343" start="5017" end="5025" title="jihadist" label="jihadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424585" start="5026" end="5037" title="List of rebel groups that control territory" label="rebel group"/>
<link wikidata="Q212372" start="5039" end="5049" title="Boko Haram" label="Boko Haram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569328" start="5053" end="5073" title="Boko Haram insurgency" label="northeastern Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202792" start="5170" end="5190" title="Conflict in the Niger Delta" label="anti-piracy campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q29412" start="5198" end="5209" title="Niger Delta" label="Niger Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178969" start="5242" end="5260" title="Petroleum industry in Nigeria" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="6576" end="6594" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097054" start="6803" end="6829" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Nigeria)" label="Chief of the Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q119780281" start="6913" end="6936" title="Christopher Gwabin Musa" label="Christopher Gwabin Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625960" start="7133" end="7158" title="Vice President of Nigeria" label="Vice President of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008078" start="7601" end="7613" title="1st Division (Nigeria)" label="1st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119029" start="7615" end="7627" title="2nd Division (Nigeria)" label="2nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7629" end="7650" title="3rd Armoured Division (Nigeria)" label="3rd Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305503" start="7652" end="7665" title="81st Division (Nigeria)" label="81st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q117317439" start="7667" end="7680" title="82nd Division (Nigeria)" label="82nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q119788664" start="7790" end="7813" title="Taoreed Abiodun Lagbaja" label="Taoreed Abiodun Lagbaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="7936" end="7945" title="Democracy" label="Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="8221" end="8226" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844091" start="8228" end="8235" title="Calabar" label="Calabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q532153" start="8240" end="8247" title="Bayelsa State" label="Bayelsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217432" start="8534" end="8547" title="Port Harcourt" label="Port Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q119789450" start="8645" end="8670" title="Emmanuel Ikechukwu Ogalla" label="Emmanuel Ikechukwu Ogalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="8789" end="8801" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8880" end="8886" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="8888" end="8896" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="8901" end="8909" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152976" start="8973" end="8979" title="MiG-17" label="MiG-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9011" end="9023" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697925" start="9242" end="9281" title="Air Force Military School, Jos, Nigeria" label="Air Force Military School, Jos, Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697913" start="9290" end="9323" title="Air Force Institute of Technology" label="Air Force Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q119789451" start="9596" end="9616" title="Hassan Bala Abubakar" label="Hassan Bala Abubakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032895" start="9725" end="9749" title="Nigerian Defence Academy" label="Nigerian Defence Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="9753" end="9759" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792976" start="9765" end="9809" title="Armed Forces Command and Staff College, Jaji" label="Armed Forces Command and Staff College, Jaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="9843" end="9848" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q431638" start="9891" end="9927" title="Military Professional Resources Inc." label="Military Professional Resources Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="10108" end="10124" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="10220" end="10230" title="English-speaking world" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="10231" end="10237" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="10258" end="10264" title="Ecomog" label="ECOMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477500" start="10326" end="10346" title="First Liberian Civil War" label="civil war in Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="10457" end="10480" title="Peacekeeping Operations" label="peacekeeping operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="10484" end="10491" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10542" end="10544" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="10575" end="10592" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="10594" end="10607" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="10613" end="10625" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690032" start="10644" end="10660" title="African military systems after 1900" label="African military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300914" start="10705" end="10718" title="Pax Nigeriana" label="Pax Nigeriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q333415" start="10780" end="10797" title="Ibrahim Babangida" label="Ibrahim Babangida"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="10810" end="10821" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="10997" end="11014" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11105" end="11118" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="11161" end="11194" title="United Nations Mission in Liberia" label="United Nations Mission in Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49090" start="11212" end="11226" title="Charles G. Taylor" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="11341" end="11347" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="11372" end="11385" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q836615" start="11519" end="11540" title="Nigeria Police Force" label="Nigerian Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q233583" start="11577" end="11583" title="UNIPOM" label="UNIPOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="11586" end="11591" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="11596" end="11604" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="11613" end="11619" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="11622" end="11629" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549011" start="11639" end="11646" title="UNIIMOG" label="UNIIMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11649" end="11653" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="11658" end="11662" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q170245" start="11672" end="11680" title="United Nations Protection Force" label="UNPROFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="11690" end="11700" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141705" start="11710" end="11717" title="United Nations Mission of Support to East Timor" label="UNMISET"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="11720" end="11730" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="11740" end="11745" title="MONUC" label="MONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="11748" end="11780" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097014" start="11821" end="11838" title="Chief of defence" label="Chiefs of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063508" start="11882" end="11895" title="Maxwell Khobe" label="Maxwell Khobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="11921" end="11935" title="Chief of staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331367" start="12015" end="12038" title="Armed Forces of Liberia" label="Armed Forces of Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12441" end="12454" title="Robin Luckham" label="Robin Luckham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21392" wikidata="Q4113718" url="?curid=21392" title="Foreign relations of Nigeria">
<text>Since independence, with Jaja Wachuku as the first Minister for Foreign Affairs and Commonwealth Relations, later called External Affairs, Nigerian foreign policy has been characterised by a focus on Africa as a regional power and by attachment to several fundamental principles: African unity and independence; capability to exercise hegemonic influence in the region: peaceful settlement of disputes; non-alignment and non-intentional interference in the internal affairs of other nations; and regional economic cooperation and development. In carrying out these principles, Nigeria participates in the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the United Nations.

==Nigeria and the liberation of Africa==

Upon gaining independence in 1960, Nigeria quickly committed itself to improving the lives of the people of the country and harnessing the resources that remain vital to the economy of the country and her neighbours. By observing at what benefits and appropriate for the country, Nigeria became one of the founding members of the Organisation for African Unity (OAU), which later became the African Union. The Organisation for African Unity checks political stability of any African countries and encourages them to be holding regional meetings for the union. Nigeria backed the African National Congress (ANC) by taking a committed tough line with regard to the South African government and their military actions in southern Africa. Nigeria and Organisation for African Unity (OAU, now the African Union), has tremendous influence in West Africa nations and Africa on the whole. Nigeria has additionally founded regional cooperative efforts in West Africa, functioning as standard-bearer for ECOWAS and ECOMOG, economic and military organisations, respectively. 

Similarly, when civil war broke out in Angola after the country gained independence from Portugal in 1975, Nigeria mobilised its diplomatic influence in Africa in support of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA). That support helped tip the balance in their favour, which led to OAU recognition of the MPLA over the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola.

Nigeria extended diplomatic support to another cause, Sam Nujoma&#x27;s Southwest Africa People&#x27;s Organization in Namibia, to stall the apartheid South African-installed government there. In 1977, the new General Olusegun Obasanjo&#x27;s military regime donated $20 million to the Zimbabwean movement against the apartheid government of Rhodesia. Nigeria also sent military equipment to Mozambique to help the newly independent country suppress the South African-backed Mozambican National Resistance guerrillas. Nigeria also provided some military training at the Kaduna first mechanised army division and other material support to Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe&#x27;s guerrilla forces during the Zimbabwe War in 1979 against the white minority rule of Prime Minister Ian Douglas Smith, which was backed by the apartheid -government of South Africa. 

Due to mismanagement of its economy and technology, Nigeria announced that it was launching a nuclear programme of &quot;unlimited scope&quot; of its own but failed. After the Nigerian Independence in 1960, Nigeria demonstrated its seriousness in improving the economy for the people and embarked on nationalizing some multi-national companies that traded with and broke the economic/trade embargo of the apartheid South African regime, the local operations of Barclays Bank was nationalised after that bank ignored the strong protests by the Nigeria populace.

Nigeria also nationalised the British Petroleum (BP) for supplying oil to South Africa. In 1982, the Alhaji Shehu Shagari government urged the visiting Pontiff Pope John Paul II to grant audience to the leaders of Southern Africa guerrilla organisations Oliver Tambo of the ANC and Sam Nujoma of SWAPO. In December 1983, the new Major General Muhammadu Buhari regime announced that Nigeria could no longer afford an apartheid government in Africa. however, Nigeria being the foremost black nation on Earth due to its population, Nigeria has great potential and will soon grow to be a force to reckon with on the global stage.

==Nigeria and West Africa==

In pursuing the goal of regional economic cooperation and development, Nigeria helped create ECOWAS, which seeks to harmonise trade and investment practices for its 16 West African member countries, ultimately achieve a full customs union, and establish a single currency. Nigeria also has taken the lead in articulating the views of developing nations on the need for modification of the existing international economic order.

Nigeria has played a central role in the ECOWAS efforts to end the civil war in Liberia and contributed the bulk of the ECOWAS peacekeeping forces sent there in 1990. Nigeria also has provided the bulk of troops for ECOMOG forces in Sierra Leone.

Nigeria has enjoyed generally good relations with its immediate neighbours.
Nigeria has actively played a leading role in West Africa, with enormous military power, Nigeria has been perpetual in its aim of promoting peace and stability in Africa&#x27;s most prosperous region for more than three decades.

==Nigeria and International Organisations==

Nigeria is a member of the following organizations:

* African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States
* African Development Bank
* African Union
* Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South
* Commonwealth of Nations
* Economic Community of West African States
* Food and Agriculture Organization
* Group of 15
* G-19
* Group of 24
* Group of 77
* International Atomic Energy Agency
* International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
* International Chamber of Commerce
* International Civil Aviation Organization
* International Criminal Court
* International Development Association
* International Finance Corporation
* International Fund for Agricultural Development
* International Hydrographic Organization
* International Labour Organization
* International Monetary Fund
* International Maritime Organization
* International Mobile Satellite Organization
* International Olympic Committee
* International Organization for Standardization
* International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
* International Telecommunication Union
* Interpol
* Non-Aligned Movement
* Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
* Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
* Organization of Islamic Cooperation
* Permanent Court of Arbitration
* United Nations
* United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
* United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
* United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
* United Nations Industrial Development Organization
* United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission
* United Nations Institute for Training and Research
* United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
* United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
* United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
* United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka
* United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
* United Nations University
* Universal Postal Union
* World Confederation of Labour
* World Customs Organization
* World Federation of Trade Unions
* World Health Organization
* World Intellectual Property Organization
* World Meteorological Organization
* World Tourism Organization
* World Trade Organization

The Babangida regime joined the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC, now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation), though President Obasanjo has indicated he might reconsider Nigeria&#x27;s membership.comments are being made for Nigeria to establish more bilateral relations.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of countries which Nigeria maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Africa==
==Americas==
==Asia==
==Europe==
==Oceania==
==International disputes==

Delimitation of international boundaries in the vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in the past, has been completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria; dispute with Cameroon over land and maritime boundaries around the Bakasi Peninsula is currently before the International Court of Justice; maritime boundary dispute with Equatorial Guinea because of disputed jurisdiction over oil-rich areas in the Gulf of Guinea.

==Nigeria and the Commonwealth of Nations==

The Federation of Nigeria became independent from the United Kingdom in 1960 with Queen Elizabeth II as Queen of Nigeria. Nigeria became a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations in 1963, when the Governor-General of Nigeria, Nnamdi Azikiwe became the first President of Nigeria.

Nigeria was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations from 1995 until 1999, when its full membership was restored.

==See also==
* Jaja Wachuku - First Nigerian Foreign Affairs Minister
* List of diplomatic missions in Nigeria

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q548710" start="25" end="37" title="Jaja Wachuku" label="Jaja Wachuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="51" end="59" title="Minister (government)" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q16753607" start="64" end="79" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Nigeria)" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="84" end="106" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="139" end="147" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="148" end="162" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="403" end="416" title="neutrality (international relations)" label="non-alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="605" end="618" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="624" end="665" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="680" end="700" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="706" end="729" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="739" end="753" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="1128" end="1158" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation for African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="1377" end="1402" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="1545" end="1575" title="Organisation for African Unity" label="Organisation for African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="1590" end="1603" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="1634" end="1645" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1792" end="1798" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="1803" end="1809" title="ECOMOG" label="ECOMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="1903" end="1909" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q28551" start="2042" end="2087" title="Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola" label="Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q28699" start="2199" end="2250" title="UNITA" label="National Union for the Total Independence of Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q154104" start="2307" end="2317" title="Sam Nujoma" label="Sam Nujoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q467711" start="2325" end="2368" title="SWAPO" label="Southwest Africa People&amp;#x27;s Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="2372" end="2379" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2394" end="2403" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q202006" start="2463" end="2488" title="Olusegun Obasanjo" label="General Olusegun Obasanjo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2539" end="2558" title="Zimbabwean movement" label="Zimbabwean movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="2595" end="2603" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425821" start="2728" end="2758" title="RENAMO" label="Mozambican National Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="2823" end="2829" title="Kaduna (city)" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q470290" start="2891" end="2903" title="Joshua Nkomo" label="Joshua Nkomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="2908" end="2921" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444955" start="2957" end="2969" title="Zimbabwe War of Independence" label="Zimbabwe War"/>
<link wikidata="Q313424" start="3028" end="3045" title="Ian Douglas Smith" label="Ian Douglas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="3573" end="3586" title="Barclays plc" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="3591" end="3603" title="nationalised" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="3704" end="3721" title="BP" label="British Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380668" start="3782" end="3795" title="Shehu Shagari" label="Shehu Shagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="3834" end="3851" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q359579" start="3928" end="3940" title="Oliver Tambo" label="Oliver Tambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q361567" start="4017" end="4033" title="Muhammadu Buhari" label="Muhammadu Buhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="4800" end="4806" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="4975" end="4981" title="ECOMOG" label="ECOMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="4992" end="5004" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="5413" end="5459" title="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States" label="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="5462" end="5486" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="5489" end="5502" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152738" start="5505" end="5582" title="Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South" label="Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="5585" end="5608" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="5611" end="5652" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="5655" end="5688" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q971612" start="5691" end="5702" title="Group of 15" label="Group of 15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5705" end="5709" title="Group of 19" label="G-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="5712" end="5723" title="Group of 24" label="Group of 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="5726" end="5737" title="Group of 77" label="Group of 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="5740" end="5774" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q191384" start="5777" end="5830" title="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development" label="International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q848633" start="5833" end="5866" title="International Chamber of Commerce" label="International Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="5869" end="5910" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="5913" end="5941" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q827525" start="5944" end="5981" title="International Development Association" label="International Development Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="5984" end="6017" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q689859" start="6020" end="6067" title="International Fund for Agricultural Development" label="International Fund for Agricultural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="6070" end="6109" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="6112" end="6145" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="6148" end="6175" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="6178" end="6213" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666759" start="6216" end="6259" title="International Mobile Satellite Organization" label="International Mobile Satellite Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="6262" end="6293" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="6296" end="6342" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="6345" end="6394" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="6397" end="6434" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="6437" end="6445" title="Interpol (organization)" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="6448" end="6468" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q842490" start="6471" end="6523" title="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons" label="Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="6526" end="6571" title="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries" label="Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="6574" end="6609" title="Organization of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organization of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045198" start="6612" end="6642" title="Permanent Court of Arbitration" label="Permanent Court of Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6645" end="6659" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="6662" end="6712" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="6715" end="6760" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="6763" end="6827" title="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="6830" end="6875" title="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees" label="United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q386120" start="6878" end="6928" title="United Nations Industrial Development Organization" label="United Nations Industrial Development Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064062" start="6931" end="6977" title="United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission" label="United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q131878" start="6980" end="7030" title="United Nations Institute for Training and Research" label="United Nations Institute for Training and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="7033" end="7088" title="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" label="United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q695186" start="7091" end="7150" title="United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara" label="United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q487377" start="7153" end="7201" title="United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618168" start="7204" end="7251" title="United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka" label="United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785413" start="7254" end="7303" title="United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan" label="United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q492442" start="7306" end="7331" title="United Nations University" label="United Nations University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="7334" end="7356" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q595208" start="7359" end="7388" title="World Confederation of Labour" label="World Confederation of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q605326" start="7391" end="7417" title="World Customs Organization" label="World Customs Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q748999" start="7420" end="7452" title="World Federation of Trade Unions" label="World Federation of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="7455" end="7480" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="7483" end="7523" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="World Intellectual Property Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="7526" end="7559" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q61923" start="7562" end="7588" title="World Tourism Organization" label="World Tourism Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="7591" end="7615" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="7702" end="7737" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125309" start="8140" end="8149" title="Lake Chad" label="Lake Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="8252" end="8260" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="8262" end="8266" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="8268" end="8273" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="8324" end="8343" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q804272" start="8355" end="8371" title="Bakasi Peninsula" label="Bakasi Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="8396" end="8426" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="8459" end="8476" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="8537" end="8551" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440850" start="8603" end="8624" title="Federation of Nigeria" label="Federation of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="8681" end="8699" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898094" start="8703" end="8719" title="Queen of Nigeria" label="Queen of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="8738" end="8777" title="republic in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="republic in the Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q743228" start="8796" end="8823" title="Governor-General of Nigeria" label="Governor-General of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="8825" end="8839" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="8857" end="8877" title="President of Nigeria" label="President of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="8911" end="8934" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q548710" start="9012" end="9024" title="Jaja Wachuku" label="Jaja Wachuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616492" start="9069" end="9107" title="List of diplomatic missions in Nigeria" label="List of diplomatic missions in Nigeria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21393" wikidata="Q2356111" url="?curid=21393" title="History of Niue">
<text>The history of Niue is the history of the area and people of Niue, including its indigenous Polynesian societies. Niue was first settled by Polynesian sailors from Samoa in around 900 AD. Further settlers (or possibly invaders) arrived from Tonga in the 16th century.

The first known sighting of the island by a European was by Captain James Cook in 1774 during his second Pacific voyage. The pioneering missionary John Williams was the first European to land on the island in 1830. After years of British missionary activity, negotiations with the local kings for British protection of the island began in 1879. Lord Ranfurly, Governor of New Zealand proclaimed British Sovereignty over Niue in 1900, therefore laid the island under the patronage of New Zealand.

Niue lost around 4% of its population in World War I as 150 Niuean men were sent to France under the New Zealand army, of which nearly none returned. World War II however did not directly affect the island.

Niue became self-governing in 1974. Since then, the island has been shrinking in population from emigration due to frequent devastating natural disasters and lack of economic opportunities.

==Early history==
Until the beginning of the 18th century, there appears to have been no national government or national leader in Niue. Before that time, chiefs and heads of family exercised authority over segments of the population. Around 1700, the concept and practice of kingship appears to have been introduced through contact with Samoa or Tonga. From then on, a succession of &quot;patu-iki&quot; (kings) ruled the island, the first of whom was Puni-mata.

==European contact==
Captain James Cook was the first European to sight the island, but he was unable to land there due to fierce opposition by the local population. The &quot;1911 Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; claimed this was due to native fear of foreign disease. In response, Cook named Niue the &quot;Savage Island&quot;.
Christian missionaries from the London Missionary Society converted most of the population circa 1846. Tui-toga, who reigned from 1875 to 1887, was the first Christian king of Niue.

The island was visited by Captain John Erskine in &quot;H.M.S. Havannah&quot; in July 1849.

==British protectorate==
In 1887, King Fataaiki wrote to Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, requesting that Niue be placed under British protection, but his request was turned down. In 1900, in response to renewed requests, the island became a British protectorate, and the following year it was annexed by New Zealand. Niue&#x27;s remoteness, as well as cultural and linguistic differences between its Polynesian inhabitants and those of the Cook Islands, caused it to be separately administered.
==World War I==
During World War I, 148 Niuean men (4% of the island&#x27;s population) served as soldiers in the New Zealand armed forces. They were initially sent to Egypt, in February 1916, however, illness was common, and by April over half of them had been hospitalized. They were transferred to Northern France in April 1916, where illness was also common. At the end of May it was decided the Niuean soldiers would be withdrawn from the front, being sent to Hornchurch, in England, before leaving for New Zealand by the end of June.

==Autonomy==
Niue gained its autonomy in 1974 in free association with New Zealand, which handles the island&#x27;s military and foreign affairs. Niue had been offered autonomy in 1965 (along with the Cook Islands, which accepted), but had asked for its autonomy to be deferred another decade.

Niueans continue to be New Zealand citizens, and use standard New Zealand passports. Niueans who meet normal residence criteria in either country may vote or stand in that country&#x27;s elections. Niue continues to use New Zealand currency, but issues its own postage stamps (New Zealand stamps are not valid for postage in Niue, nor Niuean stamps in New Zealand).

==Recent history==
In January 2004, Niue was struck by a devastating cyclone (Cyclone Heta) which left 200 of the islands&#x27; 1600 inhabitants homeless. As a number of local residents chose afterwards not to rebuild, New Zealand&#x27;s Foreign Affairs Minister Phil Goff speculated that Niue&#x27;s status as a self-governing nation in free association with New Zealand might come into question if too many residents departed the island to maintain basic services. Soon afterwards, Niue Premier Young Vivian categorically rejected the possibility of altering the existing relationship with New Zealand.

The population of the island continues to drop (from a peak of 5,200 in 1966 to 2,100 in 2000), with substantial emigration to New Zealand.

==See also==
*Postage stamps and postal history of Niue
* List of resident commissioners of Niue

==References==
==Further reading==
* HEKAU, Maihetoe &amp; al., &quot;Niue: A History of the Island&quot;, Suva: Institute of Pacific Studies (USP) &amp; the government of Niue, 1982 [no ISBN]

==External links==
*A Brief History of Niue</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2356111" start="4" end="19" title="History of Niue" label="history of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="61" end="65" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="92" end="102" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="114" end="118" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="140" end="149" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45199" start="151" end="157" title="sailor" label="sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="164" end="169" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="241" end="246" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="337" end="347" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241783" start="416" end="429" title="John Williams (missionary)" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721559" start="614" end="627" title="Lord Ranfurly" label="Lord Ranfurly"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="752" end="763" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="1441" end="1449" title="kingship" label="kingship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641997" start="1618" end="1627" title="List of Niuean monarchs" label="Puni-mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1659" end="1669" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="1967" end="1979" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="1989" end="2014" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231900" start="2166" end="2186" title="John Erskine (Royal Navy officer)" label="Captain John Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632718" start="2190" end="2217" title="HMS Havannah (1811)" label="&amp;quot;H.M.S. Havannah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147438" start="2272" end="2280" title="Fataaiki" label="Fataaiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2290" end="2304" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="2488" end="2500" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2543" end="2554" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="2639" end="2648" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="2679" end="2691" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656021" start="3199" end="3209" title="Hornchurch" label="Hornchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="3324" end="3340" title="Associated state" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="3476" end="3488" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008516" start="4015" end="4027" title="Cyclone Heta" label="Cyclone Heta"/>
<link wikidata="Q508830" start="4434" end="4446" title="Young Vivian" label="Young Vivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233871" start="4698" end="4739" title="Postage stamps and postal history of Niue" label="Postage stamps and postal history of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q21515458" start="4742" end="4780" title="List of resident commissioners of Niue" label="List of resident commissioners of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q38807" start="4889" end="4893" title="Suva" label="Suva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062121" start="4925" end="4928" title="University of the South Pacific" label="USP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21394" wikidata="Q2602265" url="?curid=21394" title="Geography of Niue">
<text>[[Niue]] is a small, oval island in the South Pacific Ocean, to the east of Tonga. It has an area of 260 square kilometres, and a coastline of 64 km. It claims an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles, and a territorial sea of 12 nautical miles. It is one of world&#x27;s largest coral islands.

== Climate ==
Niue&#x27;s climate is tropical, modified by south-east trade winds. Cyclones pose a natural hazard.

== Terrain ==

The terrain consists of steep coastal cliffs made from limestone and a central plateau. Scenic features on the northern coast are the Talava Arches. The three sea arches are accessible via a trail. Further west on the coast the user will encounter Avaiki Cave. The coastline also includes numerous coastal caverns including Ana, Togo, and Vaikona. The lowest point is at sea level, and the highest is an unnamed point near Mutalau settlement, at 68 m.

== Natural resources ==
The island&#x27;s natural resources are fish and arable land. Land use in 1993 was as in the following table:

== Environmental issues ==
A current environmental issue is increasing attention to conservationist practices to counter loss of soil fertility from traditional slash-and-burn agriculture. Niue is a party to the following international agreements regarding the environment: Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification. Niue has signed but not ratified the Law of the Sea agreement.

==Boundaries==
Niue has signed a treaty with the United States in which the parties delimited the east–west maritime boundary between Niue and American Samoa. Niue is south of American Samoa.

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Niue, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point – unnamed headland north-west of Uluvehi
* Easternmost point – unnamed headland south-east of Liku
* Southernmost point – Limufuafua Point
* Westernmost point - Halagigie Point

== References ==

==External links==
* Maritime Zones Act 2013
* Exclusive Economic Zone Outer Limit Notice 2013</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2602265" start="0" end="8" title="Geography of Niue" label="[[Niue]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="26" end="32" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="46" end="59" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="76" end="81" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="163" end="186" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="216" end="231" title="territorial sea" label="territorial sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324426" start="288" end="300" title="coral island" label="coral island"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="341" end="349" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="374" end="385" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="387" end="395" title="Cyclones" label="Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="473" end="478" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="490" end="499" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="514" end="521" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552363" start="858" end="865" title="Mutalau" label="Mutalau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="952" end="956" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="961" end="972" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144359" start="1060" end="1079" title="environmental issue" label="environmental issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="1107" end="1122" title="conservation movement" label="conservationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="1152" end="1166" title="soil fertility" label="soil fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="1184" end="1198" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="1297" end="1309" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="1311" end="1340" title="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="1342" end="1357" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="1396" end="1410" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041691" start="1456" end="1462" title="Niue – United States Maritime Boundary Treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1472" end="1485" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305439" start="1507" end="1516" title="boundary delimitation" label="delimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="1531" end="1548" title="maritime boundary" label="maritime boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="1566" end="1580" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="1678" end="1682" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570188" start="1880" end="1884" title="Liku, Niue" label="Liku"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641018" start="1947" end="1962" title="Halagigie Point" label="Halagigie Point"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21396" wikidata="Q2401610" url="?curid=21396" title="Politics of Niue">
<text>The politics of Niue take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic dependency, whereby the Chief Minister is the head of government, and of a non-partisan system. Niue is self-governing in free association with New Zealand and is fully responsible for internal affairs. New Zealand retains some responsibility for external affairs, in consultation with Niue. The Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ) vests executive authority in His Majesty the King in Right of New Zealand and the Governor-General of New Zealand. The constitution specifies that in everyday practice, it is exercised by a Cabinet of the Premier of Niue and three other ministers. The premier and ministers must be members of the Niue Assembly, the nation&#x27;s legislative assembly.
The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

==Executive branch==

|Monarch
|Charles III 
|8 September 2022
|Governor-General
|Cindy Kiro
|28 September 2021
|Premier
|Dalton Tagelagi
|Independent
|11 June 2020

The monarch is hereditary; his representative in relation to Niue (the Governor-General of New Zealand) is appointed by the monarch. The New Zealand high commissioner is appointed by, and acts solely as a diplomatic agent of, the New Zealand Government. The cabinet is chosen by the premier and appointed by the Speaker of the Niue Assembly and collectively responsible to Parliament.

=== Cabinet ===
The Cabinet is made up of four ministers, each overseeing a different portfolio. Each minister, with the exception of the Premier, has another Member of the Assembly assisting him/her in the operations of their portfolio. Each ministry also has Directory Generals serving as permanent employees of the ministries, as well as directors for each division.

==Legislative branch==
The Assembly has 20 members elected for a three-year term, 6 elected on a nationwide list, called the common roll, and 14 representatives of the villages. Electors must be New Zealand citizens, resident for at least three months, and candidates must have been electors, resident for twelve months. The speaker is elected from among the members.

==Political parties and elections==
In Niue, political parties have never played an important role. There is, at present, no political party, and candidates to elections therefore run as independents. The only party ever to have existed, the Niue People&#x27;s Party, disbanded in 2003.

As there are no political parties, there is no formal parliamentary Opposition, though there are MPs who oppose the government.

===Latest election===
===By-elections===

Below is a list of recent by-elections:

==Judicial branch==
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council sitting in the United Kingdom is Niue&#x27;s highest court. On the island, there is a Court of Appeal (which sat in New Zealand until 2009), and the High Court of Niue.

The current Chief Justice of the High Court is Craig Coxhead. The Chief Justice is chosen by the Governor-General of New Zealand on advice from the cabinet of Niue.

=== Public Defender of Niue ===
Initially, it was the Crown Counsel of New Zealand that provided legal assistance to those accused of serious offenses such as murder. In 1971, the Select Committee on the Appointment of a Public Defender recommended that the Government of Niue provide any offenders with court representation. John Funaki (a non-attorney) was the first to serve as the Public Defender of Niue in 1976. Even today, the government provides funding for a Public Defender.

==Administrative divisions==
Niue is divided in 14 villages each with its own village council whose members are elected and serve three-year terms.

==International organization participation==

* African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States (Cotounu Convention)
* U.N. Economic and Social Committee for Asia and the Pacific (associate)
* Intelsat (nonsignatory user)
* Pacific Islands Forum
* South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement (SPARTECA)
* The Pacific Community (SPC)
* United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
* World Health Organization
* World Meteorological Organization

==Local government==
Local Government in Niue is established under the provisions of the Niue Village Council Act 1967. Every village in Niue have a Village council, the term in office is three years before going back to the polls. The election of the members of the village council follows the same rules and regulations used in the General Election to elect members of the Niue Legislative Assembly (parliament). At the first meeting of the Village Council the Chairman will be elected, including the Deputy Chair and the appointment of the Secretary/Treasurer. The Village Council receives grants from the Government, donor agencies also fund some development projects. The Council use to organize show days and conduct fundraising activities to generate revenue to help run some of the activities of the village.

=== Attorney General of Niue ===
Before achieving independence in 1974, there was an Attorney General for Niue that also served as the Attorney General for New Zealand. However, it would not be until 1996 that Niue would create the official title of Attorney General after amending the Niue Act 1966. Nevertheless, the amendment would not create much of a constitutional change, and the introduction of the Interpretation Act 2004 instated the Crown Law Office as providing legal advice to the Niue government. As a result, it was advised in 2004 that the post of Attorney General be repealed.

The head of the Crown Law Office functions as a public servant, and the Public Service Commission designates the titles for the service officers. The Crown Law Office is responsible for advising the government ministries, and advises the police in regards to criminal prosecution. Due to the lack of attorneys in Niue, there are certain instances in which the office will provide legal presentation to Niue residents.
*He may have spent the majority of his service as the Acting Attorney General as the Niue government had difficulty filling the position.

==See also==
* Cabinet of Niue
* Electoral calendar
* Electoral system
* Foreign relations of Niue
* List of political parties by country to browse parties by country

==References==
==External links==
* Government of Niue</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2401610" start="4" end="20" title="Politics of Niue" label="politics of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="52" end="65" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="66" end="91" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="92" end="102" title="Dependent territory" label="dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="138" end="156" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="188" end="192" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="236" end="247" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643153" start="388" end="419" title="Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ)" label="Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="449" end="493" title="Monarchy in New Zealand" label="His Majesty the King in Right of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="502" end="533" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="610" end="617" title="Cabinet (government)" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="717" end="730" title="Niue Assembly" label="Niue Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="776" end="785" title="Judiciary" label="Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641997" start="863" end="870" title="List of Niuean monarchs" label="Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="872" end="883" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="904" end="920" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180701" start="922" end="932" title="Cindy Kiro" label="Cindy Kiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602784" start="953" end="960" title="Premier of Niue" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876617" start="962" end="977" title="Dalton Tagelagi" label="Dalton Tagelagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="979" end="990" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="1790" end="1798" title="Niue Assembly" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="2177" end="2194" title="political parties" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644044" start="2374" end="2398" title="Niue People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Niue People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="2474" end="2498" title="Opposition (parliamentary)" label="parliamentary Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="2656" end="2695" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q96210383" start="2913" end="2926" title="Craig Coxhead" label="Craig Coxhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="2963" end="2994" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015539" start="3014" end="3029" title="cabinet of Niue" label="cabinet of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q294278" start="3715" end="3762" title="African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States" label="African, Caribbean, and Pacific Group of States"/>
<link wikidata="Q832200" start="3764" end="3782" title="Cotonou Agreement" label="Cotounu Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="3786" end="3845" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="U.N. Economic and Social Committee for Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="3860" end="3868" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="3891" end="3912" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413357" start="3915" end="3990" title="South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement" label="South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement (SPARTECA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="3993" end="4020" title="Pacific Community" label="The Pacific Community (SPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="4023" end="4096" title="UNESCO" label="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="4099" end="4124" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="4127" end="4160" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="4288" end="4295" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="4311" end="4326" title="Town council" label="Village council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="4496" end="4512" title="General election" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643140" start="4537" end="4562" title="Niue Assembly" label="Niue Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161355" start="4885" end="4896" title="fundraising" label="fundraising"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="4920" end="4927" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015539" start="6147" end="6162" title="Cabinet of Niue" label="Cabinet of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688440" start="6165" end="6183" title="Electoral calendar" label="Electoral calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="6186" end="6202" title="Electoral system" label="Electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395197" start="6205" end="6230" title="Foreign relations of Niue" label="Foreign relations of Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18692890" start="6233" end="6269" title="List of political parties by country" label="List of political parties by country"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21398" wikidata="Q7835046" url="?curid=21398" title="Transport in Niue">
<text>Transport in [[Niue]] takes place on a road network, and via an (international) airport and a sea port.

A ring road around the island&#x27;s coast is the major route, and roads cross the central plateau linking Alofi to the villages of Lakepa, Liku and Hakupu on the opposite coast. All villages in Niue are connected by roads. There are utility roads to the inland and some coastal areas, unsealed, used mainly for accessing taro plantations, coconut areas and walking access to the sea.

Niue International Airport in the west, south of Alofi, is the only airfield. It was extended in 1995 to allow Boeing 737 aircraft to take off with maximum weight. Boeing 737-300, 737-800 and Boeing 757 aircraft have used the airport. Air New Zealand is the only airline serving Niue, with a weekly flight from Auckland. The flight is operated with an A320 departing Auckland on Saturday and arriving the previous day due to the International Date Line. The flight from Niue departs on Friday.

Niue has a sea port, Sir Roberts Wharf in Alofi, which can be used only by flat-bottomed smaller vessels. The cargo ship &quot;Forum Pacific&quot; from Reef Shipping uses the wharf when the sea is calm. Otherwise cargo vessels and fishing boats use moorings about 100 metres from the reef, and barges are used to offload their cargo.

Most Niuean households own a vehicle. There are four car-rental companies, which also hire bicycles, motorbikes and minibuses.

==Statistics==
Railways:
0 km

Highways:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
234 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;tarsealed:&quot;
210 km
&lt;br&gt;&quot;unsealed:&quot;
24 km

Ports and harbors:
none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine:
none (1999 est.)

Airports:
1 (Niue International Airport)

Airports - with paved runways:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;
1 (1999 est.)

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7835046" start="0" end="21" title="Transport in Niue" label="Transport in [[Niue]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q30966" start="212" end="217" title="Alofi" label="Alofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600860" start="237" end="243" title="Lakepa" label="Lakepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570188" start="245" end="249" title="Liku, Niue" label="Liku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635174" start="254" end="260" title="Hakupu" label="Hakupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150665" start="491" end="517" title="Niue International Airport" label="Niue International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="602" end="612" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q204296" start="726" end="741" title="Air New Zealand" label="Air New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q30966" start="1007" end="1024" title="Sir Roberts Wharf" label="Sir Roberts Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1113" end="1126" title="Forum Pacific" label="Forum Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306803" start="1138" end="1151" title="Reef Shipping" label="Reef Shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="1480" end="1487" title="Highway" label="Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="1615" end="1621" title="harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="1655" end="1670" title="Merchant marine" label="Merchant marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="1690" end="1697" title="Airport" label="Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150665" start="1703" end="1729" title="Niue International Airport" label="Niue International Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21399" wikidata="Q5154209" url="?curid=21399" title="Communications in Niue">
<text>Communications in [[Niue]] include postal, telephone, internet, press and radio.

==Telecommunications services==
Telephone service is provided by Telecom Niue, the sole provider, which services 1,100 landlines and fixed wireless lines. It also operates a cellular telephone service on the AMPS and GSM platforms.

Internet users:
1,485 (December, 2020)

Telephones – main lines in use:
1,100 (800 land line, 300 fixed wireless) (2003)

Telephones – mobile cellular:
undisclosed (excludes 300 fixed wireless) (2003)

Telephones – GSM mobile cellular:
undisclosed (2011)

Telephone system:
&lt;br&gt;&quot;domestic:&quot;
single-line telephone system connects all villages on island
&lt;br&gt;&quot;international:&quot;
provided by Telecom Niue (IDD code: 683)

==Radio==
Radio broadcast stations:
AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios:
1,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations:
1 (1997)

Televisions:
NA

== Postal ==
Postal services are through the Niue Post Office.

==Newspapers==
Niue has only one printed newspaper, the &quot;Niue Star&quot;, founded in 1993. Until 2002, the Auckland-based Pasifika Times was also circulated in Niue.

== Internet service ==

Niue has free Internet service through the efforts of the Internet Users Society Niue, established 1999. However users need to pay NZD$25 to a local IT company to register the MAC address of their WiFi card before being able to log into this WiFi network.

Alternatively, where ADSL is available, users can have connections through Telecom Niue&#x27;s Internet Services located at Alofi through their island-wide distributed wireline.

=== .nu Internet domain ===

The .nu TLD is assigned to Niue.

Niue, through an outside company, registers Internet domain names, so most .nu web addresses are not actually located in Niue. They are commonly used by Danish, Dutch and Swedish websites, because in those languages &#x27;nu&#x27; means “now”.

Niue was the first country in the world to plan on offering free nationwide WiFi internet access, more than five million websites are available/accessible in Niue, using the funds provided by the domain registrations. 79.6% of Niueans were internet users in 2022.

== References ==
==External links==
* CIA World Factbook 2007: Niue
* Internet Users Society Niue
* Niue Computer Society (Inc.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5154209" start="0" end="26" title="Communications in Niue" label="Communications in [[Niue]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="35" end="41" title="post office" label="postal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="43" end="52" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="54" end="62" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="64" end="69" title="News media" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="74" end="79" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="256" end="274" title="cellular telephone" label="cellular telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q379651" start="290" end="294" title="Advanced Mobile Phone System" label="AMPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="299" end="302" title="Groupe Spécial Mobile" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="745" end="753" title="List of country calling codes" label="IDD code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041675" start="1035" end="1044" title="Niue Star" label="Niue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142117" start="1100" end="1114" title="Pasifika Times" label="Pasifika Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="1169" end="1173" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="1345" end="1356" title="MAC address" label="MAC address"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="1366" end="1370" title="WiFi" label="WiFi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44921" start="1638" end="1641" title=".nu" label=".nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1642" end="1645" title="TLD" label="TLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1712" end="1720" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1721" end="1733" title="top-level domain" label="domain names"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="1747" end="1758" title="web address" label="web address"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1906" end="1909" title=":wikt:now" label="now"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="1989" end="1993" title="WiFi" label="WiFi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="1994" end="2009" title="internet access" label="internet access"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21402" wikidata="Q16644" url="?curid=21402" title="Northern Mariana Islands">
<text>The Northern Mariana Islands, officially the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), is an unincorporated territory and commonwealth of the United States consisting of 14 islands in the northwestern Pacific Ocean. The CNMI includes the 14 northernmost islands in the Mariana Archipelago; the southernmost island, Guam, is a separate U.S. territory. The Northern Mariana Islands were listed by the United Nations as a non-self-governing territory until 1990.

During the colonial period, the Northern Marianas were variously under the control of the Spanish, German, and Japanese empires. After World War II, the islands were part of the United Nations trust territories under American administration before formally joining the United States as a territory in 1986, with their population gaining United States citizenship.

The United States Department of the Interior cites a landmass of . According to the 2020 United States census, 47,329 people were living in the CNMI at the time. The vast majority of the population resides on Saipan, Tinian, and Rota. The other islands of the Northern Marianas are sparsely inhabited; the most notable among these is Pagan, which was left largely uninhabited since a 1981 volcanic eruption.

The administrative center is Capitol Hill, a village in northwestern Saipan. The current governor of the CNMI is Arnold Palacios, who entered office in January 2023. The legislative branch has a 9-member Senate and a 20-member House of Representatives.

==History==
The islands were settled around 1500 BC when various peoples migrated there. Eventually, the islands were claimed by Spain in 1521. In the 18th century, the people of the northern Marianas were forced by Spain to relocate, and when they returned, new peoples migrated there. In 1899 Spain sold the Northern Marianas to Germany in the Spanish-German Treaty of 1899, while Guam went to the United States. At the end of World War I, with the defeat of Germany, the islands became a part of the Japanese Mandate under the League of Nations, starting in 1918. The islands were liberated from the Japanese in the Battle of Saipan in 1944, and after the war, became part of the UN Trust Territory called the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). Over the decades, integration with Guam was rejected, and eventually, the islands left the TTPI and became a part of the US in 1986. The Northern Marianas then became the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) and its residents are US citizens. In 2009, they elected a non-voting delegate to the US Congress.

===Arrival of humans===
The Mariana Islands were the first islands settled by humans in Remote Oceania. Incidentally, their settlement was the first and longest of the ocean-crossing voyages of the Austronesian peoples, separate from the later Polynesian settlement of the rest of Remote Oceania. The islands were first settled around 1500 to 1400 BC by people from the Philippines. This was followed by a second migration from the Caroline Islands by the first millennium AD, and a third migration from Island Southeast Asia (likely the Philippines or eastern Indonesia) by 900 AD.

After their first contact with Spaniards, the islanders eventually became known as the Chamorros, a Spanish word similar to &quot;Chamori&quot;, the name of the Indigenous caste system&#x27;s higher division.

The ancient people of the Marianas raised colonnades of megalithic-capped pillars called latte stones upon which they built their homes. The Spanish reported that by their arrival, the largest of these was already in ruins and that the Chamorros believed the ancestors who had erected the pillars lived in an era when people possessed supernatural abilities.

In 2013 archaeologists posited that the first people to settle in the Marianas may have made what was at that point the longest uninterrupted ocean-crossing voyage in human history. Archeological evidence indicates that Tinian may have been the first Pacific island to be settled.

===Spanish possession===

The Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, sailing under the Spanish flag, arrived in 1521. He and his crew were the first Europeans to arrive in the Mariana Islands. He landed on Guam, the southernmost island of the Marianas, and claimed the archipelago for Spain. The Spanish ships were met offshore by the native Chamorros, who delivered refreshments and then helped themselves to a small boat belonging to Magellan&#x27;s fleet. This led to a cultural clash: in Chamorro tradition, little property was private, and taking something one needed, such as a boat for fishing, did not count as stealing. The Spanish did not understand this custom and fought the Chamorros until the boat was recovered. Three days after he had been welcomed on his arrival, Magellan fled the archipelago. Spain regarded the islands as annexed and later made them part of the Spanish East Indies in 1565. In 1734, the Spanish built a royal palace, the Plaza de España, in Guam for the governor of the islands. The palace was largely destroyed during World War II, but portions of it remain.

Guam operated as an important stopover between the Philippines and Mexico for the Manila galleon, which carried trading between Spanish colonies.

In 1668, Father Diego Luis de San Vitores renamed the islands &quot;Las Marianas&quot; in honor of his patroness, the Spanish regent Mariana of Austria (1634–1696), widow of Felipe IV (reigned 1621–1665).

Most of the islands&#x27; native population (90–95%) died from European diseases carried by the Spaniards or married non-Chamorro settlers under Spanish rule. New settlers from the Philippines and the Caroline Islands were brought to repopulate the islands. The Chamorro population gradually recovered, and Chamorro, Filipino, and Refaluwasch languages and other ethnic groups remain in the Marianas.

During the 17th century, Spanish colonists forcibly moved the Chamorros to Guam, to encourage assimilation and conversion to Roman Catholicism. By the time they were allowed to return to the Northern Marianas, many Carolinians from present-day eastern Yap State and western Chuuk State had settled in the Marianas. Both languages, as well as English, are now official in the commonwealth.

In 1720 the Spanish moved the remaining islanders, whose population had been decimated by diseases, from the Marianas to Guam. By 1741, there was about 5000 remaining Chamorros.

====Carolinian immigration====
The Northern Marianas experienced an influx of immigration from the Carolines (Micronesia region) during the 19th century. Both this Carolinian sub-ethnicity and Carolinians in the Carolines archipelago refer to themselves as the Refaluwasch. The indigenous Chamorro word for the same group of people is &quot;gu&#x27;palao&quot;. They are usually referred to simply as &quot;Carolinians&quot;, though, unlike the other two monikers, this can also mean those who live in the Carolines and may have no affiliation with the Marianas.

The conquering Spanish did not focus attempts at cultural suppression against Carolinian immigrants, whose immigration they allowed during a period when the indigenous Chamorro majority was being subjugated with land alienation, forced relocations, and internment. Carolinians in the Marianas continue to be fluent in the Carolinian language and have maintained many of the cultural distinctions and traditions of their ethnicity&#x27;s land of ancestral origin.

===German possession and Japanese mandate===
Following its loss during the Spanish–American War of 1898, Spain ceded Guam to the United States and sold the remainder of the Marianas (i.e., the Northern Marianas), along with the Caroline Islands, to Germany under the German–Spanish Treaty of 1899. The United States could have taken the entire Marianas, but beyond Guam, saw no need for the group. Germany administered the islands as part of its colony of German New Guinea and did little in terms of development.

Germany built an office on Saipan to administer the island, and the head administrator was Georg Fritz. San Jose church was built during the German period. The Germans established a public school system and homesteading program, and some efforts were put into copra production; there was an overall effort to grow the economy with roads being built and vocational/trades training. Pagan and Alamagan were leased to a company called Pagan Gesellschaft, which planned to produce copra there, although its goals were hampered by numerous typhoons. Eight islands were leased to bird hunters, which used the feathers for hats.

Early in World War I, Japan declared war on Germany and invaded the Northern Marianas. In 1919 after the war concluded, the League of Nations (LoN) awarded all of Germany&#x27;s islands in the Pacific Ocean located north of the Equator, including the Northern Marianas, under mandate to Japan. Under this arrangement, the Japanese thus administered the Northern Marianas as part of the South Seas Mandate. During the Japanese period, sugar cane became the primary industry of the islands. Garapan on Saipan was developed as a regional capital, and numerous Japanese (including ethnic Koreans and Okinawan and Taiwanese) migrated to the islands. In the December 1939 census, the total population of the South Seas Mandate was 129,104, of whom 77,257 were Japanese (including ethnic Taiwanese and Koreans). On Saipan, the pre-war population comprised 29,348 Japanese settlers and 3,926 Chamorro and Caroline Islanders; Tinian had 15,700 Japanese settlers (including 2,700 ethnic Koreans and 22 ethnic Chamorro). The Japanese built military constructions on the island in the 1930s and, in December 1941, used it as a staging area to invade Guam, which was part of the U.S. at that time.

During the Japanese mandate, the main economic focus was sugar production, and for example, about 98% of Tinian island was used to grow sugarcane.

===World War II===
On December 8, 1941, hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese forces from the Marianas launched an invasion of Guam. Chamorros from the Northern Marianas, which had been under Japanese rule for more than 20 years, were brought to Guam to assist the Japanese administration. This, combined with the harsh treatment of Guamanian Chamorros during the 31-month occupation, created a rift that would become the main reason Guamanians rejected the referendum on the reunification of Guam with the Northern Marianas that the Northern Marianas approved in the 1960s.

On June 15, 1944, the United States military invaded the Mariana Islands, starting the Battle of Saipan, which ended on July 9. Of the 30,000 Japanese troops defending Saipan, fewer than 1,000 remained alive at the battle&#x27;s end. Many civilians were also killed, by disease, starvation, enemy fire, or suicide; about 1,000 civilians killed themselves by jumping off cliffs. U.S. forces then recaptured Guam on July 21, and invaded Tinian on July 24. A year later, Tinian was the takeoff point for the &quot;Enola Gay&quot;, the plane that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima. Rota was left untouched (and isolated) until the Japanese surrender in August 1945, owing to its military insignificance and U.S. forces&#x27; strategy of &quot;island hopping&quot; in which they did not invade islands that they did not need. The story of the holdouts on Anatahan was told in 1953 by Josef von Sternberg in his film &quot;The Saga of Anatahan&quot;.

The war did not end for everyone with the signing of the armistice. The last group of Japanese holdouts surrendered on Saipan on December 1, 1945. However, as mentioned, a group of about 30 held out until 1951 on Anahatan. The bizarre story has been the subject of several movies and writings, including &quot;The Saga of Anatahan&quot;. On a related note, on Guam, Japanese soldier Shoichi Yokoi, unaware that the war had ended, hid in a jungle cave in the Talofofo area until 1972.

Japanese nationals were eventually repatriated to the Japanese home islands. After World War II, the people of Marianas were able to return to the Northern Marianas under the protection of the United Nations Trusteeship administered by the United States. During this time, a series of referendums took place.

===United Nations trusteeship ends, Commonwealth begins===
After Japan&#x27;s defeat in World War II, the Northern Marianas were administered by the United States pursuant to Security Council Resolution 21 as part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which assigned responsibility for defense and foreign affairs to the United States as trustee. Four referendums offering integration with Guam or changes to the islands&#x27; status were held in 1958, 1961, 1963 and 1969. On each occasion, a majority voted in favor of integration with Guam, but this did not happen: Guam rejected integration in a 1969 referendum.

In the 1975 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum nearly 80% voted to become a commonwealth of the United States, and in 1977 over 93% approved the constitution of the CNMI.
The people of the Northern Mariana Islands decided in the 1970s not to seek independence, but instead to forge closer links with the United States. Negotiations for commonwealth status began in 1972, and a covenant to establish a commonwealth in political union with the United States was approved in a 1975 referendum. A new government and constitution came into effect in part on January 9, 1978, after being approved in a 1977 referendum. The United Nations approved this arrangement pursuant to Security Council Resolution 683. The Northern Mariana Islands came under U.S. sovereignty on November 4, 1986, and the islanders became US citizens. Also on November 4, 1986, the Northern Mariana Islands constitution became fully effective under the Covenant.

In May 1981, volcanic eruptions led to the evacuation of the island of Pagan. Most residents of Pagan have not yet returned to Pagan due to ongoing volcanic activity.

In the 1960s and 1970s, agriculture and ranching became an important activity with thousands of beef cattle, dairy cows, hogs, and many crops such as pineapple. The food production became an important source of food supply for the Marianas region.

The Chamorro-Carolinian Language Policy Commission was created in 1982 to carry out policies in support of the Chamorro and Carolinian languages and cultures.

In December 1986, 20 percent of the homes on Saipan were destroyed by Typhoon Kim, trees were stripped of foliage, thousands of coconut trees were knocked down, roads were blocked, and there was no electricity or public water supply for weeks.

In April 1990, the inhabitants of the western coast of Anatahan were evacuated after earthquake swarms and active fumaroles indicated that an eruption might be imminent, but no eruption occurred at that time. A further earthquake swarm occurred in May 1992. The first historical eruption of Anatahan occurred in May 2003, when a large explosive eruption with a VEI of 4 took place, forming a new crater inside the eastern caldera and causing an ash plume high which impaired air traffic to Saipan and Guam.

===Twenty-first century===

The Northern Mariana Islands does not have voting representation in the United States Congress, but, since 2009, has been represented in the U.S. House of Representatives by a delegate; congressional delegates may participate in debates and serve on congressional committees but may not cast decisive votes on the House floor. In the United States, a non-voting delegate is not a new concept, but rather goes back to before 1800. Territorial delegates represent their region&#x27;s interest in Congress, and their powers have been established over time, beginning in 1795. A major power of the territorial delegates (which have also been called Resident Commissioners), besides serving on committees, is speaking on the floor. Perhaps more importantly, the position is seen as a precursor to establishing voting rights, and discussion about granting delegate voting rights have occurred.

In 2018, 18 people embarked on a mission to repopulate the northern islands of Alamagan and Agrihan. They left Saipan aboard the M/V Super Emerald; the families involved originally had come from Alamagan. The mayor&#x27;s office coordinated the months-long project plans, including a clean water supply, establishment of radio contact, and hopefully sending more families to the two islands. One returning Marianan remarked, &quot;I was born and raised on Saipan but my family is from Alamagan. We are going to live there for a long time.&quot; The 2020 United States Census reported a total of 7 people living on Alamagan and Agrihan.

Typhoon Yutu caused widespread damage in October 2018, and was the strongest typhoon known to hit the islands. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) personnel deployed to both Tinian and Saipan ahead of the storm. U.S. President Donald Trump declared an emergency for the Northern Islands on October 24, 2018.

==Geography==

The Northern Mariana Islands, together with Guam to the south, compose the Mariana Islands archipelago. The southern islands are limestone, with level terraces and fringing coral reefs. The northern islands are volcanic, with active volcanoes on several islands, including Anatahan, Pagan, and Agrihan. The volcano on Agrihan, Mount Agrihan, has the highest elevation at . An expedition organized by John D. Mitchler and Reid Larson made the first complete ascent to the summit of this peak on June 1, 2018.

The islands going from north to south comprise 14 main islands, but some smaller islands are often grouped together. Also, Zealandia Bank can sometimes be an island, depending on the tide. In terms of area, it is smaller than Guam; however, as an island chain, it spans hundreds of kilometers/miles from the northernmost to the southernmost. Many islands have multiple names due to popular nicknames, usually of Spanish, Chamorro, or English origin. Many of the islands have had to be evacuated due to volcanic activity.

*Farallon de Pajaros (or Uracus), 
*Maug Islands (actually three islands, North, East, and West)
**Supply reef, about 10 km from Maug, has an active submarine volcano and various corals; it rises within 8 meters of the surface.
*Asuncion Island
*Agrihan
*Pagan (Mostly uninhabited since a 1981 eruption)
*Alamagan
*Guguan 
*Zealandia Bank, mostly submerged rocky outcrops break the surface at low tide. 
*Sarigan 
*Anatahan, eruptions in 2003 and 2007–8
*Farallon de Medinilla 
*Saipan
**Mañagaha (small island West of Saipan)
**Bird Island (Partially connected island on East of Saipan)
**Forbidden Island (Partially connected island on South East of Saipan)
*Tinian, a quiet rural island with many cattle ranches and historical sites
*Aguijan (Goat Island) (This uninhabited island south of Tinian is filled with birds and goats)
**Naftan Rock
*Rota, (also known as Friendly Island) Also inhabited.

Anatahan Volcano is a small volcanic island north of Saipan. It is about long and wide. Anatahan began erupting from its east crater on May 10, 2003. It has since alternated between eruptive and calm periods. On April 6, 2005, an estimated of ash and rock were ejected, causing a large, black cloud to drift south over Saipan and Tinian.

*Northernmost point – Farallon de Pajaros
*Easternmost point – Farallon de Medinilla
*Southernmost point – Puntan Malikok, Rota
*Westernmost point – Farallon de Pajaros

The islands lie in the Marianas tropical dry forests terrestrial ecoregion.

The ocean area to the east of the islands and parts of the islands themselves are part of the Marianas Trench Marine National Monument. This area includes three northernmost islands, the &quot;Arc of Fire&quot; refuge, which includes 21 underwater volcanic sites, and the trench region, which goes to the maximum limit of the EEZ. The nature preserve aims to protect the unique marine life, which includes seabirds, sea turtles, unique coral reefs, and life around under-sea vents. The Marianas Trench includes the deepest ocean water on the planet, along with other underwater wonders, including a pool of liquid sulfur located at Daikoku, an underwater volcano. (see also Challenger Deep)

Guam is to the south of the CNMI and Rota. To the east is Wake Island, then further east is the island of Midway, and eventually, the start of the Hawaiian island chain. American Samoa is located to the east and south and lies below the Equator. To the north and east, lies Alaska, which is a string of islands known as the Aleutians. To the west of the CNMI is the Philippines, and to the south and west is Palua, home to Chamorro people. To the south and east is Micronesia, which is home to the Carolinian people, many of which also settled on the CNMI centuries ago.

Saipan has some additional semi-attached islets, including Bird Island, a nature reserve for birds. It is connected to Saipan only at low tide. Forbidden Island is similar, but larger on the southeast side of Saipan.

===Climate===
The Northern Mariana Islands have a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen: Af) moderated by seasonal northeast trade winds, with little seasonal temperature variation. The dry season runs from December to June; the rainy season runs from July to November and can include typhoons. The &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; has said Saipan has the most climate in the world.

==Politics and government==

The Northern Mariana Islands have a multiparty presidential representative democratic system. They are a commonwealth of the United States. Federal funds to the commonwealth are administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the U.S. Department of the Interior.

Replicating the separation of powers elsewhere in the United States, the executive branch is headed by the governor of the Northern Mariana Islands; legislative power is vested in the bicameral Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature and the judicial power is vested in the CNMI Supreme Court and the trial courts inferior to it.

Some critics, including the author of the political website &quot;Saipan Sucks&quot;, say that politics in the Northern Mariana Islands is often &quot;more a function of family relationships and personal loyalties&quot; where the size of one&#x27;s extended family is more important than a candidate&#x27;s personal qualifications. They charge that this is nepotism carried out within the trappings of democracy.

In April 2012, anticipating a loss of funding by 2014, the commonwealth&#x27;s public pension fund declared Chapter 11 bankruptcy. The retirement fund is a defined benefit-type pension plan and was only partially funded by the government, with only $268.4 million in assets and $911 million in liabilities. The plan experienced low investment returns and a benefit structure that had been increased without raises in funding.

In August 2012, cries for impeachment arose, as the sitting governor Benigno Fitial was being held responsible for withholding payments from the pension fund, not paying the local utility (Commonwealth Utilities or &quot;CUC&quot;) for government offices, cutting off funding to the only hospital in the Northern Marianas, interfering with the delivery of a subpoena to his attorney general, withholding required funds from the public schools, and for signing a sole source $190 million contract for power generation.

Northern Mariana Islands&#x27; delegation to the 2016 Republican National Convention boasted about being &quot;the most Republican territory&quot; in the U.S. In 2017, the Republican Party had large majorities in both the Northern Mariana Islands Senate and the Northern Mariana Islands House of Representatives, though no party has a majority in either chamber as of 2023.

===Administrative divisions===
The islands total . The table gives an overview, with the individual islands listed from north to south:

Administratively, the CNMI is divided into four municipalities:

The Northern Islands (north of Saipan) form the Northern Islands Municipality. The three main islands of the Southern Islands form the municipalities of Saipan, Tinian, and Rota, with uninhabited Aguijan forming part of Tinian municipality.

The northern islands have been evacuated because of a volcanic threat. Human habitation was limited to Agrihan, Pagan, and Alamagan, but the population varied due to various economic factors, including children&#x27;s education. The 2020 census showed only seven residents in the Northern Islands Municipality, and the Northern Islands&#x27; mayor&#x27;s office is located in &quot;exile&quot; on Saipan.

Saipan, Tinian, and Rota have the only ports and harbors and are the only permanently populated islands.

For statistical purposes, the United States Census Bureau counts the four municipalities of the Northern Mariana Islands as county equivalents.

===Political status and autonomy===

In 1947, the Northern Mariana Islands became part of the post–World War II United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). The United States became the TTPI&#x27;s administering authority under the terms of a trusteeship agreement. In 1976, Congress approved the mutually negotiated Covenant to establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in Political Union with the United States of America. The Covenant was codified on March 24, 1976, as Public Law 94-241. The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) government adopted its own constitution in 1977, and the new government took office in January 1978. Implementation of the Covenant, which took effect on January 1, 1978, was completed on November 3, 1986, pursuant to Presidential Proclamation no. 5564; which placed into effect the Covenant With the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Compacts of Free Association With the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. This allowed the CNMI to be represented to the United States Government in Washington, DC by a &quot;Resident Representative&quot;, elected at-large by CNMI voters and whose office was paid for by the CNMI government. The Consolidated Natural Resources Act of 2008 (&quot;CNRA&quot;), approved by the U.S. Congress on May 8, 2008, established a CNMI delegate&#x27;s seat; Democrat Gregorio Sablan was elected in November 2008 as the first CNMI delegate and took office in the 111th Congress. Like the other five delegates in the House, the CNMI delegate participates in debates and committee votes but has no vote on the floor of the House of Representatives and has no role in the U.S. Senate, but is equal to a Senator when serving on a conference committee.

On December 22, 1990, the United Nations Trusteeship Council terminated the TTPI as it applied to the CNMI and five other of the TTPI&#x27;s original seven districts (the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia (Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap)), this was acknowledged in United Nations Security Council Resolution 683 passed on the same day.
Under the Covenant, only certain provisions of the U.S. Constitution apply to the Commonwealth, and legislation passed by the U.S. Congress can only apply to the Commonwealth if it applies to all 50 states. The CNMI is outside the customs area of the United States and &quot;bona fide&quot; residents of the Commonwealth are exempt from U.S. federal income tax, as is the case in the four self-governing territories. According to the Covenant, the federal minimum wage and federal immigration laws &quot;will not apply to the Northern Mariana Islands except in the manner and to the extent made applicable to them by the Congress by law after termination of the Trusteeship Agreement.&quot; Local control of minimum wage was superseded by the United States Congress in 2007; it was slowly raised until in 2015 it reached parity with the 50 states.

Initially, under the Covenant, a separate immigration system existed in the CNMI, and U.S. immigration law did not apply. Still, the Covenant gave the United States power of reservation over immigration law in the Commonwealth. After reports surfaced of abusive practices for immigrant workers, on November 28, 2009, the United States exercised its power of reservation; specifically, CNRA § 702(a) amended the Covenant to state that &quot;the provisions of the &#x27;immigration laws&#x27; (as defined in section 101(a)(17) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(17))) shall apply to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.&quot; Further, under CNRA § 702(a), the &quot;immigration laws,&quot; as well as the amendments to the Covenant, &quot;shall...supersede and replace all laws, provisions, or programs of the Commonwealth relating to the admission of aliens and the removal of aliens from the Commonwealth.&quot; Transition to U.S. immigration laws began November 28, 2009.

===Judicial system===
Cases under federal law are heard by the District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands, which was established by act of Congress in 1977, and began operations in January 1978. The court sits on the island of Saipan but may sit in other places within the commonwealth. The district court has the same jurisdiction as all other United States district courts, including diversity jurisdiction and bankruptcy jurisdiction. Appeals are taken to the Ninth Circuit. As a United States territorial court established under Congress&#x27;s territorial power granted by Article IV of the United States Constitution, judges do not have lifetime appointments, unlike the Article III courts in the 50 states, District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.

Cases under territorial law are heard by the Superior Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, with appeals heard by the Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.

In June 2024, Julian Assange pleaded guilty in a court in Saipan, the capital of the US territory, before flying home to Australia.

===Citizenship===

Article III of the Covenant conferred United States citizenship on legally qualified CNMI residents, which generally included all citizens of the CNMI, and established U.S. birthright citizenship for persons born in the CNMI.
The CNMI has a number of special visa programs and conditions, one of the latest was the CNMI Long-Term Resident Status program. However, the visa exemptions for Guam-CNMI are more restrictive than the general U.S. Visa Waiver Program.

Per the terms of the covenant, since 1986, the Northern Marianas have the right of &quot;jus soli&quot;; children born there, as anywhere in the U.S., are citizens at birth. This has also made the CNMI a refuge for pregnant women who escape authoritarian regimes in East Asia: when their child is born in the Northern Marianas it can be a U.S. citizen. There are a number of serious restrictions on immigration and citizenship rules in the CNMI. For example, it is not possible to apply for asylum before 2030. The U.S. has tried to work with Asian countries and local Marianas to create a realistic balance that allows access but not abuse of the CNMI system and realistic pathways to citizenship according to the rules of the United States and a respect for human situations.

==Economy==

The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands benefits from its trading relationship with the federal government of the United States and cheap trained labor from Asia. The CNMI&#x27;s economy has historically relied on tourism, mostly from Japan, and the garment manufacturing sector. The economy has declined since quotas were lifted in 2005, eventually leading all the garment factories in Saipan to close by February 2009. Tourism also declined after 2005 when Japan Airlines stopped serving the Marianas.

Agricultural production, primarily of tapioca, cattle, coconuts, breadfruit, tomatoes, and melons, is relatively unimportant in the economy, representing only 1.7% of CNMI GDP as of 2016. It remains important for the community, and the Marianas, with their thousands of cattle and rich soils, are important for feeding the region, with Tinian being known as the breadbasket of the Marianas. The cattle herds in the CNMI supply beef not only locally but also to Guam, Palau, and Micronesia. Some of the cattle breeds on Tinian in the 21st century include Senepol, Brangus (Brahman X Angus), Red Angus, and American Brahman, and various modern ranching techniques are utilized.

Non-native islanders are not allowed to own land but can lease it.

===Tourism===


Tourism is popular; several hundred thousand people visit the CNMI in a typical year, and one of the highest years was 1997 when over 760,000 people visited the islands. 

Tourism was strong in 2019, comprising visitors mainly from China and South Korea. Tourism dropped during the pandemic, and has been slow to recover since it ended. Direct flights from Japan have decreased, and the political issues between the US and China have stopped all flights from China (except from Hong Kong) to Saipan. CNMI hopes to attract tourists again from Japan, requiring direct flights to increase between Saipan and Japanese cities. The market in 2023 and 2024 for tourism is about half the 2019, pre-pandemic level, relying on tourists from South Korea. “The number of tourists recovered to over 194,600 in fiscal 2023 from some 5,370 in fiscal 2021 and about 69,530 in fiscal 2022 thanks to the return of South Koreans, according to the MVA data.” Some travel experts suggest that CNMI change its image from the low cost destination to a slightly fancier destination.

Activities known to be popular are jungle hikes, golfing, diving, and historical sites such as prehistoric stones. One of the golf courses was designed by professional champion golfer Greg Norman. A tourism hot spot is Managaha Island, which must be accessed by ferry and has various bbq vendors, water sport activities, and has wide sandy beaches surrounding a tropical forest. 

Tourists from the U.S. do not need a visa, while those from other countries that qualify for ESTA or the Guam-CNMI Visa Waiver Program can usually stay for up to 45 or 90 days.

Noted tourist destinations in the CNMI include:
*Managaha Island (100-acre tropical beach island visited by ferry)
*American Memorial Park
*Micro Beach, a 1 km beach on the west side, so it is possible to see the sunset.
*San Juan beach, with a unique stone formation that is known for looking a bit like a crocodile.
*Rad/Ladder/Coral Beach on the southern part of Saipan is about 100 yards long and is mostly coral fragments. It is popular for local barbeques and beach running.
*Obyan Beach is a long south beach known for its colorful underwater life.
*Taga Beach (on Tinian Island) is the largest beach known for its sunset views.
*Latte Stones Quarry (an ancient stone quarry of the Chamorro people)
*Mount Tapochau (highest point with views of Saipan), this site is known for its views, and it is possible to see other islands on a clear day and is topped by a statue of Jesus Christ.
*Kalabera Cave (features ancient cave drawings)
*Last Command Post (The final Japanese command post in the Battle of Saipan)
*Bird Island Sanctuary beach (beach by Bird Island sanctuary), faces east. There is also a Bird Island observatory to the south for observing the birds)
*Forbidden Island, this small island connected to Saipan, is connected at low tide and can be hiked onto, but the water separates it at high tide. There is a lookout near this small island.
*Japanese Lighthouse (a lighthouse built in 1934 when the Northern Marianas were in the Japanese Mandate, currently a cafe with island views)
*NMI Museum of History and Culture
*The Grotto, on Saipan, is a large underwater limestone cavern.
*Birth tourism, became more popular in the 2010s century with mothers coming from Asia to give birth, thus giving the baby a chance to be a U.S. Citizen.

===Labor controversies===

The Northern Mariana Islands had successfully used its position as a free trade area with the U.S., while at the same time not being subject to the same labor laws. For example, the Commonwealth&#x27;s $3.05 per hour minimum wage, which lasted from 1997 to 2007, was lower than in the U.S., and some other worker protections are weaker, leading to lower production costs. That allowed garments to be labeled &quot;Made in USA&quot; without complying with all U.S. labor laws. However, the U.S. minimum wage law signed by President George W. Bush on May 25, 2007, resulted in stepped increases in the Northern Marianas&#x27; minimum wage, which allowed it to reach the U.S. level in 2015. The first step (to $3.55) became effective July 25, 2007, and a yearly increase of $0.50 will take effect every May thereafter until the CNMI minimum wage equals the nationwide minimum wage. However, a law signed by President Obama in December 2009 delayed the yearly increase from May to September. In 2018, the minimum wage finally reached $7.25, matching the U.S. federal minimum wage.

The island&#x27;s exemption from U.S. labor laws had led to many alleged exploitations, including recent claims of sweatshops, child labor, child prostitution, and forced abortions.

An immigration system mostly outside of federal U.S. control (which ended on November 28, 2009) resulted in many Chinese migrant workers (about 15,000 during the peak years) being employed in the islands&#x27; garment trade. However, the lifting of World Trade Organization restrictions on Chinese imports to the U.S. in 2005 had put the commonwealth-based trade under severe pressure, leading to a number of recent factory closures. Adding to the U.S.-imposed scheduled wage increases, the garment industry became extinct by 2009.

===Infrastructure===

The islands have more than of highways, three airports with paved runways (one about long; two around ), three airports with unpaved runways, and one heliport. The main commercial airport is Saipan International Airport.

Commuter airline Star Marianas Air provides short-haul flights between Guam, Saipan, Tinian, and Rota. International carriers connect Saipan with Korea, China, and Japan; flights to the U.S. mainland typically connect through Guam or Hawaiʻi.

In addition to by air, inter-island travel within the commonwealth is possible via ferry or chartered vessel services. For example, to visit Pagan is a boat trip.

Mail service for the islands is provided by the U.S. Postal Service (USPS). Each major island has its own ZIP code in the 96950–96952 range, and the USPS two-letter abbreviation for the CNMI is MP (&quot;Marianas Pacific&quot;, NM and MI being taken). &quot;CM&quot; has been used previously and is still used in some contexts, but can be confused with Cameroon. For phone service, the islands are included in the North American Numbering Plan, using area code 670.

Television service is provided by KPPI-LD, Channel 7, which simulcasts Guam&#x27;s ABC affiliate, KTGM, as well as WSZE, Channel 10, which simulcasts Guam&#x27;s NBC affiliate, KUAM-TV. About 10 radio stations broadcast within the CNMI.

In 2012, &quot;Slate&quot; reported that CNMI internet prices were five times those of Guam and that the price per megabit increases if a customer chooses a higher level internet package due to the limited bandwidth. In 2023, some Federal funding for improving broadband was allocated to the territory.

==Demographics==


According to the 2020 census, the population of the CNMI was 47,329, down from 69,221 in 2000. The decrease was reportedly due to a combination of factors, including the demise of the garment industry (the vast majority of whose employees were females from China), economic crises, and a decline in tourism, one of the CNMI&#x27;s primary sources of revenue.

As of the 2020 Census, except for the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands are the second least populous sub-federal jurisdiction in the United States, next to American Samoa. However, the islands population has fluctuated over time hitting 80 thousand in 2000, then declining to around 50 thousand in the 2010s. In 1986, when the people of the CNMI became U.S. citizens, it had a population of about 36 thousand. In 1950, the population was about 7 thousand. For comparison, in 1776, the smallest American state by population was Delaware with a population of about 60 thousand.

As of 2020, about 60% of the population are U.S. Citizens or Lawful Permanent Residents, and the other 40% are foreign workers. The United States has a program that monitors the ratio of workers to citizens and the number of lawful residents of different types.

Many Marianans have migrated to the continental US, and moving to the West Coast is slightly more popular. One of the largest communities is in Washington State, with a community of almost 5,000 people from the islands.

=== Languages ===
The official languages on the Northern Mariana Islands include English, Chamorro, and Carolinian. Few people still speak the nearly extinct Tanapag language. Many Philippine languages, Chinese, and other Pacific island languages are also spoken. Spanish is still retained in surnames but is no longer commonly used, though it is still familiar to some elders as a third or fourth language.

===Ethnic groups===
Based on the 2010 census in the CIA World Factbook:

The Northern Marianas is mostly a diverse mix of Asian and Pacific peoples.
*Filipino 35.3%
*Chamorro 23.9%
*Multiracial 12.7% (2 or more backgrounds)
*Chinese 6.8%
*Other Hawaiian or Pacific Islander 6.4%
*Carolinian 4.6%
*Korean 4.2%
*Other Asian 3.7%
*Other 2.5%

===Religion===

Owing to the Spanish missionaries in the Marianas, a large majority of Chamorros and Carolinians practice Roman Catholicism. The Japanese occupation created a sizable Buddhist community which remained even after their departure. Due to the influence of the United States, diverse denominations of Protestantism also entered the islands. Many people on the Northern Mariana Islands are Roman Catholic or have traditional beliefs.

According to the Pew Research Center, 2010:
* Roman Catholic 64.1%
* Protestants 16%
* Buddhists 10.6%
* Folk religions 5.3%
* Other Christians 1.2%
* Other religions 1.1%
* Unaffiliated 1.0%
* Eastern Orthodox &lt;1%
* Hindu &lt;1%
* Muslim &lt;1%
* Jews &lt;1%
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints reported 865 members in a ward (congregation) in the Northern Mariana Islands.

===Education===
The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Public School System operates public schools in the commonwealth and there are numerous private schools. Northern Marianas College is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges and offers a range of programs similar to other small U.S. community colleges.

==Culture==
Much of the Chamorro culture in the Mariana Islands was influenced by Spanish rule; it also displays influence from the Germans and Japanese. Respect is an integral part of Chamorro culture, and one typical display is the tradition of &quot;manngingi&#x27;&quot;. This tradition has been around for centuries and involves an elder and a young Chamorro child. The child takes the hand of the elder, places it on their nose, and says &quot;ñot&quot; to the men and &quot;ñora&quot; to the women, with the elders responding &quot;diosti ayudi&quot; (from Spanish &quot;Señor&quot;, &quot;Señora&quot;, &quot;Dios Te Ayude&quot;), meaning &quot;God help you&quot;.

The Carolinian culture is very similar to that of the Chamorros, with respect paramount. Carolinian culture can be traced to Yap and Chuuk, where the population originated. One of the differences between Guam and the Northern Marianas is the significant migration of the Carolinian (modern-day Micronesia) people and culture, in addition to the Chamorros.

===Cuisine===

Much of Chamorro cuisine is influenced by various cultures. Popular foods of foreign origin include various types of sweet or savory empanada, initially introduced by Spain, and pancit, a noodle dish from the Philippines.

Archeological evidence reveals that rice has been cultivated in the Marianas since prehistoric times. Red rice made with achoti is a distinct staple food that strongly distinguishes Chamorro cuisine from that of other Pacific islands. It is commonly served for special events, such as parties (gupot or &quot;fiestas&quot;), novenas, and high school or college graduations. Fruits such as lemmai (breadfruit), mangga (mangoes), niyok (coconuts), and bilimbines (bilimbi, a fruit related to starfruit) are included in various local recipes. Korean, Chinese, Japanese, and American cuisine are also commonly available.

Local specialties include kelaguen, a dish in which meat is cooked in whole or in part by the action of citric acid rather than heat; &quot;tinaktak&quot;, a meat dish made with coconut milk; and kå&#x27;du fanihi (flying fox/fruit bat soup). Fruit bats have become scarce in modern times on several islands, primarily due to the overharvesting of the species and loss of habitat; hunting them is now illegal even though poaching still occurs.

The Marianas and the Hawaiian islands are the world&#x27;s foremost consumers, per capita, of Spam, with Guam at the top of the list and Hawaii second (details regarding the rest of the Marianas are often absent from statistics). Spam was introduced to the islands by the American military as war rations during World War II.

Spam is considered a &quot;default&quot; meal or snack and is often incorporated into recipes such as Spam sushi, Spam pizza, Spam and eggs, and Spam-fried rice. The food is popular on other islands also including Guam and Hawaiian islands, and one popular flavor is hot and spicy spam.

===Cinema===

A small independent cinema of Northern Mariana Islands, producing mostly documentary films, developed in the 21st century thanks to the efforts of the Commonwealth and of the Northern Marianas College. Foreign producers had already shot films on the islands in the 20th century.

In 2002, a new § 2151 of the Commonwealth Code established within the Marianas Visitors Authority (MVA), a Commonwealth Film, Video, and Media Office, also known as the Northern Mariana Islands Film Office, with the purpose of attracting foreign companies to produce movies in the Commonwealth and to develop a local cinema industry.

===Sports===
Team sports prevalent in the United States were introduced to the Northern Mariana Islands by American soldiers during World War II. Baseball is the islands&#x27; most popular sport. CNMI teams have made appearances in the Little League World Series (in the Little, Junior, Senior, and Big league divisions) as well as winning gold medals in the Micronesian Games and South Pacific Games.

Basketball and mixed martial arts are also popular in the islands, which hosted the official 2009 Oceania Basketball Tournament. Trench Wars is the CNMI&#x27;s Mixed Martial Arts brand. Fighters from the CNMI have competed in the Pacific Xtreme Combat as well as the UFC.

Other sports in the CNMI include Ultimate Frisbee, volleyball, tennis, soccer, outrigger sailing, softball, beach volleyball, rugby, golf, boxing, kickboxing, tae kwon do, track and field, swimming, triathlon, and football.

The islands have several golf courses, mostly on Saipan and often near resorts. There are four golf courses on Saipan as of the 2020s: Marianas Country Club, Laolao Bay Country Club, Coral Ocean Point Resort Clu, and Kingfisher Golf Links. To the south, Rota Island has another Rota Resort &amp; Country Club. All the courses have 18 holes, but the level of difficulty varies.

== Flora and fauna ==
The official bird of the Northern Marianas Islands is the endemic Mariana fruit dove and the official flower is the Plumeria, which originated in the Americas. The islands are home to many tropical plants and animals, as well as marine life such as whales and dugongs. The islands are heavily forested, with about 80% ground cover consisting of tropical forests. Trees include palm, banana, pine, fern, and plumeria. There are many species of coral around the islands, many of which are ringed by coral reefs, and some islands have upwards of 60 species of coral.

There are nine known species of birds endemic to the Northern Marianas, such as the Saipan Reed Warbler and Golden white-eye, as well as a variety of invertebrates, insects, and plants. Some of examples include Langford&#x27;s tree snail (&quot;Partula langfordi&quot;) or the tree fern &quot;(Cyathea aramaganensis&quot;).

==See also==

* An Act to amend Public Law 93-435 with respect to the Northern Mariana Islands
* Outline of the Northern Mariana Islands
* Index of Northern Mariana Islands-related articles
* List of National Register of Historic Places in the Northern Mariana Islands

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;The World Factbook&quot;, 2000.
* Land areas and population data from United States Census Bureau.
* Northern Mariana Islands and constituent municipalities, United States Census Bureau

==External links==
===Government===
* Official website – Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (archived April 28, 2009)
* The CNMI Covenant
* The CNMI Constitution (archived October 5, 2008)
* CNMI Office of Resident Representative Pedro A. Tenorio (archived May 23, 2007)
* H.R. 873 – The Northern Mariana Islands Delegate Act (archived December 24, 2008)
* H.R. 5550 – The United States-Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Human Dignity Act (archived December 23, 2008)

===General===
* &quot;U.S. Census Bureau: Island Areas Census 2000&quot;
* Northern Mariana Islands. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* U.S. Northern Mariana Islands: Resource Guide, from the Library of Congress 
* 

===News media===
* KSPN-TV Channel 2 News
* &quot;Saipan Tribune&quot;
* &quot;Marianas Variety&quot;
* &quot;The Pacific Times&quot;
* Food for Thought – Weekly commentary on CNMI society by KZMI and KCNM manager Harry Blalock

===Other===
* &quot;The Insular Empire: America in the Mariana Islands&quot;, PBS documentary film &amp; website
* Northern Mariana Islands Online Encyclopedia
* U.S. Department of the Interior – Insular Area Summary for the Northern Mariana Islands</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="4" end="28" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="45" end="89" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="91" end="95" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="CNMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="104" end="128" title="Territories of the United States" label="unincorporated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="133" end="145" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="153" end="166" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="280" end="299" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="326" end="330" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="430" end="458" title="non-self-governing territory" label="non-self-governing territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="562" end="569" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="571" end="577" title="German colonial empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="583" end="591" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="607" end="619" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="650" end="682" title="United Nations trust territories" label="United Nations trust territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="841" end="881" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="921" end="946" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="1046" end="1052" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="1054" end="1060" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="1066" end="1070" title="Rota (island)" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126761" start="1171" end="1176" title="Pagan (island)" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273113" start="1275" end="1287" title="Capitol Hill, Saipan" label="Capitol Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795194" start="1359" end="1374" title="Arnold Palacios" label="Arnold Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1629" end="1634" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="1831" end="1838" title="German colonial empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q664603" start="1846" end="1875" title="German–Spanish Treaty (1899)" label="Spanish-German Treaty of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q700705" start="2119" end="2135" title="Battle of Saipan" label="Battle of Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052998" start="2671" end="2685" title="Remote Oceania" label="Remote Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2781" end="2801" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="2827" end="2837" title="Polynesian people" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2953" end="2964" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="3015" end="3031" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="3087" end="3108" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3144" end="3153" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="3254" end="3263" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorros"/>
<link wikidata="Q657100" start="3419" end="3428" title="colonnade" label="colonnade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211672" start="3466" end="3477" title="latte stone" label="latte stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="3919" end="3941" title="archaeology" label="Archeological evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="3957" end="3963" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="4070" end="4088" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="4903" end="4922" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203678" start="4979" end="4994" title="Plaza de España (Hagåtña)" label="Plaza de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5186" end="5192" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="5201" end="5215" title="Manila galleon" label="Manila galleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q785894" start="5282" end="5307" title="Diego Luis de San Vitores" label="Diego Luis de San Vitores"/>
<link wikidata="Q311469" start="5399" end="5417" title="Mariana of Austria" label="Mariana of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q691402" start="5440" end="5449" title="Philip IV of Spain" label="Felipe IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="5789" end="5797" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q28427" start="5803" end="5814" title="Carolinian language" label="Refaluwasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5999" end="6016" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11342951" start="6126" end="6135" title="Yap State" label="Yap State"/>
<link wikidata="Q221684" start="6148" end="6159" title="Chuuk State" label="Chuuk State"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="6542" end="6551" title="Caroline Islands" label="Carolines"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="6677" end="6696" title="endonym" label="refer to themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282773" start="6704" end="6715" title="Refaluwasch" label="Refaluwasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q28427" start="7329" end="7348" title="Carolinian language" label="Carolinian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="7546" end="7566" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="7576" end="7581" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="7644" end="7652" title="Mariana Islands" label="Marianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="7720" end="7727" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q664603" start="7738" end="7767" title="German–Spanish Treaty (1899)" label="German–Spanish Treaty of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q165008" start="7927" end="7944" title="German New Guinea" label="German New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="8246" end="8251" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="8521" end="8528" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8618" end="8629" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="8631" end="8636" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="8733" end="8750" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="8837" end="8844" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="8885" end="8892" title="League of Nations mandate" label="mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q718763" start="8995" end="9013" title="South Seas Mandate" label="South Seas Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="9043" end="9053" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272415" start="9098" end="9105" title="Garapan" label="Garapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="9109" end="9115" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="9205" end="9212" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="9218" end="9227" title="Taiwanese people" label="Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="9526" end="9532" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="9931" end="9940" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="9999" end="10021" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q699897" start="10069" end="10085" title="Battle of Guam (1941)" label="invasion of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613466" start="10408" end="10422" title="1969 Guamanian unification with the Northern Mariana Islands referendum" label="the referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q700705" start="10617" end="10633" title="Battle of Saipan" label="Battle of Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q176915" start="10957" end="10971" title="Battle of Tinian" label="invaded Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="10998" end="11004" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204424" start="11041" end="11050" title="Enola Gay" label="Enola Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="11100" end="11109" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="11111" end="11115" title="Rota (island)" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q487319" start="11383" end="11391" title="Anatahan" label="Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q78719" start="11412" end="11431" title="Josef von Sternberg" label="Josef von Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819484" start="11450" end="11470" title="Anatahan (film)" label="The Saga of Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624429" start="11565" end="11581" title="Japanese holdout" label="Japanese holdout"/>
<link wikidata="Q379781" start="11862" end="11875" title="Shoichi Yokoi" label="Shoichi Yokoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482468" start="11937" end="11945" title="Talofofo, Guam" label="Talofofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="12018" end="12039" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese home islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335938" start="12449" end="12479" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 21" label="Security Council Resolution 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q129237" start="12510" end="12548" title="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands" label="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402484" start="12745" end="12749" title="1958 Saipan integration referendum" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058735" start="12751" end="12755" title="1961 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402485" start="12757" end="12761" title="1963 Northern Mariana Islands integration referendum" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058738" start="12766" end="12770" title="1969 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613466" start="12898" end="12913" title="1969 Guamanian Northern Mariana Islands union referendum" label="1969 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058737" start="12923" end="12970" title="1975 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum" label="1975 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="13260" end="13279" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="commonwealth status"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058737" start="13398" end="13413" title="1975 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum" label="1975 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058717" start="13520" end="13535" title="1977 Northern Mariana Islands constitutional referendum" label="1977 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550673" start="13594" end="13625" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 683" label="Security Council Resolution 683"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="13672" end="13683" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="13730" end="13741" title="Citizenship of the United States" label="US citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19054125" start="13773" end="13810" title="Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Constitution" label="Northern Mariana Islands constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126761" start="13926" end="13931" title="Pagan (island)" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583172" start="14502" end="14513" title="Typhoon Kim (1986)" label="Typhoon Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q487319" start="14732" end="14740" title="Anatahan" label="Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q489523" start="14762" end="14778" title="earthquake swarm" label="earthquake swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="14791" end="14800" title="fumaroles" label="fumaroles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="15038" end="15041" title="Volcanic Explosivity Index" label="VEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="15099" end="15106" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="15285" end="15307" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="15354" end="15383" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253588" start="15389" end="15397" title="delegate (United States Congress)" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q57784264" start="16739" end="16751" title="Typhoon Yutu" label="Typhoon Yutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="16850" end="16885" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="17114" end="17118" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="17145" end="17160" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="17199" end="17208" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="17243" end="17248" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="17303" end="17310" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q487319" start="17343" end="17351" title="Anatahan" label="Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126761" start="17353" end="17358" title="Pagan Island" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q396730" start="17364" end="17371" title="Agrihan" label="Agrihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27728822" start="17397" end="17410" title="Mount Agrihan" label="Mount Agrihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384924" start="18102" end="18121" title="Farallon de Pajaros" label="Farallon de Pajaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q155873" start="18137" end="18149" title="Maug Islands" label="Maug Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178062" start="18200" end="18211" title="Supply Reef" label="Supply reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q752427" start="18330" end="18345" title="Asuncion Island" label="Asuncion Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q396730" start="18347" end="18354" title="Agrihan" label="Agrihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126761" start="18356" end="18361" title="Pagan (island)" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q478663" start="18406" end="18414" title="Alamagan" label="Alamagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q498899" start="18416" end="18422" title="Guguan" label="Guguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169308" start="18425" end="18439" title="Zealandia Bank" label="Zealandia Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144360" start="18506" end="18513" title="Sarigan" label="Sarigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q487319" start="18516" end="18524" title="Anatahan" label="Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636493" start="18556" end="18577" title="Farallon de Medinilla" label="Farallon de Medinilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="18580" end="18586" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="18762" end="18768" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q398309" start="18838" end="18845" title="Aguijan" label="Aguijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="18948" end="18952" title="Rota (island)" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384924" start="19364" end="19383" title="Farallon de Pajaros" label="Farallon de Pajaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636493" start="19405" end="19426" title="Farallon de Medinilla" label="Farallon de Medinilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19449" end="19463" title="Puntan Malikok" label="Puntan Malikok"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="19465" end="19469" title="Rota (island)" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384924" start="19491" end="19510" title="Farallon de Pajaros" label="Farallon de Pajaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q102435780" start="19535" end="19564" title="Marianas tropical dry forests" label="Marianas tropical dry forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612760" start="19683" end="19723" title="Marianas Trench Marine National Monument" label="Marianas Trench Marine National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q459173" start="20263" end="20278" title="Challenger Deep" label="Challenger Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="20605" end="20614" title="Aleutians" label="Aleutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="20704" end="20712" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="21121" end="21148" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="21150" end="21156" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="21194" end="21205" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="21354" end="21361" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="21374" end="21404" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="21528" end="21538" title="multi-party system" label="multiparty"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="21539" end="21551" title="presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="21552" end="21577" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079248" start="21690" end="21715" title="Office of Insular Affairs" label="Office of Insular Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="21723" end="21754" title="U.S. Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="21830" end="21846" title="executive power" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q888807" start="21864" end="21904" title="List of Northern Mariana Islands Governors" label="governor of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="21906" end="21923" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565625" start="21951" end="22000" title="Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature" label="Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="22009" end="22023" title="judiciary" label="judicial power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058710" start="22041" end="22059" title="Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="CNMI Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402483" start="22164" end="22176" title="Saipan Sucks" label="Saipan Sucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="22455" end="22463" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22591" end="22610" title="Pension fund#Public vs. private pension funds" label="public pension fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="22620" end="22641" title="Chapter 11 bankruptcy" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027846" start="22668" end="22683" title="defined benefit" label="defined benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="22779" end="22784" title="asset" label="asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776939" start="22806" end="22817" title="liability (financial accounting)" label="liabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q939760" start="23008" end="23022" title="Benigno Fitial" label="Benigno Fitial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="23297" end="23305" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156282" start="23507" end="23542" title="2016 Republican National Convention" label="2016 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314628" start="23630" end="23646" title="Republican Party of Northern Mariana Islands" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058709" start="23680" end="23711" title="Northern Mariana Islands Senate" label="Northern Mariana Islands Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058704" start="23720" end="23769" title="Northern Mariana Islands House of Representatives" label="Northern Mariana Islands House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608103" start="24083" end="24112" title="Northern Islands Municipality" label="Northern Islands Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="24188" end="24194" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="24196" end="24202" title="Tinian Municipality" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="24208" end="24212" title="Rota (island)" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="24819" end="24846" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="24913" end="24930" title="county equivalent" label="county equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q129237" start="25061" end="25099" title="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands" label="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207892" start="25439" end="25449" title="Public Law" label="Public Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163288" start="26202" end="26244" title="Consolidated Natural Resources Act of 2008" label="Consolidated Natural Resources Act of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="26281" end="26294" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058701" start="26325" end="26338" title="United States congressional delegations from the Northern Mariana Islands" label="CNMI delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116336" start="26361" end="26376" title="Gregorio Sablan" label="Gregorio Sablan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190410" start="26392" end="26405" title="2008 United States House of Representatives elections" label="November 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q170375" start="26456" end="26470" title="111th Congress" label="111th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q219693" start="26768" end="26802" title="United Nations Trusteeship Council" label="United Nations Trusteeship Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="26913" end="26929" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="26938" end="26968" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550673" start="27029" end="27075" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 683" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 683"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283298" start="29021" end="29068" title="District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands" label="District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="29095" end="29110" title="act of Congress" label="act of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="29190" end="29196" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="29426" end="29439" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="Ninth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893190" start="29446" end="29477" title="United States territorial court" label="United States territorial court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29762" end="29828" title="Superior Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Superior Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058710" start="29856" end="29921" title="Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q360" start="29938" end="29952" title="Julian Assange" label="Julian Assange"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="30114" end="30139" title="United States citizenship" label="United States citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917105" start="30249" end="30271" title="Birthright citizenship in the United States" label="birthright citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q45177" start="30517" end="30536" title="Visa Waiver Program" label="Visa Waiver Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q604971" start="30628" end="30636" title="jus soli" label="jus soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="31799" end="31813" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q873761" start="31883" end="31890" title="tapioca" label="tapioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="31900" end="31907" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="31910" end="31920" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="32312" end="32317" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="32323" end="32333" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479137" start="32399" end="32406" title="Senepol" label="Senepol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366573" start="32408" end="32415" title="Brangus" label="Brangus"/>
<link wikidata="Q617943" start="32435" end="32444" title="Red Angus" label="Red Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q897314" start="32450" end="32466" title="American Brahman" label="American Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q381941" start="33850" end="33861" title="Greg Norman" label="Greg Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="33950" end="33953" title="Barbecue" label="bbq"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="33963" end="33974" title="List of water sports" label="water sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744430" start="34341" end="34363" title="American Memorial Park" label="American Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211672" start="34862" end="34874" title="Latte Stones" label="Latte Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274817" start="34932" end="34946" title="Mount Tapochau" label="Mount Tapochau"/>
<link wikidata="Q27728245" start="35118" end="35131" title="Kalabera Cave" label="Kalabera Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229363" start="35586" end="35605" title="Japanese Lighthouse (Garapan, Saipan)" label="Japanese Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752824" start="35728" end="35761" title="NMI Museum of History and Culture" label="NMI Museum of History and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917041" start="35827" end="35840" title="Birth tourism" label="Birth tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="36161" end="36171" title="labor laws" label="labor laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="36529" end="36553" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="President George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="36912" end="36927" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415635" start="37201" end="37210" title="sweatshop" label="sweatshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="37213" end="37224" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029421" start="37226" end="37244" title="child prostitution" label="child prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="37518" end="37542" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257667" start="38015" end="38043" title="Saipan International Airport" label="Saipan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27926641" start="38063" end="38080" title="Star Marianas Air" label="Star Marianas Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="38502" end="38521" title="United States Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="38682" end="38684" title="New Mexico" label="NM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="38689" end="38691" title="Michigan" label="MI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="38807" end="38815" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="38868" end="38897" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="North American Numbering Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150256" start="38905" end="38918" title="area code 670" label="area code 670"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338682" start="38955" end="38962" title="KPPI-LD" label="KPPI-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="39004" end="39007" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338682" start="39019" end="39023" title="KTGM" label="KTGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856061" start="39036" end="39040" title="WSZE" label="WSZE"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="39083" end="39086" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231772" start="39098" end="39105" title="KUAM-TV" label="KUAM-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245227" start="39107" end="39130" title="List of radio stations in the Northern Mariana Islands" label="About 10 radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="39174" end="39179" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645" start="39880" end="39907" title="United States Minor Outlying Islands" label="U.S. Minor Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="40023" end="40037" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="41009" end="41016" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="41018" end="41026" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28427" start="41032" end="41042" title="Carolinian language" label="Carolinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397371" start="41086" end="41102" title="Tanapag language" label="Tanapag language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066778" start="41109" end="41129" title="Languages of the Philippines" label="Philippine languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319301" start="41150" end="41174" title="Languages of Oceania" label="Pacific island languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="41192" end="41199" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="41714" end="41726" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="41799" end="41816" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="41860" end="41868" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="41990" end="42003" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="42140" end="42159" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q867787" start="42169" end="42183" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Chalan Kanoa" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="42192" end="42203" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="42210" end="42219" title="Buddhists" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="42317" end="42333" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="42343" end="42348" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="42358" end="42364" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="42386" end="42433" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968929" start="42460" end="42464" title="ward (LDS Church)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153904" start="42534" end="42599" title="Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Public School System" label="Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Public School System"/>
<link wikidata="Q11400830" start="42684" end="42709" title="Northern Marianas College" label="Northern Marianas College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="42731" end="42774" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Western Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="42834" end="42851" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282773" start="43533" end="43543" title="Carolinian people" label="Carolinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209638" start="43654" end="43657" title="Yap" label="Yap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593555" start="43662" end="43667" title="Chuuk Lagoon" label="Chuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q747457" start="44034" end="44042" title="empanada" label="empanada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597003" start="44079" end="44085" title="pancit" label="pancit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44245" end="44251" title="Bixa orellana#Culinary uses" label="achoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="44513" end="44519" title="breadfruit" label="lemmai"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="44534" end="44540" title="mango" label="mangga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="44552" end="44557" title="coconut" label="niyok"/>
<link wikidata="Q237465" start="44574" end="44584" title="Averrhoa bilimbi" label="bilimbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q181560" start="44614" end="44623" title="starfruit" label="starfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385448" start="44768" end="44776" title="kelaguen" label="kelaguen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="44846" end="44857" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802987" start="44882" end="44890" title="tinaktak" label="tinaktak"/>
<link wikidata="Q606132" start="45281" end="45285" title="Spam (food)" label="Spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752489" start="45836" end="45870" title="cinema of Northern Mariana Islands" label="cinema of Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11400830" start="45991" end="46016" title="Northern Marianas College" label="Northern Marianas College"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="46449" end="46455" title="sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="46577" end="46585" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013818" start="46667" end="46693" title="Little League World Series" label="Little League World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057000" start="46790" end="46807" title="Micronesian Games" label="Micronesian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="46812" end="46831" title="South Pacific Games" label="South Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="46834" end="46844" title="Basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="46849" end="46867" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q810327" start="46932" end="46961" title="Oceania Basketball Tournament" label="Oceania Basketball Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q186471" start="47101" end="47104" title="UFC" label="UFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="47140" end="47156" title="Ultimate Frisbee" label="Ultimate Frisbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="47158" end="47168" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="47170" end="47176" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562991" start="47186" end="47195" title="outrigger" label="outrigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="47205" end="47213" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="47215" end="47231" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="47233" end="47238" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="47240" end="47244" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="47246" end="47252" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178678" start="47254" end="47264" title="kickboxing" label="kickboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="47266" end="47277" title="tae kwon do" label="tae kwon do"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="47279" end="47294" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q10980" start="47306" end="47315" title="triathlon" label="triathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="47321" end="47329" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265154" start="47798" end="47816" title="Mariana fruit dove" label="Mariana fruit dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q218123" start="47848" end="47856" title="Plumeria" label="Plumeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="47981" end="47986" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q129544" start="47992" end="47998" title="dugong" label="dugong"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252776" start="48381" end="48400" title="Saipan Reed Warbler" label="Saipan Reed Warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q626401" start="48405" end="48421" title="Golden white-eye" label="Golden white-eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704375" start="48542" end="48559" title="Partula langfordi" label="Partula langfordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245096" start="48638" end="48716" title="An Act to amend Public Law 93-435 with respect to the Northern Mariana Islands" label="An Act to amend Public Law 93-435 with respect to the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264774" start="48719" end="48758" title="Outline of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Outline of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152997" start="48761" end="48811" title="Index of Northern Mariana Islands-related articles" label="Index of Northern Mariana Islands-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977990" start="48814" end="48890" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in the Northern Mariana Islands" label="List of National Register of Historic Places in the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="48945" end="48963" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="49015" end="49042" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="49722" end="49740" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="49748" end="49775" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21404" wikidata="Q498929" url="?curid=21404" title="Geography of the Northern Mariana Islands">
<text>The Northern Mariana Islands, together with Guam to the south, compose the Mariana Islands. The southern islands are limestone, with level terraces and fringing coral reefs. The northern islands are volcanic, with active volcanoes on Anatahan, Pagan and Agrihan. The volcano on Agrihan has the highest elevation at . About one-fifth of the land is arable; another tenth is pasture. The primary natural resource is fish, some of which are endangered species, which leads to conflict. Also, development has created landfills which have contaminated the groundwater on Saipan, which could lead to disease.

Anatahan Volcano is a small volcanic island north of Saipan. It is about long and wide. Anatahan began erupting suddenly from its east crater on May 10, 2003, at about 6 p.m. local time (08:00 UTC). It has since alternated between eruptive and calm periods. On April 6, 2005, approximately of ash and rock were ejected, causing a large, black cloud to drift south over Saipan and Tinian.

==Climate==
The islands have a tropical marine climate moderated by seasonal northeast trade winds. There is little seasonal temperature variation. The dry season runs from December to June, and the rainy season from July to November and can include typhoons. The Guinness Book of World Records has cited Saipan as having the most equable climate in the world. From 1927 to 1935, the temperature ranged from at the lowest to at the highest.

==See also==
*Extreme points of the Northern Mariana Islands
*Marianas Trench Marine National Monument

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="44" end="48" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="75" end="90" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="117" end="126" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="161" end="166" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="221" end="228" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q487319" start="234" end="242" title="Anatahan" label="Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126761" start="244" end="249" title="Pagan Island" label="Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q396730" start="254" end="261" title="Agrihan" label="Agrihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="438" end="456" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="513" end="521" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q487319" start="604" end="612" title="Anatahan" label="Anatahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="797" end="800" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="984" end="990" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846178" start="1024" end="1047" title="tropical marine climate" label="tropical marine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="1080" end="1091" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="1243" end="1250" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1257" end="1287" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="1298" end="1304" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="1449" end="1495" title="Extreme points of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Extreme points of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612760" start="1497" end="1537" title="Marianas Trench Marine National Monument" label="Marianas Trench Marine National Monument"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21405" wikidata="Q3044356" url="?curid=21405" title="Demographics of the Northern Mariana Islands">
<text>==Population==
=== Structure of the population ===

Demographic features of the population of the Northern Mariana Islands include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.

==Births and deaths==
Population from census data, other data from CDC Births/Deaths reports.


==Ethnic groups==
*Asian 50% (includes Filipino 35.3%, Chinese 6.8%, Korean 4.2%, and other Asian 3.7%)
*Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 34.9% (includes Chamorro 23.9%, Carolinian people 4.6%, and other Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander 6.4%),
*Other 2.5%, two or more ethnicities or races 12.7% (2010 est.)

==Languages==
*Philippine languages 32.8%
*Chamorro (official) 24.1%
*English (official) 17%
*Other Pacific island languages (Refaluwasch, official) 10.1%
*Chinese 6.8%
*Other Asian languages 7.3%
*Other 1.9%

==Religion==
According to the Pew Research Center, 2010:
*Roman Catholic 64.1%
*Protestants 16%
*Buddhists 10.6%
*Folk religions 5.3%
*Other Christians 1.2%
*Other religions 1.1%
*Unaffiliated 1.0%
*Muslim 0.7%
*Eastern Orthodox &lt;1%
*Hindu &lt;1%
*Jews &lt;1%

==See also==
*Northern Mariana citizenship and nationality

==References==

*CIA World Factbook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="52" end="63" title="demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="80" end="90" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="98" end="122" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="131" end="149" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="151" end="160" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="378" end="383" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="398" end="406" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="414" end="421" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="428" end="434" title="Koreans" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="464" end="479" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="489" end="505" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="522" end="530" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28427" start="538" end="555" title="Carolinians" label="Carolinian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="572" end="587" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="591" end="607" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q947858" start="695" end="715" title="Philippine languages" label="Philippine languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="723" end="731" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="750" end="757" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="836" end="843" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624777" start="856" end="871" title="Asian languages" label="Asian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="920" end="939" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="948" end="962" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="970" end="981" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="987" end="996" title="Buddhists" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1089" end="1095" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="1102" end="1118" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="1127" end="1132" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1141" end="1145" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324994" start="1168" end="1212" title="Northern Mariana citizenship and nationality" label="Northern Mariana citizenship and nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="1231" end="1249" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21406" wikidata="Q7225393" url="?curid=21406" title="Politics of the Northern Mariana Islands">
<text>Politics of the Northern Mariana Islands takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic system, whereby the Governor is head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. The Northern Mariana Islands is an unincorporated territory of the United States, and in a political union with it in the form of a commonwealth. Executive power is exercised by the governor. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the legislature. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Local government is carried out through four regional mayors.

The Northern Mariana Islands and the United States of America reached a Covenant Agreement which became fully effective on November 4, 1986. The Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands became effective on January 1, 1978.

==Executive branch==

|Governor
|Arnold Indalecio Palacios
| | Republican
|January 9, 2023
|Lieutenant Governor
|David Mundo Apatang
| | Independent
|January 9, 2023

===Department Level Cabinet Positions===

===Sub-cabinet level divisions and offices===
==Legislative branch==
The Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature has two chambers. The House of Representatives has 20 members, elected for a two-year term from seven districts. The Senate has 9 members, elected for a four-year term in two staggered classes.

Prior to January 2009, the Commonwealth maintained an elected &quot;Resident Representative&quot; in Washington, DC. As authorized by , the Commonwealth now elects a nonvoting delegate to the U.S. Congress, similar to other U.S. insular areas. The first election was held on November 4, 2008.

==Political parties and elections==
==Judicial branch==
Commonwealth Supreme Court; Superior Court; Federal District Court

==Federal representation==
In November 2008, the Northern Mariana Islands held its first election for a delegate to the United States Congress. Gregorio &quot;Kilili&quot; Sablan won the election, and began his term of office in January 2009. The delegate serves as a member to some House committees and may vote in those committees, but the delegate is not permitted to vote on bills up for vote among all members of the House.

==International organization participation==
* United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (associate)
* INTERPOL (subbureau)
* Pacific Community

==Political culture==
Historically the Northern Mariana Islands have been subject to the colonizing powers of Spain, Germany, Japan, and the United States under a United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands Agreement. Each power contributed elements that mixed with local indigenous cultures to form the current political culture of the Northern Mariana Islands.

United States citizenship was granted in 1986. Politics in the Northern Mariana Islands is often &quot;more a function of family relationships and personal loyalties&quot; where the size of one&#x27;s extended family is more important than a candidate&#x27;s personal qualifications. Both scholarly works and the authors of the controversial website Saipansucks.com charge that this is nepotism carried out within the trappings of democracy.

== Notes ==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7225393" start="0" end="40" title="Politics of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Politics of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="73" end="85" title="presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="86" end="111" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q888807" start="132" end="140" title="List of Northern Mariana Islands Governors" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="144" end="162" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="173" end="182" title="Plurality voting system" label="pluriform"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="183" end="201" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="207" end="231" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="238" end="262" title="unincorporated territories of the United States" label="unincorporated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="270" end="283" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="335" end="347" title="commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="349" end="364" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="395" end="412" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="467" end="476" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="530" end="546" title="Local government" label="Local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="584" end="590" title="mayors" label="mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19054125" start="738" end="802" title="Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q888807" start="864" end="872" title="List of Northern Mariana Islands Governors" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795194" start="874" end="899" title="Arnold Palacios" label="Arnold Indalecio Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="904" end="914" title="Republican Party (US)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544442" start="933" end="952" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413751" start="954" end="973" title="David M. Apatang" label="David Mundo Apatang"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="978" end="989" title="Independent (politician)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565625" start="1123" end="1172" title="Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature" label="Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="1181" end="1189" title="bicameralism" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058704" start="1195" end="1219" title="Northern Mariana Islands House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058709" start="1290" end="1296" title="Northern Mariana Islands Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253588" start="1544" end="1552" title="Delegate (United States Congress)" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1560" end="1573" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q462778" start="1597" end="1610" title="insular areas" label="insular areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058710" start="1731" end="1744" title="Northern Mariana Islands Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283298" start="1762" end="1784" title="United States District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Federal District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253588" start="1890" end="1898" title="Delegate (United States Congress)" label="delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116336" start="1930" end="1964" title="Gregorio Sablan" label="Gregorio &amp;quot;Kilili&amp;quot; Sablan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="2263" end="2333" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="2348" end="2368" title="INTERPOL" label="INTERPOL (subbureau)"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="2371" end="2388" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="2479" end="2496" title="Colonies and Colonialism" label="colonizing powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2500" end="2505" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2507" end="2514" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2516" end="2521" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2531" end="2544" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2553" end="2567" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q129237" start="2568" end="2606" title="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands" label="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q303132" start="2712" end="2729" title="political culture" label="political culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="2764" end="2789" title="Citizenship of the United States" label="United States citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402483" start="3114" end="3129" title="Saipansucks.com" label="Saipansucks.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="3150" end="3158" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21422" wikidata="Q31057" url="?curid=21422" title="Norfolk Island">
<text>Norfolk Island ( , ; ) is an external territory of Australia located in the Pacific Ocean between New Zealand and New Caledonia, approximately east of Australia&#x27;s Evans Head and about from Lord Howe Island. Together with the neighbouring Phillip Island and Nepean Island, the three islands collectively form the Territory of Norfolk Island. At the 2021 census, it had 2,188 inhabitants living on a total land area of about . Its capital and administrative seat is Kingston, while its main town and largest settlement is Burnt Pine.

East Polynesians were the first to settle Norfolk Island, but they had already departed when Great Britain settled it as part of its 1788 colonisation of Australia. The island served as a convict penal settlement from 6 March 1788 until 5 May 1855, except for an 11-year hiatus between 15 February 1814 and 6 June 1825, when it lay abandoned. On 8 June 1856, permanent civilian residence on the island began when descendants of the &quot;Bounty&quot; mutineers were relocated from Pitcairn Island. In 1914, the UK handed Norfolk Island over to Australia to administer as an external territory.

Native to the island, the evergreen Norfolk Island pine is a symbol of the island and is pictured on its flag. The pine is a key export for Norfolk Island, being a popular ornamental tree in Australia (where two related species grow) and in other countries.

== History ==
=== Early settlement ===
Norfolk Island was uninhabited when first settled by Europeans, but evidence of earlier habitation was obvious. Archaeological investigation suggests that in the 13th or 14th century the island was settled by East Polynesian seafarers, either from the Kermadec Islands north of mainland New Zealand, or from the North Island of New Zealand. However, both Polynesian and Melanesian artefacts have been found, so it is possible that people from New Caledonia, relatively close to the north, also reached Norfolk Island. Human occupation must have ceased at least a few hundred years before Europeans arrived in the late 18th century. Ultimately, the relative isolation of the island, and its poor horticultural environment, were not favourable to long-term settlement.

=== First penal settlement (1788–1814) ===

The first European known to have sighted and landed on the island was Captain James Cook, on 10 October 1774, on his second voyage to the South Pacific on . He named it after Mary Howard, Duchess of Norfolk. Sir John Call argued the advantages of Norfolk Island in that it was uninhabited and that New Zealand flax grew there.

After the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in 1775 halted penal transportation to the Thirteen Colonies, British prisons started to overcrowd. Several stopgap measures proved ineffective, and the government announced in December 1785 that it would send convicts to parts of what is now known as Australia. In 1786, it included Norfolk Island as an auxiliary settlement, as proposed by John Call, in its plan for colonisation of the Colony of New South Wales. The decision to settle Norfolk Island was taken after Empress Catherine II of Russia restricted the sale of hemp. At the time, practically all the hemp and flax required by the Royal Navy for cordage and sailcloth was imported from Russia.

When the First Fleet arrived at Port Jackson in January 1788, Governor Arthur Phillip ordered Lieutenant Philip Gidley King to lead a party of 15 convicts and seven free men to take control of Norfolk Island, and prepare for its commercial development. They arrived on 6 March. During the first year of the settlement, which was also called &quot;Sydney&quot; like its parent, more convicts and soldiers were sent to the island from New South Wales. Robert Watson, harbourmaster, arrived with the First Fleet as quartermaster of , and was still serving in that capacity when the ship was wrecked at Norfolk Island in 1790. Next year, he obtained and cultivated a grant of on the island.

As early as 1794, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales Francis Grose suggested its closure as a penal settlement, as it was too remote and difficult for shipping and too costly to maintain. The first group of people left in February 1805, and by 1808, only about 200 remained, forming a small settlement until the remnants were removed in 1813. A small party remained to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings, so that there would be no inducement for anyone, especially from other European powers, to visit and lay claim to the place. From February 1814 until June 1825, the island was uninhabited.
=== Second penal settlement (18241856) ===

In 1824, the British government instructed the Governor of New South Wales, Thomas Brisbane, to reoccupy Norfolk Island as a place to send &quot;the worst description of convicts&quot;. Its remoteness, previously seen as a disadvantage, was now viewed as an asset for the detention of recalcitrant male prisoners. The convicts detained have long been assumed to be hardcore recidivists, or &#x27;doubly-convicted capital respites&#x27; – that is, men transported to Australia who committed fresh crimes in the colony for which they were sentenced to death, but were spared the gallows on condition of life on Norfolk Island. However, a 2011 study, using a database of 6,458 Norfolk Island convicts, has demonstrated that the reality was somewhat different: More than half were detained on Norfolk Island without ever receiving a colonial conviction, and only 15% had been reprieved from a death sentence. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of convicts sent to Norfolk Island had committed non-violent property offences, and the average length of detention there was three years. Nonetheless, Norfolk Island went through periods of unrest with convicts staging a number of uprisings and mutinies between 1826 and 1846, all of which failed. The British government began to wind down the second penal settlement after 1847, and the last convicts were removed to Tasmania in May 1855. The island was abandoned because transportation from the United Kingdom to Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (Tasmania) had ceased in 1853, to be replaced by penal servitude in the UK.

=== Settlement by Pitcairn Islanders (1856present) ===

The next settlement began on 8 June 1856, as the descendants of Tahitians and the HMS &quot;Bounty&quot; mutineers, including those of Fletcher Christian, were resettled from the Pitcairn Islands, which had become too small for their growing number. On 3 May 1856, 193 people left Pitcairn Islands aboard the &quot;Morayshire&quot;. On 8 June 194 people arrived, a baby having been born in transit. The Pitcairners occupied many of the buildings remaining from the penal settlements, and gradually established traditional farming and whaling industries on the island. Although some families decided to return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863, the island&#x27;s population continued to grow. They accepted additional settlers, who often arrived on whaling vessels.

The island was a regular resort for whaling vessels in the age of sail. The first such ship was the &quot;Britannia&quot; in November 1793. The last on record was the &quot;Andrew Hicks&quot; in August–September 1907. They came for water, wood and provisions, and sometimes they recruited islanders to serve as crewmen on their vessels.

In 1867, the headquarters of the Melanesian Mission of the Church of England was established on the island. In 1920, the Mission was relocated from Norfolk Island to the Solomon Islands to be closer to the focus of population.

Norfolk Island was the subject of several experiments in administration during the century. It began the 19th century as part of the Colony of New South Wales. On 29 September 1844, Norfolk Island was transferred from the Colony of New South Wales to the Colony of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land. On 1 November 1856 Norfolk Island was separated from the Colony of Tasmania (formerly Van Diemen&#x27;s Land) and constituted as a &quot;distinct and separate Settlement, the affairs of which should until further Order in that behalf by Her Majesty be administered by a Governor to be for that purpose appointed&quot;. The Governor of New South Wales was constituted as the Governor of Norfolk Island.

On 19 March 1897, the office of the Governor of Norfolk Island was abolished and responsibility for the administration of Norfolk Island was vested in the Governor of the Colony of New South Wales. Yet, the island was not made a part of New South Wales and remained separate. The Colony of New South Wales ceased to exist upon the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia on 1 January 1901, and from that date responsibility for the administration of Norfolk Island was vested in the Governor of the State of New South Wales.

==== 20th century ====

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia accepted the territory by the &quot;Norfolk Island Act 1913&quot; (Cth), subject to British agreement; the Act received royal assent on 19 December 1913. In preparation for the handover, a proclamation by the Governor of New South Wales on 23 December 1913 (in force when gazetted on 24 December) repealed &quot;all laws heretofore in force in Norfolk Island&quot; and replaced them by re-enacting a list of such laws. Among those laws was the &quot;Administration Law 1913&quot; (NSW), which provided for appointment of an Administrator of Norfolk Island and of magistrates, and contained a code of criminal law.

British agreement was expressed on 30 March 1914, in a UK Order in Council made pursuant to the &quot;Australian Waste Lands Act&quot; 1855 (Imp). A proclamation by the Governor-General of Australia on 17 June 1914 gave effect to the Act and the Order as from 1 July 1914.

During World War II, the island became a key airbase and refuelling depot between Australia and New Zealand and between New Zealand and the Solomon Islands. The airstrip was constructed by Australian, New Zealand and United States servicemen during 1942. Since Norfolk Island fell within New Zealand&#x27;s area of responsibility, it was garrisoned by a New Zealand Army unit known as N Force at a large army camp that had the capacity to house a 1,500-strong force. N Force relieved a company of the Second Australian Imperial Force. The island proved too remote to come under attack during the war, and N Force left the island in February 1944.

In 1979, Norfolk Island was granted limited self-government by Australia, under which the island elected a government that ran most of the island&#x27;s affairs.

==== 21st century ====
In 2006, a formal review process took place in which the Australian government considered revising the island&#x27;s model of government. The review was completed on 20 December 2006, when it was decided that there would be no changes in the governance of Norfolk Island.

Financial problems and a reduction in tourism led to Norfolk Island&#x27;s administration appealing to the Australian federal government for assistance in 2010. In return, the islanders were to pay income tax for the first time but would be eligible for greater welfare benefits. However, by May 2013, agreement had not been reached and islanders were having to leave to find work and welfare. An agreement was finally signed in Canberra on 12 March 2015 to replace self-government with a local council but against the wishes of the Norfolk Island government. A majority of Norfolk Islanders objected to the Australian plan to make changes to Norfolk Island without first consulting them and allowing their say, with 68% of voters against forced changes. An example of growing friction between Norfolk Island and increased Australian rule was featured in a 2019 episode of Discovery Channel&#x27;s annual Shark Week. The episode featured Norfolk Island&#x27;s policy of culling growing cattle populations by killing older cattle and feeding the carcasses to tiger sharks well off the coast. This is done to help prevent tiger sharks from coming further toward shore in search of food. Norfolk Island holds one of the largest populations of tiger sharks in the world. Australia has banned the culling policy as cruelty to animals. Norfolk Islanders fear this will lead to increased shark attacks and damage an already waning tourist industry.

On 4 October 2015, the time zone for Norfolk Island was changed from UTC+11:30 to UTC+11:00.

==== Reduced autonomy 2016 ====
In March 2015, the Australian Government announced comprehensive reforms for Norfolk Island. The action was justified on the grounds it was necessary &quot;to address issues of sustainability which have arisen from the model of self-government requiring Norfolk Island to deliver local, state and federal functions since 1979&quot;. On 17 June 2015, the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly was abolished, with the territory becoming run by an Administrator and an advisory council. Elections for a new Regional Council were held on 28 May 2016, with the new council taking office on 1 July 2016.

From that date, most Australian Commonwealth laws were extended to Norfolk Island. This means that taxation, social security, immigration, customs and health arrangements apply on the same basis as in mainland Australia. Travel between Norfolk Island and mainland Australia became domestic travel on 1 July 2016. For the 2016 Australian federal election, 328 people on Norfolk Island voted in the ACT electorate of Canberra, out of 117,248 total votes. Since 2018, Norfolk Island is covered by the electorate of Bean.

There is opposition to the reforms, led by Norfolk Island People for Democracy Inc., an association appealing to the United Nations to include the island on its list of &quot;non-self-governing territories&quot;. There has also been movement to join New Zealand since the autonomy reforms.

In October 2019, the Norfolk Island People For Democracy advocacy group conducted a survey of 457 island residents (about one quarter of the entire population) and found that 37% preferred free association with New Zealand, 35% preferred free association with Australia, 25% preferred full independence, and 3% preferred full integration with Australia.

== Geography ==

The Territory of Norfolk Island is located in the South Pacific Ocean, east of the Australian mainland. Norfolk Island itself is the main island of the island group that the territory encompasses and is located at . It has an area of , with no large-scale internal bodies of water and of coastline. Norfolk was formed from several volcanic eruptions between 3.1 and 2.3 million years ago.

The island&#x27;s highest point is Mount Bates reaching above sea level, located in the northwest quadrant of the island. The majority of the terrain is suitable for farming and other agricultural uses. Phillip Island, the second largest island of the territory, is located at , south of the main island.

The coastline of Norfolk Island consists, to varying degrees, of cliff faces. A downward slope exists towards Slaughter Bay and Emily Bay, the site of the original colonial settlement of Kingston. There are no safe harbour facilities on Norfolk Island, with loading jetties existing at Kingston and Cascade Bay. All goods not domestically produced are brought in by ship, usually to Cascade Bay. Emily Bay, protected from the Pacific Ocean by a small coral reef, is the only safe area for recreational swimming, although surfing waves can be found at Anson and Ball Bays.

The climate is subtropical and mild, with little seasonal differentiation. The island is the eroded remnant of a basaltic volcano active around 2.3 to 3 million years ago, with inland areas now consisting mainly of rolling plains. It forms the highest point on the Norfolk Ridge, part of the submerged continent Zealandia.

The area surrounding Mount Bates is preserved as the Norfolk Island National Park. The park, covering around 10% of the land of the island, contains remnants of the forests which originally covered the island, including stands of subtropical rainforest.

The park also includes the two smaller islands to the south of Norfolk Island, Nepean Island and Phillip Island. The vegetation of Phillip Island was devastated due to the introduction during the penal era of pest animals such as pigs and rabbits, giving it a red-brown colour as viewed from Norfolk; however, pest control and remediation work by park staff has recently brought some improvement to the Phillip Island environment.

The major settlement on Norfolk Island is Burnt Pine, located predominantly along Taylors Road, where the shopping centre, post office, bottle shop, telephone exchange and community hall are located. Settlement also exists over much of the island, consisting largely of widely separated homesteads.

Government House, the official residence of the Administrator, is located on Quality Row in what was the penal settlement of Kingston. Other government buildings, including the court, Legislative Assembly and Administration, are also located there. Kingston&#x27;s role is largely a ceremonial one, however, with most of the economic impetus coming from Burnt Pine.

=== Climate ===
Norfolk Island has a maritime-influenced humid subtropical climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfa&quot;) with warm, humid summers and very mild, rainy winters. The highest recorded temperature is on 23 January 2024, whilst the lowest is on 29 July 1953. The island has moderate rainfall , with a maximum in winter, and 52.8 clear days annually.

=== Environment ===

Norfolk Island is part of the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia region &quot;Pacific Subtropical Islands&quot; (PSI), and forms subregion PSI02, with an area of . The country is home to the Norfolk Island subtropical forests terrestrial ecoregion.

==== Flora ====

Norfolk Island has 174 native plants; 51 of them are endemic. At least 18 of the endemic species are rare or threatened. The Norfolk Island palm (&quot;Rhopalostylis baueri&quot;) and the smooth tree-fern (&quot;Cyathea brownii&quot;), the tallest tree-fern in the world, are common in the Norfolk Island National Park but rare elsewhere on the island. Before European colonisation, most of Norfolk Island was covered with subtropical rain forest, the canopy of which was made of &quot;Araucaria heterophylla&quot; (Norfolk Island pine) in exposed areas, and the palm &quot;Rhopalostylis baueri&quot; and tree ferns &quot;Cyathea brownii&quot; and &quot;C. australis&quot; in moister protected areas. The understory was thick with lianas and ferns covering the forest floor. Only one small tract, , of rainforest remains, which was declared as the Norfolk Island National Park in 1986.

This forest has been infested with several introduced plants. The cliffs and steep slopes of Mount Pitt supported a community of shrubs, herbaceous plants, and climbers. A few tracts of cliff top and seashore vegetation have been preserved. The rest of the island has been cleared for pasture and housing. Grazing and introduced weeds currently threaten the native flora, displacing it in some areas. In fact, there are more weed species than native species on Norfolk Island.

==== Fauna ====
As a relatively small and isolated oceanic island, Norfolk has few land birds but a high degree of endemicity among them. Norfolk Island is home to a radiation of about 40 endemic snail species. Many of the endemic bird species and subspecies have become extinct as a result of massive clearance of the island&#x27;s native vegetation of subtropical rainforest for agriculture, hunting and persecution as agricultural pests. The birds have also suffered from the introduction of mammals such as rats, cats, foxes, pigs and goats, as well as from introduced competitors such as common blackbirds and crimson rosellas. Although the island is politically part of Australia, many of Norfolk Island&#x27;s native birds show affinities to those of neighbouring New Zealand, such as the Norfolk kākā, Norfolk pigeon, and Norfolk boobook.

Extinctions include that of the endemic Norfolk kākā, Norfolk ground dove and Norfolk pigeon, while of the endemic subspecies the starling, triller, thrush and boobook owl are extinct, although the latter&#x27;s genes persist in a hybrid population descended from the last female. Other endemic birds are the white-chested white-eye, which may be extinct, the Norfolk parakeet, the Norfolk gerygone, the slender-billed white-eye and endemic subspecies of the Pacific robin and golden whistler. Subfossil bones indicate that a species of &quot;Coenocorypha&quot; snipe was also found on the island and is now extinct, but the taxonomic relationships of this are unclear and have not been scientifically described yet.

The Norfolk Island Group Nepean Island is also home to breeding seabirds. The providence petrel was hunted to local extinction by the beginning of the 19th century but has shown signs of returning to breed on Phillip Island. Other seabirds breeding there include the white-necked petrel, Kermadec petrel, wedge-tailed shearwater, Australasian gannet, red-tailed tropicbird and grey ternlet. The sooty tern (known locally as the whale bird) has traditionally been subject to seasonal egg harvesting by Norfolk Islanders.

Norfolk Island, with neighbouring Nepean Island, has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area because it supports the entire populations of white-chested and slender-billed white-eyes, Norfolk parakeets and Norfolk gerygones, as well as over 1% of the world populations of wedge-tailed shearwaters and red-tailed tropicbirds. Nearby Phillip Island is treated as a separate IBA.

Norfolk Island also has a botanical garden, which is home to a sizeable variety of plant species. However, the island has only one native mammal, Gould&#x27;s wattled bat (&quot;Chalinolobus gouldii&quot;). It is very rare, and may already be extinct on the island.

The Norfolk swallowtail (&quot;Papilio amynthor&quot;) is a species of butterfly that is found on Norfolk Island and the Loyalty Islands.

Cetaceans were historically abundant around the island as commercial hunts on the island were operating until 1956. Today, numbers of larger whales have disappeared, but even today many species such humpback whale, minke whale, sei whale, and dolphins can be observed close to shore, and scientific surveys have been conducted regularly. Southern right whales were once regular migrants to Norfolk, but were severely depleted by historical hunts, and further by recent illegal Soviet and Japanese whaling, resulting in none or very few, if remnants still live, right whales in these regions along with Lord Howe Island.

Whale sharks can be encountered off the island, too.

==== List of endemic and extirpated native birds ====

*Norfolk parakeet, &quot;Cyanoramphus cookii&quot; (endangered)
*Norfolk kākā, &quot;Nestor productus&quot; (extinct)
*Brown goshawk, &quot;Accipiter fasciatus&quot; (extirpated)
*Norfolk pigeon, &quot;Hemiphaga novaseelandiae spadicea&quot; (extinct, subspecies of NZ pigeon)
*Norfolk ground dove, &quot;Aloepecoenas norfolkensis&quot; (extinct)
*Norfolk snipe, &quot;Coenocorypha spp.&quot; (extinct, undescribed)
*Norfolk rail, &quot;Gallirallus spp.&quot; (extinct, undescribed)
*Norfolk robin, &quot;Petroica multicolor&quot; (endangered)
*Norfolk golden whistler, &quot;Pachycephala pectoralis xanthoprocta&quot; (vulnerable, subspecies of golden whistler)
*Norfolk triller, &quot;Lalage leucopyga leucopyga&quot; (extinct, nominate subspecies of long-tailed triller)
*Norfolk Island thrush, &quot;Turdus poliocephalus poliocephalus&quot; (extinct, nominate subspecies of Island thrush)
*Norfolk Island starling, &quot;Aplonis fusca fusca&quot; (extinct, nominate subspecies of extinct Tasman starling)
*Norfolk boobook, &quot;Ninox novaeseelandiae undulata&quot; (extinct except for hybrids with nominate subspecies, subspecies of Morepork\Southern boobook)
*White-chested white-eye, &quot;Zosterops albogularis&quot; (critically endangered, possibly extinct)
*Slender-billed white-eye, &quot;Zosterops tenuirostris&quot; (near threatened)
*Norfolk gerygone, &quot;Gerygone modesta&quot; (near threatened)
*Norfolk grey fantail, &quot;Rhiphidura albiscapa pelzelni&quot; (least concern, subspecies of grey fantail)
*Norfolk petrel, &quot;Pterodroma spp.&quot; (extinct, undescribed)

== Demographics ==

The population of Norfolk Island was 2,188 in the 2021 census, which had declined from a high of 2,601 in 2001.

In 2011, residents were 78% of the census count, with the remaining 22% being visitors. 16% of the population were 14 years and under, 54% were 15 to 64 years, and 24% were 65 years and over. The figures showed an ageing population, with many people aged 20–34 having moved away from the island.

Most islanders are of either European-only (mostly British) or combined European-Tahitian ancestry, being descendants of the &quot;Bounty&quot; mutineers as well as more recent arrivals from Australia and New Zealand. About half of the islanders can trace their roots back to Pitcairn Island.

This common heritage has led to a limited number of surnames among the islanders – a limit constraining enough that the island&#x27;s telephone directory also includes nicknames for many subscribers, such as Carrots, Dar Bizziebee, Diddles, Geek, Lettuce Leaf, Possum, Pumpkin, Smudgie, Truck and Wiggy.

===Structure of the population===

Population
* (as of the 2016 census) 
Population growth rate
*0.01%
Ancestry
* Australian (22.8%)
* English (22.4%)
* Pitcairn Islander (20%)
* Scottish (6%)
* Irish (5.2%)
Citizenship (as of the 2011 census)
*Australia 79.5%
*New Zealand 13.3%
*Fiji 2.5%
*Philippines 1.1%
*United Kingdom 1%
*Other 1.8%
*Unspecified 0.8%

===Religion===
62% of the islanders are Christians. After the death of the first chaplain Rev G. H. Nobbs in 1884, a Methodist church was formed, followed in 1891 by a Seventh-day Adventist congregation led by one of Nobbs&#x27; sons. Some unhappiness with G. H. Nobbs, the more organised and formal ritual of the Church of England service arising from the influence of the Melanesian Mission, decline in spirituality, the influence of visiting American whalers, literature sent by Christians overseas impressed by the Pitcairn story, and the adoption of Seventh-day Adventism by the descendants of the mutineers still on Pitcairn, all contributed to these developments.

The Roman Catholic Church began an ongoing presence on Norfolk Island in 1957. In the late 1990s, a group left the former Methodist (then Uniting Church) and formed a charismatic fellowship. In the 2021 Census, 22% of the ordinary residents identified as Anglican (compared to 34% in 2011), 13% as Uniting Church, 11% as Roman Catholic and 3% as Seventh-day Adventist. 9% were from other religions. 35.7% had no religion (up from 24% in 2011), and 14.7% did not indicate a religion. Typical ordinary congregations in any church do not exceed 30 local residents . The three older denominations have good facilities. Ministers are usually short-term visitors.

There are two Anglican churches on Norfolk Island, being All Saints Kingston (established 1870) and St Barnabas Chapel (establish 1880 as the Melanesian Mission) which are both part of the Diocese of Sydney, Anglican Church of Australia.

There is one Roman Catholic church on Norfolk Island, the Church of St Philip Howard within the Archdiocese of Sydney.

Statistics in 2016 Census:
*Protestant 46.8% 
**Anglican 29.2%
**Uniting Church in Australia 9.8%
**Seventh-Day Adventist 2.7%
* Roman Catholic 12.6%
*Other 1.4%
*None 26.7%
*Unspecified 9.5%

===Country of birth===
All information below is from the 2016 Census.

* Australia (39.7%)
* Norfolk Island (22.1%)
* New Zealand (17.6%)
* Fiji (2.7%)
* England (2.6%)
* Philippines (2.3%)

===Language===

Islanders speak both English and a creole language known as Norfuk, a blend of 18th-century English and Tahitian, based on Pitkern. The Norfuk language is decreasing in popularity as more tourists visit the island, and more young people leave for work and education. However, efforts are being made to keep it alive via dictionaries and the renaming of some tourist attractions to their Norfuk equivalents.

In 2004, an act of the Norfolk Island Assembly made Norfuk a co-official language of the island. The act is long-titled: &quot;An Act to recognise the Norfolk Island Language (Norf&#x27;k) as an official language of Norfolk Island&quot;. The &quot;language known as &#x27;Norf&#x27;k&#x27;&quot; is described as the language &quot;that is spoken by descendants of the first free settlers of Norfolk Island who were descendants of the settlers of Pitcairn Island&quot;. The act recognises and protects use of the language but does not require it; in official use, it must be accompanied by an accurate translation into English. 32% of the total population reported speaking a language other than English in the 2011 census, and just under three-quarters of the ordinarily resident population could speak Norfuk.

==Education==

The sole school on the island, Norfolk Island Central School, provides education from kindergarten through to Year 12. The school had a contractual arrangement referred to as a Memorandum of Understanding with the New South Wales Department of Education regarding the provision of education services at the school, the latest of which took effect in January 2015. In 2015 enrolment at the Norfolk Island Central School was students. As of January, 2022, The Department of Education (Queensland) took over the running of the Norfolk Island Central School in line with the transition of state services from the New South Wales Government to the Queensland Government. The NSW curriculum will continue to be utilised until the end of the 2023 school year.

Children on the island learn English as well as Norfuk, in efforts to revive the language.

No public tertiary education infrastructure exists on the island. The Norfolk Island Central School works in partnership with registered training organisations (RTOs) and local employers to support students accessing Vocational Education and Training (VET) courses.

== Culture ==

While there was no &quot;indigenous&quot; culture on the island at the time of settlement, the Tahitian influence of the Pitcairn settlers has resulted in some aspects of Polynesian culture being adapted to that of Norfolk, including the hula dance. Local cuisine also shows influences from the same region.

Islanders traditionally spend a lot of time outdoors, with fishing and other aquatic pursuits being common pastimes, an aspect which has become more noticeable as the island becomes more accessible to tourism. Most island families have at least one member involved in primary production in some form.
Religious observance remains an important part of life for some islanders, particularly the older generations, but actual attendance is about 8% of the resident population plus some tourists. In the 2006 census, 19.9% had no religion compared with 13.2% in 1996. Businesses are closed on Wednesday and Saturday afternoons and Sundays.

One of the island&#x27;s long-term residents was the novelist Colleen McCullough, whose works include &quot;The Thorn Birds&quot; and the &quot;Masters of Rome&quot; series as well as &quot;Morgan&#x27;s Run&quot;, set, in large part, on Norfolk Island. Ruth Park, notable author of &quot;The Harp in the South&quot; and many other works of fiction, also lived on the island for several years after the death of her husband, writer D&#x27;Arcy Niland. Actress/singer Helen Reddy also moved to the island in 2002, and maintained a house there.

American novelist James A. Michener, who served in the United States Navy during World War II, set one of the chapters of his episodic novel &quot;Tales of the South Pacific&quot; on Norfolk Island.

The island is one of the few locations outside North America to celebrate the holiday of Thanksgiving.

Norfolk Island has a number of museums and heritage organisations, including Norfolk Island Museum and Bounty Museum. The former has five sites within the Kingston and Arthur&#x27;s Vale Historic Area, a World Heritage Site also linked to the Australian Convict Sites.

===Cuisine===
The cuisine of Norfolk Island is very similar to that of the Pitcairn Islands, as Norfolk Islanders trace their origins to Pitcairn. The local cuisine is a blend of British cuisine and Tahitian cuisine.

Recipes from Norfolk Island of Pitcairn origin include mudda (green banana dumplings) and kumara pilhi. The island&#x27;s cuisine also includes foods not found on Pitcairn, such as chopped salads and fruit pies.

== Government and politics ==

Norfolk Island was the only non-mainland Australian territory to have had self-governance. The &quot;Norfolk Island Act 1979&quot;, passed by the Parliament of Australia in 1979, is the Act under which the island was governed until the passing of the &quot;Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Act&quot; 2015 (Cth). The Australian government maintains authority on the island through an Administrator, currently George Plant.

From 1979 to 2015, a Legislative Assembly was elected by popular vote for terms of not more than three years, although legislation passed by the Australian Parliament could extend its laws to the territory at will, including the power to override any laws made by the assembly. The Assembly consisted of nine seats, with electors casting nine equal votes, of which no more than two could be given to any individual candidate. It is a method of voting called a &quot;weighted first past the post system&quot;. Four of the members of the Assembly formed the Executive Council, which devised policy and acted as an advisory body to the Administrator. The last Chief Minister of Norfolk Island was Lisle Snell. Other ministers included: Minister for Tourism, Industry and Development; Minister for Finance; Minister for Cultural Heritage and Community Services; and Minister for Environment.

All seats were held by independent candidates. Norfolk Island did not embrace party politics. In 2007, a branch of the Australian Labor Party was formed on Norfolk Island, with the aim of reforming the system of government.

Since 2018, residents of Norfolk Island have been required to enroll in the Division of Bean. As is the case for all Australian citizens, enrolment and voting for Norfolk Islanders is compulsory.

Disagreements over the island&#x27;s relationship with Australia were put in sharper relief by a 2006 review undertaken by the Australian government. Under the more radical of two models proposed in the review, the island&#x27;s legislative assembly would have been reduced to the status of a local council. However, in December 2006, citing the &quot;significant disruption&quot; that changes to the governance would impose on the island&#x27;s economy, the Australian government ended the review leaving the existing governance arrangements unaltered.

In a move that apparently surprised many islanders, the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island, David Buffett, announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its self-government status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts.

It was announced on 19 March 2015 that self-governance for the island would be revoked by the Commonwealth and replaced by a local council with the state of New South Wales providing services to the island. A reason given was that the island had never gained self-sufficiency and was being heavily subsidised by the Commonwealth, being given $12.5 million in 2015 alone. It meant that residents would have to start paying Australian income tax, but they would also be covered by Australian welfare schemes such as Centrelink and Medicare.

The Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly decided to hold a referendum on the proposal. On 8 May 2015, voters were asked if Norfolk Islanders should freely determine their political status and their economic, social and cultural development, and to &quot;be consulted at referendum or plebiscite on the future model of governance for Norfolk Island before such changes are acted upon by the Australian parliament&quot;. 68% out of 912 voters voted in favour. The Norfolk Island Chief Minister, Lisle Snell, said that &quot;the referendum results blow a hole in Canberra&#x27;s assertion that the reforms introduced before the Australian Parliament that propose abolishing the Legislative Assembly and Norfolk Island Parliament were overwhelmingly supported by the people of Norfolk Island&quot;.

The &quot;Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Act 2015&quot; passed the Australian Parliament on 14 May 2015 (assented on 26 May 2015), abolishing self-government on Norfolk Island and transferring Norfolk Island into a council as part of New South Wales law.

Between 1 July 2016 and 1 January 2022, New South Wales provided state-based services. Since 1 January 2022, Queensland has provided state-based services directly for Norfolk Island.

The island&#x27;s official capital is Kingston; it is, however, more a centre of government than a sizeable settlement. The largest settlement is at Burnt Pine.

The most important local holiday is Bounty Day, celebrated on 8 June, in memory of the arrival of the Pitcairn Islanders in 1856.

Local ordinances and acts apply on the island, where most laws are based on the Australian legal system. Australian common law applies when not covered by either Australian or Norfolk Island law. Suffrage is universal at age eighteen.

As a territory of Australia, Norfolk Island does not have diplomatic representation abroad, or within the territory, and is also not a participant in any international organisations, other than sporting organisations.

The flag is three vertical bands of green, white, and green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree centred in the slightly wider white band.

The Norfolk Island Regional Council was established in July 2016 to govern the territory at the local level in line with local governments in mainland Australia.

=== Constitutional status ===
From 1788 until 1844, Norfolk Island was a part of the Colony of New South Wales. In 1844, it was severed from New South Wales and annexed to the Colony of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land. With the demise of the third settlement and in contemplation that the inhabitants of Pitcairn Island would move to Norfolk Island, the &quot;Australian Waste Lands Act&quot; 1855 (Imp), gave the Queen in Council the power to &quot;separate Norfolk Island from the Colony of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land and to make such provision for the government of Norfolk Island as might seem expedient&quot;. In 1856, the Queen in Council ordered that Norfolk Island be a distinct and separate settlement, appointing the Governor of New South Wales to also be the Governor of Norfolk Island with &quot;full power and authority to make laws for the order, peace, and good government&quot; of the island. Under these arrangements Norfolk Island was effectively self-governing, Although Norfolk Island was a colony acquired by settlement, it was never within the &quot;British Settlements Act&quot;.

The constitutional status of Norfolk Island was revisited in 1894 when the British government appointed an inquiry into the administration of justice on the island. By this time, there had been steps in Australia towards federation including the 1891 constitutional convention. There was a correspondence between the Governor of Norfolk Island, the British colonial office and the Governor of New Zealand as to how the island should be governed and by whom. Even within NSW, it was felt that &quot;the laws and system of government in the Colony of New South Wales would not prove suitable to the Island Community&quot;. In 1896, the Governor of New Zealand wrote &quot;I am advised that, as far as my Ministers can ascertain, if any change is to take place in the government of Norfolk Island, the Islanders, while protesting against any change, would prefer to come under the control of New Zealand rather than that of New South Wales&quot;.

The British government decided not to annex Norfolk Island to the Colony of NSW and instead that the affairs of Norfolk Island would be administered by the Governor of NSW in that capacity rather than having a separate office as Governor of Norfolk Island. The order-in-council contemplated the future annexation of Norfolk Island to the Colony of NSW or to any federal body of which NSW form part. Norfolk Island was not a part of NSW and residents of Norfolk Island were not entitled to have their names placed on the NSW electoral roll. Norfolk Island was accepted as a territory of Australia, separate from any state, by the &quot;Norfolk Island Act&quot; 1913 (Cth), passed under the territories power, and made effective in 1914. Norfolk Island was given a limited form of self-government by the &quot;Norfolk Island Act&quot; 1979 (Cth).

There have been four challenges to the constitutional validity of the Australian Government&#x27;s authority to administer Norfolk Island:
*In 1939, Samuel Hadley argued that the only valid laws in Norfolk Island were those made under the 1856 Order in Council and that all subsequent laws were invalid; his case was rejected by the High Court.
*In 1965, the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island rejected Henry Newbery&#x27;s appeal against conviction for failing to apply to be enrolled to vote in Norfolk Island Council elections. He had argued that in 1857 Norfolk Island had a constitution and a legislature such that the Crown could not abolish the legislature nor place Norfolk Island under the authority of Australia. In the Supreme Court, Eggleston J considered the constitutional history of Norfolk Island and concluded that the &quot;Australian Waste Lands Act&quot; 1855 (Imp) authorised any form of government, representative or non-representative, and that this included placing Norfolk Island under the authority of Australia.
*As a result of the Australian Government&#x27;s decision in 1972 to prevent Norfolk Island from being used as a tax haven, Berwick Ltd claimed to be resident in Norfolk Island but was convicted of failing to lodge a tax return. One of the arguments for Berwick Ltd was that Norfolk Island, as an external territory, was not part of Australia in the constitutional sense. In 1976, the High Court unanimously rejected this argument, approving the &quot;Newbery&quot; decision and holding that Norfolk Island was a part of Australia.
*In 2004 the Australian Government amended the &quot;Norfolk Island Act&quot; 1979 (Cth) to remove the right for non-Australian citizens to enrol and stand for election to the Legislative Assembly of Norfolk Island. The validity of the amendments was challenged in the High Court, arguing that as an external territory Norfolk Island was not part of Australia in the constitutional sense and that disenfranchising residents of Norfolk Island who were not Australian citizens was inconsistent with self-government. In 2007, the High Court of Australia rejected these arguments, again approving the &quot;Newbery&quot; decision and holding that Norfolk Island was part of Australia and that self-government did not require residency rather than citizenship to determine the entitlement to vote.

The Government of Australia thus holds that:
: Norfolk Island has been an integral part of the Commonwealth of Australia since 1914, when it was accepted as an Australian territory under section 122 of the Constitution. The Island has no international status independent of Australia.

Much of the self-government under the 1979 legislation was repealed with effect from 2016. The reforms included, to the chagrin of some of the locals of Norfolk Island, a repeal of the preambular sections of the Act which originally were 3–4 pages recognising the particular circumstances in the history of Norfolk Island.

Consistent with the Australian position, the United Nations Decolonization Committee does not include Norfolk Island on its list of non-self-governing territories.

This legal position is disputed by some residents on the island. Some islanders claim that Norfolk Island was actually granted independence at the time Queen Victoria granted permission to Pitcairn Islanders to re-settle on the island.

Following reforms to the status of Norfolk Island, there were mass protests by the local population. In 2015, it was reported that Norfolk Island was taking its argument for self-governance to the United Nations. A campaign to preserve the island&#x27;s autonomy was formed, named Norfolk&#x27;s Choice. A formal petition was lodged with the United Nations by Geoffrey Robertson on behalf of the local population on 25 April 2016.

Various suggestions for retaining the island&#x27;s self-government have been proposed. In 2006, a UK MP, Andrew Rosindell, raised the possibility of the island becoming a self-governing British Overseas Territory. In 2013, the island&#x27;s last chief minister, Lisle Snell, suggested independence, to be supported by income from fishing, offshore banking and foreign aid.

The laws of Norfolk Island were in a transitional state, under the Norfolk Island Applied Laws Ordinance 2016 (Cth), from 2016 until 2018. Laws of New South Wales as applying in Norfolk Island were suspended (with five major exceptions, which the 2016 Ordinance itself amended) until the end of June 2018. From 1 July 2018, all laws of New South Wales apply in Norfolk Island and, as &quot;applied laws&quot;, are subject to amendment, repeal or suspension by federal ordinance. The Local Government Act 1993 (NSW) has been amended for application to Norfolk Island.

=== Immigration and citizenship ===

The island was subject to separate immigration controls from the remainder of Australia. Before 1 July 2016, immigration to Norfolk Island, even by other Australian citizens was heavily restricted. In 2012, immigration controls were relaxed with the introduction of an Unrestricted Entry Permit for all Australian and New Zealand citizens upon arrival and the option to apply for residency; the only criteria were to pass a police check and be able to pay into the local health scheme. From 1 July 2016, the Australian migration system replaced the immigration arrangements previously maintained by the Norfolk Island Government. Holders of Australian visas who travelled to Norfolk Island would have departed the Australian Migration Zone before 1 July 2016. Unless they held a multiple-entry visa, the visa would have ceased; in which case they would require another visa to re-enter mainland Australia.

Australian citizens and residents from other parts of the nation now have an automatic right of residence on the island after meeting these criteria (Immigration (Amendment No. 2) Act 2012). Australian citizens can carry either a passport or a form of photo identification to travel to Norfolk Island. The Document of Identity, which is no longer issued, is also acceptable within its validity period. Citizens of all other nations must carry a passport to travel to Norfolk Island even if arriving from other parts of Australia.

Non-Australian citizens who are permanent residents of Norfolk Island may apply for Australian citizenship after meeting normal residence requirements and are eligible to take up residence in mainland Australia at any time through the use of a Confirmatory (Residence) visa (subclass 808). Children born on Norfolk Island are Australian citizens as specified by Australian nationality law.

=== Health care ===
Norfolk Island Hospital is the only medical centre on the island. Since 1 July 2016, medical treatment on Norfolk Island has been covered by Medicare and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme as it is in Australia. Emergency medical treatment is covered by Medicare or a private health insurer. Although the hospital can perform minor surgery, serious medical conditions are not permitted to be treated on the island and patients are flown back to mainland Australia. Air charter transport can cost as much as , which is covered by the Australian Government. For serious emergencies, medical evacuations were provided by the Royal Australian Air Force; currently this service is provided by Australian Retrieval Services. The island has one ambulance, staffed by one employed St John Officer and a group of St John Ambulance Australia volunteers.

The lack of medical facilities available in most remote communities has a major impact on the health care of Norfolk Islanders. As is consistent with other extremely remote regions, many older residents move to New Zealand or Australia to access the required medical care.

=== Defence and law enforcement ===
Defence is the responsibility of the Australian Defence Force. There are no active military installations or defence personnel on Norfolk Island. The Administrator may request the assistance of the Australian Defence Force if required. As part of &quot;Operation Resolute&quot;, the Royal Australian Navy and Australian Border Force deploy and patrol boats to carry out civil maritime security operations in Australian mainland and offshore territories including Norfolk Island, the Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Christmas Island, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Macquarie Island, and Lord Howe Island. In part to carry out this mission, as of 2023, the Navy&#x27;s &quot;Armidale&quot;-class boats are in the process of being replaced by larger s.

In 2023, Australian and American forces conducted joint military exercises in the vicinity of Norfolk Island signifying the island&#x27;s potential as a staging base for peacekeeping, disaster-relief and other operations in the South Pacific.

Civilian law enforcement and community policing are provided by the Australian Federal Police. The normal deployment to the island is one sergeant and two constables. These are augmented by five local Special Members who have police powers but are not AFP employees.

=== Courts ===
The Norfolk Island Court of Petty Sessions is the equivalent of a Magistrates Court and deals with minor criminal, civil or regulatory matters. The Chief Magistrate of Norfolk Island is usually the current Chief Magistrate of the Australian Capital Territory. Three local Justices of the Peace have the powers of a Magistrate to deal with minor matters.

The Supreme Court of Norfolk Island deals with more serious criminal offences, more complex civil matters, administration of deceased estates and federal laws as they apply to the Territory. The Judges of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island are generally appointed from among Justices of the Federal Court of Australia and may sit on the Australian mainland or convene a circuit court. Appeals are to the Federal Court of Australia.

As stated by the Legal Profession Act 1993, &quot;a resident practitioner must hold a Norfolk Island practising certificate.&quot; , only one lawyer maintained a full-time legal practice on Norfolk Island.

=== Census ===
Until 2016, Norfolk Island took its own censuses, separate from those taken by the Australian Bureau of Statistics for the remainder of Australia.

=== Postal service ===

Prior to 2016, the Norfolk Island Postal Service was responsible for mail receipt and delivery on the island and issued its own postage stamps. With the merger of Norfolk Island as a regional council, the Norfolk Island Postal Service ceased to exist and all postage is now handled by Australia Post. Australia Post sends and receives mail from Norfolk Island with the postcode 2899.

== Economy and infrastructure ==
Tourism, the primary economic activity, has steadily increased over the years. As Norfolk Island prohibits the importation of fresh fruit and vegetables, most produce is grown locally. Beef is both produced locally and imported. The island has one winery, Two Chimneys Wines.

The Australian government controls the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and revenue from it extending around Norfolk Island equating to roughly , and territorial sea claims to from the island. There is a strong belief on the island that some of the revenue generated from Norfolk&#x27;s EEZ should be available to provide services such as health and infrastructure on the island, which the island has been responsible for, similar to how the Northern Territory is able to access revenue from their mineral resources. The exclusive economic zone provides the Islanders with fish, its only major natural resource. Norfolk Island has no direct control over any marine areas but has an agreement with the Commonwealth through the Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) to fish &quot;recreationally&quot; in a small section of the EEZ known locally as &quot;the Box&quot;. While there is speculation that the zone may include oil and gas deposits, this is not proven. There are no major arable lands or permanent farmlands, though about 25 percent of the island is a permanent pasture. There is no irrigated land. The island uses the Australian dollar as its currency.

In 2015, a company in Norfolk Island was granted a licence to export medicinal cannabis. The medicinal cannabis industry has been viewed by some as a means of reinvigorating the economy of Norfolk Island. The Commonwealth stepped in to overturn the decision, with the island&#x27;s administrator, former Liberal MP Gary Hardgrave revoking the local licence to grow the crop. (Legislation to allow the cultivation of cannabis in Australia for medical or scientific purposes passed Federal Parliament in February 2016. The Victorian Government will be undertaking a small-scale, strictly controlled cannabis cultivation trial at a Victorian research facility.)

=== Taxes ===
Formerly, residents of Norfolk Island did not pay Australian federal taxes, which created a tax haven for locals and visitors alike. There was no income tax so the island&#x27;s legislative assembly raised money through an import duty, fuel levy, medicare levy, goods and services tax of 12%, and local/international phone calls. The Chief Minister of Norfolk Island, David Buffett, announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its tax-free status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts. The introduction of income taxation came into effect on 1 July 2016. Prior to these reforms, residents of Norfolk Island were not entitled to social services. The reforms extend to private persons, companies and trustees.

=== Communications ===
, telephone main lines were in use, a mix of analogue () and digital () circuits. Satellite communications services are planned. The island has two locally based radio stations (Radio Norfolk), a community station broadcasting on both AM and FM frequencies and an independent station Watawieh FM (callsign: VL-WTF) which broadcasts on 87.6 FM and is owned by the Bounty Folk Museum. Norfolk Island does not have its own dedicated ABC Local Radio station but the island is covered by ABC Western Plains which broadcasts on 95.9 FM from its studios in Dubbo in mainland Australia. There is also one television station, Norfolk TV, featuring local programming, plus transmitters for Australian channels ABC, SBS, Nine (through Imparja Television) and Seven. The Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) is .nf. A small GSM (2G) mobile network operates on the island across three towers, however no data transmission is available on this network. An eight-tower 4G/LTE 1800 MHz network was installed in November 2018, improving data service significantly on the island.

=== Transport ===

There are no railways, waterways, ports or harbours on the island. Loading jetties are located at Kingston and Cascade, but ships cannot get close to either of them. When a supply ship arrives, it is emptied by whaleboats towed by launches, five tonnes at a time. A mobile crane picks up the freight using nets and straps and lifts the freight onto the pier. Which jetty is used depends on the prevailing weather of the day; the jetty on the leeward side of the island is often used. If the wind changes significantly during unloading/loading, the ship will move around to the other side. Visitors often gather to watch the activity when a supply ship arrives. Norfolk Forwarding Services is the primary Freight Forwarding service for Norfolk Island handling both sea and airfreight. In 2017 Norfolk Forwarding Services shipped most of the freight for the Cascade Pier Project over a period of 18 months.

The island hosts of roads, of which are paved and unpaved. As with the rest of Australia, driving is on the left side of the road. Uniquely, local law gives livestock right of way. Speed limits are lower than most mainland Australian roads; the general speed limit is , reducing to in town and near schools. Drivers on the island wave to other passing vehicles, this tradition is nicknamed the &quot;Norfolk wave&quot;.

There is one airport, Norfolk Island Airport. Qantas operates direct flights to Sydney and Brisbane, and Air Chathams flies to Auckland. A local airline, Norfolk Island Airlines, ran flights to Auckland and Brisbane until 2018. In mid 2018, Air Chathams announced it was looking to re-establish flights between Auckland and Norfolk Island. It began a weekly service between Auckland and Norfolk Island on 6 September 2019 using a Convair 580.
Since the reopening of the Trans-Tasman bubble in 2021, the Air Chathams Auckland service operates on Thursdays using a 36-seater Saab 340 aircraft.
=== Electricity ===
Electricity is provided by diesel generators operated by Norfolk Island Electricity, a government organisation. Some electricity is also provided by privately owned rooftop solar panels.

==Sport==
Norfolk Island competes at the Commonwealth Games, and has won two bronze medals, both in lawn bowls. The territory also competes in the Pacific Games and Pacific Mini Games.

The island supports national rugby league, cricket and netball teams. It is a member of World Athletics.

== See also ==

* Bibliography of Norfolk Island
* List of islands of Australia
* List of volcanoes in Australia
* Outline of Norfolk Island

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* Andrew Kippis, &quot;The Life and Voyages of Captain James Cook&quot;, Westminster 1788, Reprint London and New York 1904, pp. 246 ff
* Nobbs, Raymond, &quot;Norfolk Island and its Third Settlement: The First Hundred Years 1856–1956&quot; Sydney, Library of Australian History, 2006.

; History of penal settlements
* Causer, Tim &#x27;&quot;The Worst Types of Sub-Human Beings&quot;: the Myth and Reality of the Convicts of the Norfolk Island Penal Settlement , 1825–1855&#x27;, &quot;Islands of History&quot;, Sydney, 2011, pp. 8–31. ().
* Causer, Tim &#x27;Norfolk Island&#x27;s &quot;Suicide Lotteries&quot;: Myth and Reality&#x27; , &quot;Islands of History&quot;, Sydney, 2011, pp. 61–68. ().
* Clark, Manning, &quot;A History of Australia&quot;, Vols. I–III, Melbourne, Melbourne University Press, 1962, 1968, 1973.
* Clarke, Marcus, &quot;For the Term of his Natural Life&quot; (novel).
* Hazzard, Margaret, &quot;Punishment Short of Death: a history of the penal settlement at Norfolk Island&quot;, Melbourne, Hyland, 1984. ().
* Murray-Brown, David, &quot;Norfolk Island Cancellations and Postal Markings.&quot; London: Pacific Islands Study Circle, 3rd edition, 2012, 978-1-899833-20-7, 130pp; http://www.pisc.org.uk 
* Hughes, Robert, &quot;The Fatal Shore&quot;, London, Pan, 1988. ().
* Wright, R., &quot;The Forgotten Generation of Norfolk Island and Van Diemen&#x27;s Land&quot;, Sydney, Library of Australian History, 1986.

== Further reading ==
* Barry, John Vincent – &quot;Alexander Maconochie of Norfolk Island.&quot;
* Clune, Frank – &quot;Norfolk Island Story.&quot; 
* Hazzard, Margaret – &quot;Punishment Short of Death: A history of the Penal Settlement at Norfolk Island.&quot; 
* Hoare, Merval – &quot;Norfolk Island: An Outline of Its History 1774–1987.&quot; 
* Specht, Jim – &quot;The Prehistoric Archaeology of Norfolk Island.&quot;

== External links ==

 Government
* Official government website 
* Australian Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development 

General information
*Norfolk Island . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Tourism 

Archaeology and Polynesian settlement in prehistory
*

Others
* &quot;Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? Inquiry into Governance on Norfolk Island&quot; Commonwealth Parliament, Joint Standing Committee on the National Capital and External Territories, 2003
* &quot;Norfolk Island and Its Inhabitants&quot; 1879 account by Joseph Campbell
* Anglican history on Norfolk Island Primary texts and photographs
* Colonial Secretary&#x27;s papers 1822–1877, State Library of Queensland- Includes digitised letters to the Colonial Secretary of New South Wales regarding the Norfolk Island colony</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="0" end="14" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="29" end="47" title="States and territories of Australia" label="external territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="51" end="60" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="98" end="109" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="114" end="127" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208816" start="168" end="178" title="Evans Head, New South Wales" label="Evans Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="194" end="210" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q586302" start="243" end="257" title="Phillip Island (Norfolk Island)" label="Phillip Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636644" start="262" end="275" title="Nepean Island (Norfolk Island)" label="Nepean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="317" end="344" title="Norfolk Island" label="Territory of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745365" start="353" end="364" title="2021 Australian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30963" start="469" end="477" title="Kingston, Norfolk Island" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740764" start="525" end="535" title="Burnt Pine" label="Burnt Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="543" end="552" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="631" end="644" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="726" end="750" title="penal colony" label="convict penal settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="970" end="998" title="mutiny on the Bounty" label="&amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot; mutineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="1019" end="1034" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956063" start="1112" end="1130" title="Department of External Territories (1941–51)" label="external territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q161070" start="1169" end="1188" title="Araucaria heterophylla" label="Norfolk Island pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q235445" start="1238" end="1242" title="Flag of Norfolk Island" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="1645" end="1654" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="1683" end="1699" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadec Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="1743" end="1755" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="1801" end="1811" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="1874" end="1887" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="2126" end="2139" title="horticulture" label="horticultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2321" end="2331" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779798" start="2418" end="2449" title="Mary Howard, Duchess of Norfolk (died 1773)" label="Mary Howard, Duchess of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527640" start="2455" end="2464" title="John Call" label="John Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639799" start="2541" end="2557" title="Phormium" label="New Zealand flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2597" end="2623" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770529" start="2639" end="2659" title="penal transportation" label="penal transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="2667" end="2684" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2713" end="2722" title="Prison overcrowding in the United Kingdom" label="overcrowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="3013" end="3038" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="Colony of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="3102" end="3124" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="3148" end="3152" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="3290" end="3301" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="3313" end="3325" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="3352" end="3366" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="3386" end="3404" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441518" start="4026" end="4039" title="Francis Grose (British Army officer)" label="Francis Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="4694" end="4709" title="Thomas Brisbane" label="Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166051" start="5794" end="5816" title="Norfolk Island convict mutinies" label="uprisings and mutinies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="5981" end="5989" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="6078" end="6100" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="6150" end="6165" title="Penal labour" label="penal servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q900379" start="6316" end="6338" title="HMS Bounty" label="HMS &amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q316070" start="6369" end="6387" title="Fletcher Christian" label="Fletcher Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="6413" end="6429" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667474" start="7054" end="7065" title="Age of Sail" label="age of sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811227" start="7366" end="7384" title="Melanesian Mission" label="Melanesian Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="7392" end="7409" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="7503" end="7518" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="8173" end="8200" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="8814" end="8857" title="Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia" label="Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="9067" end="9094" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="9531" end="9547" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="9642" end="9671" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9754" end="9766" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732089" start="9792" end="9799" title="Norfolk Island Airport" label="airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="9829" end="9838" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="9843" end="9854" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="9867" end="9878" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="9887" end="9902" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="10101" end="10117" title="New Zealand Army" label="New Zealand Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956299" start="10132" end="10139" title="N Force" label="N Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742845" start="10248" end="10280" title="Second Australian Imperial Force" label="Second Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489816" start="11759" end="11769" title="Shark Week" label="Shark Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q188212" start="11912" end="11923" title="tiger shark" label="tiger shark"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12366" end="12375" title="UTC+11:30" label="UTC+11:30"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12379" end="12388" title="UTC+11:00" label="UTC+11:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="13341" end="13373" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="13417" end="13420" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973482" start="13421" end="13443" title="Division of Canberra" label="electorate of Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q56041098" start="13518" end="13536" title="Division of Bean" label="electorate of Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="13714" end="13744" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="14019" end="14035" title="Associated state" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="14115" end="14132" title="Self-governance" label="full independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361458" start="14627" end="14638" title="Mount Bates" label="Mount Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="14648" end="14663" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="15164" end="15171" title="Jetty" label="jetties"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="15584" end="15590" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="15593" end="15600" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q420368" start="15736" end="15749" title="Norfolk Ridge" label="Norfolk Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="15783" end="15792" title="Zealandia (continent)" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746460" start="15848" end="15876" title="Norfolk Island National Park" label="Norfolk Island National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="16037" end="16047" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636644" start="16129" end="16142" title="Nepean Island (Norfolk Island)" label="Nepean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q586302" start="16147" end="16161" title="Phillip Island (Norfolk Island)" label="Phillip Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="16360" end="16372" title="pest control" label="pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740764" start="16524" end="16534" title="Burnt Pine" label="Burnt Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088168" start="16782" end="16798" title="Government House, Norfolk Island" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="17206" end="17231" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="17233" end="17239" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572569" start="17550" end="17601" title="Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia" label="Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="17728" end="17762" title="Norfolk Island subtropical forests" label="Norfolk Island subtropical forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="17857" end="17864" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321440" start="17956" end="17976" title="Rhopalostylis baueri" label="Rhopalostylis baueri"/>
<link wikidata="Q17188525" start="18016" end="18031" title="Cyathea brownii" label="Cyathea brownii"/>
<link wikidata="Q161070" start="18290" end="18312" title="Araucaria heterophylla" label="Araucaria heterophylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="18367" end="18371" title="Palmaceae" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282035" start="18409" end="18418" title="tree fern" label="tree fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q738235" start="18458" end="18470" title="Cyathea australis" label="C. australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422666" start="18509" end="18519" title="understory" label="understory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="18535" end="18540" title="liana" label="liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q746460" start="18652" end="18680" title="Norfolk Island National Park" label="Norfolk Island National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="18734" end="18751" title="Introduced species" label="introduced plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="18828" end="18844" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="19440" end="19447" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="19523" end="19534" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="19535" end="19545" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="19680" end="19683" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25234" start="19762" end="19778" title="common blackbird" label="common blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q53731" start="19784" end="19799" title="crimson rosella" label="crimson rosella"/>
<link wikidata="Q379051" start="19965" end="19977" title="Norfolk kākā" label="Norfolk kākā"/>
<link wikidata="Q675077" start="19979" end="19993" title="Norfolk pigeon" label="Norfolk pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107780" start="19999" end="20014" title="Norfolk boobook" label="Norfolk boobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q902995" start="20071" end="20090" title="Norfolk ground dove" label="Norfolk ground dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728563" start="20147" end="20155" title="Norfolk starling" label="starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051128" start="20157" end="20164" title="Norfolk triller" label="triller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998997" start="20166" end="20172" title="Norfolk thrush" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107780" start="20177" end="20188" title="Norfolk boobook" label="boobook owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q994409" start="20326" end="20349" title="white-chested white-eye" label="white-chested white-eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066559" start="20377" end="20393" title="Norfolk parakeet" label="Norfolk parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301852" start="20399" end="20415" title="Norfolk gerygone" label="Norfolk gerygone"/>
<link wikidata="Q904888" start="20421" end="20445" title="slender-billed white-eye" label="slender-billed white-eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q948764" start="20476" end="20489" title="Norfolk Island Pacific robin" label="Pacific robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051039" start="20494" end="20509" title="Norfolk golden whistler" label="golden whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q868199" start="20560" end="20572" title="Coenocorypha" label="Coenocorypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636644" start="20760" end="20773" title="Nepean Island" label="Nepean Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268746" start="20813" end="20830" title="providence petrel" label="providence petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q586302" start="20944" end="20958" title="Phillip Island (Norfolk Island)" label="Phillip Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q574859" start="21002" end="21021" title="white-necked petrel" label="white-necked petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259828" start="21023" end="21038" title="Kermadec petrel" label="Kermadec petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074601" start="21040" end="21063" title="wedge-tailed shearwater" label="wedge-tailed shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q782094" start="21065" end="21084" title="Australasian gannet" label="Australasian gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q756640" start="21086" end="21107" title="red-tailed tropicbird" label="red-tailed tropicbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q62575749" start="21112" end="21124" title="grey ternlet" label="grey ternlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28482" start="21130" end="21140" title="sooty tern" label="sooty tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="21328" end="21350" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="21357" end="21376" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q136051" start="21808" end="21832" title="Gould&amp;#x27;s wattled bat" label="Gould&amp;#x27;s wattled bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061545" start="21933" end="21952" title="Norfolk swallowtail" label="Norfolk swallowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655787" start="22050" end="22065" title="Loyalty Islands" label="Loyalty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="22068" end="22076" title="Cetacean" label="Cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="22267" end="22281" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="22283" end="22294" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185097" start="22296" end="22305" title="sei whale" label="sei whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="22406" end="22426" title="Southern right whale" label="Southern right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="22670" end="22686" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q80378" start="22689" end="22700" title="Whale shark" label="Whale shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066559" start="22799" end="22815" title="Norfolk parakeet" label="Norfolk parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q379051" start="22863" end="22875" title="Norfolk kākā" label="Norfolk kākā"/>
<link wikidata="Q114715" start="22917" end="22930" title="Brown goshawk" label="Brown goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q675077" start="22978" end="22992" title="Norfolk pigeon" label="Norfolk pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q902995" start="23076" end="23095" title="Norfolk ground dove" label="Norfolk ground dove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23146" end="23159" title="Norfolk snipe" label="Norfolk snipe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23215" end="23227" title="Norfolk rail" label="Norfolk rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q948764" start="23282" end="23295" title="Norfolk robin" label="Norfolk robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051039" start="23343" end="23366" title="Norfolk golden whistler" label="Norfolk golden whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051128" start="23462" end="23477" title="Norfolk triller" label="Norfolk triller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998997" start="23573" end="23594" title="Norfolk Island thrush" label="Norfolk Island thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3728563" start="23692" end="23715" title="Norfolk Island starling" label="Norfolk Island starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107780" start="23808" end="23823" title="Norfolk boobook" label="Norfolk boobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q994409" start="23964" end="23987" title="White-chested white-eye" label="White-chested white-eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q904888" start="24066" end="24090" title="Slender-billed white-eye" label="Slender-billed white-eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301852" start="24146" end="24162" title="Norfolk gerygone" label="Norfolk gerygone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24212" end="24232" title="Norfolk grey fantail" label="Norfolk grey fantail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24321" end="24335" title="Norfolk petrel" label="Norfolk petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580316" start="24848" end="24856" title="European Australians" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="24900" end="24908" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="24944" end="24972" title="Mutiny on the Bounty" label="&amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot; mutineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="25095" end="25110" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="25680" end="25691" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="25699" end="25703" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="25710" end="25721" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="25728" end="25742" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540853" start="25867" end="25882" title="George Hunn Nobbs" label="Rev G. H. Nobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25894" end="25903" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="25945" end="25966" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="26091" end="26108" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811227" start="26151" end="26169" title="Melanesian Mission" label="Melanesian Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="26453" end="26474" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425524" start="26616" end="26627" title="Charismatic Christianity" label="charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="26704" end="26712" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q523620" start="26747" end="26761" title="Uniting Church in Australia" label="Uniting Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763520" start="27297" end="27344" title="Anglican Diocese of Sydney" label="Diocese of Sydney, Anglican Church of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q336320" start="27415" end="27431" title="Philip Howard, 13th Earl of Arundel" label="St Philip Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q783057" start="27443" end="27464" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney" label="Archdiocese of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="27495" end="27505" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="27515" end="27523" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q523620" start="27532" end="27559" title="Uniting Church in Australia" label="Uniting Church in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="27567" end="27588" title="Seventh-Day Adventist" label="Seventh-Day Adventist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27596" end="27610" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="27902" end="27917" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33797" start="27927" end="27933" title="Norfuk language" label="Norfuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="27971" end="27979" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36554" start="27990" end="27997" title="Pitkern language" label="Pitkern"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="29188" end="29200" title="Pre-primary" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="29238" end="29249" title="contractual" label="contractual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="29279" end="29306" title="Memorandum of Understanding" label="Memorandum of Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260271" start="29332" end="29355" title="Department of Education (New South Wales)" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260277" start="29556" end="29596" title="Department of Education (Queensland)" label="The Department of Education (Queensland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309420" start="30074" end="30106" title="registered training organisation" label="registered training organisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30165" end="30198" title="Registered training organisation#Vocational Education and Training (VET) Quality Framework" label="Vocational Education and Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q866636" start="30468" end="30472" title="hula" label="hula"/>
<link wikidata="Q228801" start="31238" end="31256" title="Colleen McCullough" label="Colleen McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q606465" start="31284" end="31299" title="The Thorn Birds" label="The Thorn Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q685165" start="31320" end="31335" title="Masters of Rome" label="Masters of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472791" start="31366" end="31383" title="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Run" label="Morgan&amp;#x27;s Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116934" start="31430" end="31439" title="Ruth Park" label="Ruth Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738930" start="31465" end="31486" title="The Harp in the South" label="The Harp in the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q233362" start="31643" end="31654" title="Helen Reddy" label="Helen Reddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361653" start="31738" end="31755" title="James A. Michener" label="James A. Michener"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="31775" end="31793" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679410" start="31867" end="31893" title="Tales of the South Pacific" label="Tales of the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="32009" end="32021" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321582" start="32101" end="32122" title="Norfolk Island Museum" label="Norfolk Island Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q117324483" start="32127" end="32140" title="Bounty Museum" label="Bounty Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580915" start="32179" end="32224" title="Kingston and Arthur&amp;#x27;s Vale Historic Area" label="Kingston and Arthur&amp;#x27;s Vale Historic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q391496" start="32267" end="32291" title="Australian Convict Sites" label="Australian Convict Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="32369" end="32385" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="32473" end="32488" title="British cuisine" label="British cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32493" end="32509" title="Tahitian cuisine" label="Tahitian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="32797" end="32817" title="States and territories of Australia" label="Australian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051054" start="32857" end="32880" title="Norfolk Island Act 1979" label="Norfolk Island Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="32902" end="32925" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="33076" end="33097" title="Government of Australia" label="Australian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q952413" start="33143" end="33156" title="List of administrative heads of Norfolk Island" label="Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051064" start="33204" end="33224" title="Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="33658" end="33677" title="first past the post" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419809" start="33739" end="33756" title="Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15258788" start="33877" end="33888" title="Lisle Snell" label="Lisle Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="34191" end="34213" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q56041098" start="34373" end="34389" title="Division of Bean" label="Division of Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="34787" end="34800" title="Local government in Australia" label="local council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="35502" end="35517" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q124434593" start="35943" end="35953" title="2015 Norfolk Island status referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="36753" end="36774" title="Australian Parliament" label="Australian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="36901" end="36908" title="council" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30963" start="37164" end="37172" title="Kingston, Norfolk Island" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740764" start="37275" end="37285" title="Burnt Pine" label="Burnt Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950055" start="37324" end="37334" title="Bounty Day" label="Bounty Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="37615" end="37623" title="Suffrage" label="Suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q235445" start="37878" end="37882" title="Flag of Norfolk Island" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625401" start="38025" end="38056" title="Norfolk Island Regional Council" label="Norfolk Island Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="38142" end="38181" title="local government in Australia" label="local governments in mainland Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="38269" end="38294" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="Colony of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="38370" end="38392" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39488" end="39506" title="Constitutional history of Australia#Towards federation" label="towards federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39521" end="39551" title="Constitutional Convention (Australia)#1891 convention" label="1891 constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="41399" end="41409" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644961" start="41425" end="41456" title="Supreme Court of Norfolk Island" label="Supreme Court of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="44170" end="44200" title="non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="44355" end="44369" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033418" start="44800" end="44818" title="Geoffrey Robertson" label="Geoffrey Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q480092" start="44978" end="44994" title="Andrew Rosindell" label="Andrew Rosindell"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="45059" end="45085" title="British Overseas Territory" label="British Overseas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15258788" start="45135" end="45146" title="Lisle Snell" label="Lisle Snell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46388" end="46396" title="Australian migration zone#Bringing Norfolk Island within the zone" label="replaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825054" start="46566" end="46591" title="Australian Migration Zone" label="Australian Migration Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824094" start="47065" end="47085" title="Document of Identity (Australia)" label="Document of Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825062" start="47652" end="47678" title="Australian nationality law" label="Australian nationality law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47701" end="47724" title="Norfolk Island Hospital" label="Norfolk Island Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590113" start="47842" end="47850" title="Medicare (Australia)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180724" start="47859" end="47889" title="Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme" label="Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q655177" start="48282" end="48300" title="medical evacuation" label="medical evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="48323" end="48349" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593638" start="48505" end="48532" title="St John Ambulance Australia" label="St John Ambulance Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="48893" end="48917" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="49139" end="49160" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000879" start="49165" end="49188" title="Australian Border Force" label="Australian Border Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q131198" start="49339" end="49372" title="Heard Island and McDonald Islands" label="Heard Island and McDonald Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31063" start="49374" end="49390" title="Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="49396" end="49419" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46650" start="49421" end="49437" title="Macquarie Island" label="Macquarie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="49443" end="49459" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="49664" end="49681" title="military exercise" label="military exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q781401" start="49920" end="49945" title="Australian Federal Police" label="Australian Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="49990" end="49998" title="sergeant" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q165654" start="50007" end="50016" title="constable" label="constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051056" start="50139" end="50177" title="Norfolk Island Court of Petty Sessions" label="Norfolk Island Court of Petty Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303082" start="50201" end="50218" title="Australian court hierarchy" label="Magistrates Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="50365" end="50393" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="50407" end="50428" title="Justice of the Peace" label="Justices of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644961" start="50494" end="50525" title="Supreme Court of Norfolk Island" label="Supreme Court of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400030" start="50782" end="50808" title="Federal Court of Australia" label="Federal Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="50861" end="50874" title="circuit court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="51229" end="51260" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876322" start="51337" end="51366" title="Norfolk Island Postal Service" label="Norfolk Island Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142936" start="51603" end="51617" title="Australia Post" label="Australia Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902188" start="51992" end="52010" title="Two Chimneys Wines" label="Two Chimneys Wines"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="52052" end="52075" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057844" start="52736" end="52777" title="Australian Fisheries Management Authority" label="Australian Fisheries Management Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="53951" end="53960" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="54005" end="54015" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="54082" end="54093" title="import duty" label="import duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583595" start="54121" end="54143" title="Goods and services tax (Australia)" label="goods and services tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="54753" end="54786" title="communications satellite" label="Satellite communications services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280939" start="54849" end="54862" title="Radio Norfolk 89.9FM" label="Radio Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q353659" start="54968" end="54976" title="callsign" label="callsign"/>
<link wikidata="Q117324483" start="55034" end="55052" title="Bounty Folk Museum" label="Bounty Folk Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650184" start="55101" end="55116" title="ABC Local Radio" label="ABC Local Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650266" start="55154" end="55172" title="ABC Western Plains" label="ABC Western Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q706105" start="55221" end="55226" title="Dubbo" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="55371" end="55374" title="ABC (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668212" start="55376" end="55379" title="SBS (Australian TV channel)" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="55381" end="55385" title="Nine Network" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006082" start="55395" end="55413" title="Imparja Television" label="Imparja Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="55419" end="55424" title="Seven Network" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="55439" end="55451" title="country code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="55452" end="55468" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="55470" end="55475" title="ccTLD" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q48308" start="55480" end="55483" title=".nf" label=".nf"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="55493" end="55496" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="55838" end="55845" title="Jetty" label="jetties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814671" start="55963" end="55984" title="Lightering" label="emptied by whaleboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732089" start="57112" end="57134" title="Norfolk Island Airport" label="Norfolk Island Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="57170" end="57176" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="57181" end="57189" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407001" start="57195" end="57207" title="Air Chathams" label="Air Chathams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051055" start="57244" end="57267" title="Norfolk Island Airlines" label="Norfolk Island Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q868965" start="57520" end="57531" title="Convair 580" label="Convair 580"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="57663" end="57671" title="Saab 340" label="Saab 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544088" start="57931" end="57949" title="Norfolk Island at the Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="57990" end="58000" title="lawn bowls" label="lawn bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="58037" end="58050" title="Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11328791" start="58055" end="58073" title="Pacific Mini Games" label="Pacific Mini Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051061" start="58105" end="58117" title="Norfolk Island national rugby league team" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273935" start="58119" end="58126" title="Norfolk Island national cricket team" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q48838934" start="58131" end="58138" title="Norfolk Island national netball team" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="58164" end="58179" title="World Athletics" label="World Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="58200" end="58230" title="Bibliography of Norfolk Island" label="Bibliography of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510366" start="58233" end="58261" title="List of islands of Australia" label="List of islands of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782299" start="58264" end="58294" title="List of volcanoes in Australia" label="List of volcanoes in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821683" start="58297" end="58322" title="Outline of Norfolk Island" label="Outline of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757616" start="58377" end="58390" title="Andrew Kippis" label="Andrew Kippis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890752" start="59078" end="59092" title="Manning Clark" label="Clark, Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="59143" end="59152" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811908" start="59154" end="59180" title="Melbourne University Press" label="Melbourne University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481362" start="59202" end="59216" title="Marcus Clarke" label="Clarke, Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759501" start="59274" end="59291" title="Margaret Hazzard" label="Hazzard, Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811222" start="59608" end="59622" title="Robert Studley Forrest Hughes" label="Hughes, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733527" start="59630" end="59645" title="The Fatal Shore" label="The Fatal Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307886" start="59678" end="59688" title="Reg Wright" label="Wright, R."/>
<link wikidata="Q6759501" start="59971" end="59988" title="Margaret Hazzard" label="Hazzard, Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="60422" end="60440" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="60448" end="60475" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="60937" end="60964" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096919" start="61000" end="61037" title="Colonial Secretary of New South Wales" label="Colonial Secretary of New South Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21423" wikidata="Q5865693" url="?curid=21423" title="History of Norfolk Island">
<text>The history of Norfolk Island dates back to the fourteenth or fifteenth century when it was settled by Polynesian seafarers.

==Early history==
Norfolk Island was first settled by East Polynesian seafarers either from the Kermadec Islands north of New Zealand or from the North Island of New Zealand. They arrived in the fourteenth or fifteenth century, and survived for several generations before disappearing. Their main village site has been excavated at Emily Bay, and they also left behind stone tools, the Polynesian rat, and banana trees as evidence of their sojourn. The &quot;harakeke&quot; (&quot;Phormium tenax&quot;), or New Zealand flax plant, was brought to Norfolk Island either from New Zealand directly or from Raoul Island (Sunday Island) by these Polynesian settlers. The flax is no relation of European flax but is related to the daylily and other genera within the sub-family &quot;Hemerocallidaceae&quot;. The final fate of the early settlers remains a mystery.

The first European known to have sighted the island was Captain James Cook, in 1774, on his second voyage to the South Pacific on HMS &quot;Resolution&quot;. He named it after the Duchess of Norfolk (c. 1712 – 1773). The Duchess was dead at the time of the island&#x27;s sighting by Cook, but Cook had set out from England in 1772 and could not have known of her May 1773 death.

Cook went ashore on Tuesday 11 October 1774, and is said to have been impressed with the tall straight trees and New Zealand flax plants, which, although not related to the Northern Hemisphere flax plants after which they are named, produce fibres of economic importance. He took samples back to Britain and reported on their potential uses for the Royal Navy.

Andrew Kippis as the biographer of this voyage puts it as follows:
The cabbage palm referred to is a cabbage tree species Cordyline obtecta, also found in New Zealand, the edible heart of which resembles a small cabbage. At the time, Britain was heavily dependent on flax (&quot;Linum usitatissimum&quot;) (for sails) and hemp (&quot;Cannabis&quot; sp.) (for ropes) from the shores of the Baltic Sea ports. Any threat to their supply endangered Britain&#x27;s sea power. The UK also relied on timbers from New England for mainmasts, and these were not supplied after the American War of Independence. The alternative source of Norfolk Island for these, (or in the case of flax and hemp, similar) supplies is argued by some historians, notably Geoffrey Blainey in &quot;Tyranny of Distance&quot;, as being a major reason for the founding of the convict settlement of New South Wales by the First Fleet in 1788. 

James Cook said that,
Sir John Call, Member of Parliament, member of the Royal Society, and former chief engineer of the East India Company, stated the advantages of Norfolk Island in a proposal for colonisation he put to the Home Office in August 1784:
George Forster, who had been on Cook&#x27;s second voyage to the Pacific and had been with him when he landed on Norfolk Island, was at the time professor of natural history at the University of Vilna (or Vilnius) in Polish Lithuania: Forster discussed the proposed Botany Bay colony in an article written in November 1786, &quot;Neuholland, und die brittische Colonie in Botany Bay&quot;. Though unaware of the British intention to settle Norfolk Island, which was not announced until 5 December 1786, Forster referred to &quot;the nearness of New Zealand; the excellent flax plant (&quot;Phormium&quot;) that grows so abundantly there; its incomparable shipbuilding timber&quot;, as among the advantages of the new colony.

The proposal written by James Matra under the supervision of Sir Joseph Banks for establishing a settlement in New South Wales, stated that Botany Bay was: “no further than a fortnight from New Zealand, which is covered with timber even to the water&#x27;s edge. The trees are so big and tall that a single tree is enough to make a mast of a first rate man of war. New Zealand produces in addition flax, which is an object equally of utility and curiosity. Any quantity of it might be raised in the colony, as this plant grows naturally in New Zealand. It can be made to serve the various purposes of cotton, hemp and linen, and is easier manufactured than any of them. In naval affairs, it could not fail of being of the utmost consequence; a cable of being supposed to be of equal strength and durability to one of European hemp of eighteen inches.

In 1786 the British government included Norfolk Island as an auxiliary settlement, as proposed by John Call, in its plan for colonisation of New South Wales. The flax and ship timber of New Zealand were attractive, but these prospective advantages were balanced by the obvious impossibility of forming a settlement there in the face of undoubted opposition from the native Maori. There was no native population to oppose a settlement on Norfolk Island, which also possessed those desirable natural resources, but the island was too small of itself to sustain a colony. Hence the ultimate decision for a dual colonisation along the lines proposed by Call.

The decision to settle Norfolk Island was taken under the impetus of the shock Britain had just received from Empress Catherine II of Russia. Practically all the hemp and flax required by the Royal Navy for cordage and sailcloth was imported from the Russian dominions through the ports of St. Petersburg (Kronstadt) and Riga. Comptroller of the Navy Sir Charles Middleton explained to Prime Minister Pitt in a letter of 5 September 1786: &quot;It is for Hemp only we are dependent on Russia. Masts can be procured from Nova Scotia, and Iron in plenty from the Ores of this Country; but as it is impracticable to carry on a Naval War without Hemp, it is materially necessary to promote the growth of it in this Country and Ireland&quot;. In the summer of 1786, the Empress Catherine, in the context of tense negotiations on a renewed treaty of commerce, had emphasised her control over this vital commodity by asking the merchants who supplied it to restrict sales to English buyers: “the Empress has contrary to Custom speculated on this Commodity”, complained the author of a subsequent memorandum to the Home Secretary. &quot;It is unnecessary&quot;, said the memorandum, &quot;to remark the Consequences which might result from a prohibition of supply from that Quarter altogether&quot;. This implicit threat to the viability of the Royal Navy became apparent in mid-September (a month after the decision had been taken to settle Botany Bay) and caused the Pitt Administration to begin an urgent search for new sources of supply, including from Norfolk Island, which was then added to the plan to colonise New South Wales.

The need for an alternative non-Russian source of naval stores is indicated by the information from the British Ambassador in Copenhagen, Hugh Elliott, who wrote to Foreign Secretary, Lord Carmarthen on 12 August 1788:
On 6 December 1786, an Order in Council was issued, designating &quot;the Eastern Coast of New South Wales, or some one or other of the Islands adjacent&quot; as the destination for transported convicts, as required by the Transportation, etc. Act 1784 (24 Geo. 3. Sess. 2. c. 56) that authorised the sending of convicted felons to any place appointed by the King in Council. Norfolk Island was thereby brought officially within the bounds of the projected colony.

An article in &quot;The Daily Universal Register&quot; (the forerunner of &quot;The Times&quot;) of 23 December 1786 revealed the plan for a dual colonisation of Norfolk Island and Botany Bay:
The advantage of Britain&#x27;s new colony in providing a non-Russian source of flax and hemp for naval supplies was referred to in an article in &quot;Lloyd’s Evening Post&quot; of 5 October 1787 which urged: &quot;It is undoubtedly the interest of Great-Britain to remain neutral in the present contest between the Russians and the Turks&quot; and observed, &quot;Should England cease to render her services to the Empress of Russia, in a war against the Turks, there can be little of nothing to fear from her ill-will. England will speedily be enabled to draw from her colony of New South Wales, the staple of Russia, hemp and flax.&quot;

==First penal settlement==

Governor Arthur Phillip&#x27;s instructions given to him in April 1787 included an injunction to send a party to secure Norfolk Island &quot;as soon as Circumstances may admit of it…. to prevent its being occupied by the Subjects of any other European Power&quot;. This could only have been a reference to the expedition then in the Pacific commanded by Jean-François de Galaup, comte de La Pérouse. &quot;The Daily Universal Register&quot; of 11 November 1786 had stated: &quot;the Botany Bay scheme is laid aside, as there is a strong presumption that a squadron from Brest are now, or soon will be, in possession of the very spot we meant to occupy in New Holland&quot;. This may have been a reference to a report from the British Ambassador in Paris, who had believed that when La Pérouse&#x27;s expedition set out from Brest in August 1785 it had as one of its objectives the establishment of a settlement in New Zealand to forestall the British.

La Pérouse did attempt to visit Norfolk Island, but only to investigate, not to take possession. He had instructions to investigate any colonies the British may have established and learned of the intention to settle Botany Bay and Norfolk Island from despatches sent to him from Paris through St. Petersburg and by land across Siberia to Petropavlovsk in Kamchatka, where he received them on 26 September 1787, just four days before his departure from that port. His ships, the &quot;Boussole&quot; and &quot;Astrolabe&quot;, anchored off the northern side of the island on 13 January 1788, but at the time high seas were running that made it too dangerous for the two ships’ boats that were put out to attempt a landing: “It was obvious that I would have had to wait maybe for a very long time for a moment suitable for a landing and a visit to this island was not worth this sacrifice”, he recorded in his journal. Having noted that the island was still uninhabited, he was presumably the less inclined to risk a landing when there was no British settlement there to report on.

When the First Fleet arrived at Port Jackson in January 1788, Phillip ordered Lieutenant Philip Gidley King to lead a party of 15 convicts and seven free men, including surgeon Thomas Jamison (the future Principal Surgeon of New South Wales), to take control of the island and prepare for its commercial development. They arrived on 6 March 1788.

During the first year of the settlement, which was also called &quot;Sydney&quot; like its parent, more convicts and soldiers were sent to the island from New South Wales. A second village was started at Ball Bay, named after the captain of &quot;HMS Supply&quot;, Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball. On 8 January 1789, the first child was born, Norfolk King, the son of Philip Gidley King and a convict, Ann Inett. (Norfolk King went on to become the first British Naval officer born in Australia, and was a Lieutenant, commanding the schooner &quot;Ballahoo&quot; when an American privateer captured her.)

A &quot;Letter from an Officer of Marines at New South Wales, 16 November 1788&quot;, published in the London newspaper, &quot;The World,&quot; 15 May 1789, reported the glowing description of the island and its prospects by Philip Gidley King, but also drew attention to the fatal defect of the lack of a safe port: “The said Island lies near Port Jackson, and is nearly as large as the Isle of Wight. Lieutenant King, who was sent with a detachment of marines and some convicts, to settle there, gives the most flattering portrayal of it. The island is fully wooded. Its timber is in the opinion of everyone the most beautiful and finest in the world...they are most suitable for masts, yards, spars and such. The New Zealand flax-plant grows there in abundance. European grains and seeds also thrive wonderfully well on Norfolk Island. It only lacks a good port and suitable landing places, without which the island is of no use, but with them it would be of the greatest importance for Great Britain. How far these deficiencies can be improved by art and the hand of man, time must decide.”

An idealised vision of the new British settlement was given in the novel by Therese Forster, &quot;Abentheuer auf einer Reise nach Neu-Holland [Adventures on a Voyage to New Holland],&quot; published in the German women&#x27;s magazine, &quot;Flora&quot; for 1793 and 1794:
We went towards the centre of this small island where at the foot of a round hill a crystal-clear river rushes forth, dividing up further on into several arms. Towards North and West the hill is covered with the most beautiful ploughed fields all the way down to the sea. The sight of these great flax fields is one of the loveliest I ever beheld. The slender stalks, of the most beautiful green and reaching far above a man&#x27;s head, bent in the gentle breeze that blew from the sea. Their red blossoms, shining like rubies, danced in the green waves. The top of the hill and the whole of the south and east sides are covered with enormous pines whose dark green is enhanced by a pleasant foreground of cabbage palms and banana trees, and I also observed a low bush among them the fruit of which resembles our red currants but is much larger and hangs in purple and red clusters that help to give the whole a gay appearance. The dwellings of the colonists are strewn along the fringes of the forest and from my post I could see several of them. Simple houses surrounded by barns and stalls and the fields all enclosed with hedges give the region a youthful appearance the like of which is rarely found in Europe. And plants here bloom more luxuriantly and more perfectly with a natural vigour that knows no exhaustion and fears no poverty, a vigour that has disappeared from our continent.
More convicts were sent, and the island was seen as a farm, supplying Sydney with grain and vegetables during its early years of near-starvation. However, crops often failed due to the salty wind, rats, and caterpillars. The lack of a natural safe harbour hindered communication and the transport of supplies and produce.

Manning Clark observed that &quot;at first the convicts behaved well, but as more arrived from Sydney Cove, they renewed their wicked practices&quot;. These included an attempted overthrow of King in January 1789 by convicts described by Margaret Hazzard as &quot;incorrigible rogues who took his &#x27;goodwill&#x27; for weakness&quot;. While some convicts responded well to the opportunities offered to become respectable, most remained &quot;idle and miserable wretches&quot; according to Clark, despite the climate and their isolation from previous haunts of crime.

The impending starvation at Sydney led to a great transplantation of convicts and marines to Norfolk Island in March 1790 on HMS &quot;Sirius&quot;. This attempt to relieve the pressure on Sydney turned to disaster when &quot;Sirius&quot; was wrecked and, although there was no loss of life, some stores were destroyed, and the ship&#x27;s crew was marooned for ten months. This news was met in Sydney with &quot;unspeakable consternation&quot;. Norfolk Island was now further cut off from Sydney which, with the arrival of the Second Fleet with its cargo of sick and abused convicts, had more pressing problems with which to contend.

In spite of this the settlement grew slowly as more convicts were sent from Sydney. Many convicts chose to remain as settlers on the expiry of their sentence, and the population grew to over 1,000 by 1792. Norfolk Island in 1793 was described by Josef Espinosa y Tello, an officer of the Spanish expedition led by Alessandro Malaspina that visited New South Wales. 

The colony of Norfolk, settled shortly after that at Port Jackson, merits little attention both because of the small size of that island and because of the hilly nature of its terrain, and the particular circumstance of its lacking entirely an anchorage or a place where longboats can be drawn up with any security. Despite this, some 1,500 persons live there, and its fertile soil produces copiously all kinds of grains, although the difficulty of clearing the ground covered with trees and undergrowth retards the large harvests which the fertility of the land would yield without that obstacle. The pines are of a prodigious height, straight, thick and of the finest grain, and several have been felled of above 7 feet in diameter at the foot, six at 17 and five at 37 yards, having 147 feet of height in total and 120 to the first branches. The flax brought there from New Zealand bears a good aspect, but no great hopes are rested on its cultivation, and it seems that the second trials of this plant made in London have not achieved the happy outcome of the first.

Lieutenant governors of the first settlement:
* 6 March 1788 – 24 March 1790: Lieutenant Philip Gidley King (1758–1808)
* 24 March 1790 – Nov 1791: Major Robert Ross (c.1740–1794)
* 4 November 1791 – Oct 1796: Lieutenant Philip Gidley King
* October 1796 – Nov 1799: Captain John Townson (1760–1835)
* November 1799 – Jul 1800: Captain Thomas Rowley (c.1748–1806)
* 26 June 1800 – 9 September 1804: Major Joseph Foveaux (1765–1846)
* 9 September 1804 – January 1810: Lieutenant John Piper (1773–1851)
* January 1810–15 February 1813: Lieutenant Thomas Crane (caretaker)
* 15 February 1813 – 15 February 1814: Superintendent William Hutchinson

Norfolk Island was governed by a succession of short-term commandants for the next 11 years, starting with King&#x27;s replacement, Robert Ross, from 1789 to 1790. When Joseph Foveaux arrived as Lieutenant Governor in 1800, he found the settlement quite run down, little maintenance having been carried out in the previous four years, and he set about building it up, particularly through public works and attempts to improve education.

As early as 1794, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales Francis Grose suggested its closure as a penal settlement as it was too remote and difficult for shipping, and too costly to maintain. By 1803, the Secretary of State, Lord Hobart, called for the removal of part of the Norfolk Island military establishment, settlers and convicts to Van Diemen&#x27;s Land, due to its great expense and the difficulties of communication between Norfolk Island and Sydney. This was achieved more slowly than anticipated, due to reluctance of settlers to uproot themselves from the land they had struggled to tame, and compensation claims for loss of stock. It was also delayed by King&#x27;s insistence on its value for providing refreshment to the whalers. The first group of 159 left in February 1805 and comprised mainly convicts and their families and military personnel, only four settlers departing. Between November 1807 and September 1808, five groups of 554 people departed. Only about 200 remained, forming a small settlement until the remnants were removed in 1813. A small party remained to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings so that there would be no inducement for anyone, especially from another European power, to visit that place.

From 15 February 1814 to 6 June 1825 the island lay abandoned.

==Second penal settlement==

Commandants of the second settlement:
* 6 June 1825 – March 1826: Captain Richard Turton
* March 1826 – August 1827: Captain Vance Young Donaldson (1791–?)
* August 1827 – November 1828: Captain Thomas Edward Wright
* November 1828 – February 1829: Captain Robert Hunt
* February 1829–29 June 1829: Captain Joseph Wakefield
* 29 June 1829 – 1834: Lieutenant-Colonel James Thomas Morisset (1782–1852)
* 1834: Captain Foster Fyans (1790–1870) (Acting)
* 1834 – April 1839: Major Joseph Anderson (1790–1877)
* April–July 1839: Major Thomas Bunbury (1791–1862)
* July 1839 – March 1840: Major Thomas Ryan (b. c. 1790) (Acting)
* 17 March 1840 – 1844: Captain Alexander Maconochie (1787–1860)
* 8 February 1844 – 5 August 1846: Major Joseph Childs
* 6 August 1846 – 18 January 1853: John Giles Price (1808–1857)
* January 1853 – September 1853: Captain Rupert Deering
* September 1853 – 5 May 1855: Captain H. Day
* 5 May 1855 – 8 June 1856: T.S. Stewart (Caretaker)

In 1824 the British government instructed the Governor of New South Wales Thomas Brisbane to occupy Norfolk Island as a place to send &quot;the worst description of convicts&quot;. Its remoteness, seen previously as a disadvantage, was now viewed as an asset for the detention of the &quot;twice-convicted&quot; men, who had committed further crimes since arriving in New South Wales. Brisbane assured his masters that &quot;the felon who is sent there is forever excluded from all hope of return&quot; He saw Norfolk Island as &quot;the nec plus ultra of Convict degradation&quot;. The convicts detained have long been assumed be a hardcore of recidivists, or &#x27;doubly-convicted capital respites&#x27; – that is, men transported to Australia who committed fresh colonial crimes for which they were sentenced to death, and were spared the gallows on condition of life at Norfolk Island. However, a recent study has demonstrated, utilising a database of 6,458 Norfolk Island convicts, that the reality was somewhat different: more than half were detained at Norfolk Island without ever receiving a colonial conviction, and only 15% had been reprieved from a death sentence. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of convicts sent to Norfolk Island had committed non-violent property sentences, the average length of detention was three years, and the scale of punishments inflicted upon the prisoners was significantly less than assumed.

His successor, Governor Ralph Darling, was even more severe than Brisbane, wishing that &quot;every man should be worked in irons that the example may deter others from the commission of crime&quot; and &quot;to hold out [Norfolk Island] as a place of the extremest punishment short of death&quot;. Governor Arthur, in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land, likewise believed that &quot;when prisoners are sent to Norfolk Island, they should on no account be permitted to return. Transportation thither should be considered as the ultimate limit and a punishment short only of death&quot;. Reformation of the convicts was not seen as an objective of the Norfolk Island penal settlement.

The evidence that has passed down through the years points to the creation of a &quot;Hell in Paradise&quot;. A widespread and popular notion of the harshness of penal settlements, including Norfolk Island, has come from the novel &quot;For the Term of his Natural Life&quot; by Marcus Clarke, which appears to be based on the writings and recollections of witnesses. However, though Clarke did carry out primary research, he selected the most sensational examples possible.

Following a convict mutiny in 1834, Father William Ullathorne, vicar general of Sydney, visited Norfolk Island to comfort the mutineers due for execution. He found it &quot;the most heartrending scene that I ever witnessed&quot;. Having the duty of informing the prisoners as to who was reprieved and who was to die, he was shocked to record as &quot;a literal fact that each man who heard his reprieve wept bitterly, and that each man who heard of his condemnation to death went down on his knees with dry eyes, and thanked God.&quot;

The 1846 report of magistrate Robert Pringle Stuart exposed the scarcity and poor quality of food, inadequacy of housing, horrors of torture and incessant flogging, insubordination of convicts, and corruption of overseers.

Bishop Robert Willson visited Norfolk Island from Van Diemen&#x27;s Land on three occasions. Following his first visit in 1846 he reported to the House of Lords who, for the first time, came to realise the enormity of atrocities perpetrated under the British flag and attempted to remedy the evils. Willson returned in 1849 and found that many of the reforms had been implemented. However, rumours of resumed atrocities brought him back in 1852, and this visit resulted in a damning report, listing atrocities and blaming the system, which invested one man at this remote place with absolute power over so many people.

Only a handful of convicts left any written record and their descriptions (as quoted by Hazzard and Hughes) of living and working conditions, food and housing, and, in particular, the punishments given for seemingly trivial offences, are unremittingly horrifying, describing a settlement devoid of all human decency, under the iron rule of the tyrannical autocratic commandants. However, these conclusions have been reached by a reliance on a series of over-used (mainly published) sources, without their having been tested or drawn into question by detailed archival research. Such work is currently being done and has, for example, drawn into question the sensationalised version of Norfolk Island&#x27;s past, such as in demonstrating that the widespread assumption that Norfolk Island convicts engaged in &#x27;murder-suicide pacts&#x27; – that is, drawing lots to select a killer and willing victim to &#x27;escape&#x27; from Norfolk Island – is a myth.

The actions of some of the commandants, such as Morisset and particularly Price appear to be excessively harsh. All but one were military officers, brought up in a system where discipline was severe throughout the period of transportation. In addition, the commandants relied on a large number of military guards, civil overseers, ex-convict constables, and convict informers to provide them with intelligence and carry out their orders.

Of the commandants, only Alexander Maconochie appeared to reach the conclusion that brutality would breed defiance, as demonstrated by the mutinies of 1826, 1834 and 1846, and he attempted to apply his theories of penal reform, providing incentives as well as punishment. His methods were criticised as being too lenient and he was replaced, a move that returned the settlement to its harsh rule. However, recent research has also demonstrated that the level of punishment under Maconochie&#x27;s regime was much higher than assumed, as the average number of lashes per flogging – 93 – was higher under Maconochie than at any other time during the second penal settlement&#x27;s history.

The second penal settlement began to be wound down by the British government after 1847 and the last convicts were removed to Tasmania in May 1855. It was abandoned because transportation to Van Diemen&#x27;s Land had ceased in 1853 and was replaced by penal servitude in the United Kingdom.

==Settlement by Pitcairn Islanders==
On 8 June 1856, the next settlement began on Norfolk Island. These were the descendants of Tahitians and the HMS &quot;Bounty&quot; mutineers, resettled from the Pitcairn Islands, which had become too small for their growing population. The British government had permitted the transfer of the Pitcairners to Norfolk, which was thus established as a colony separate from New South Wales but under the administration of that colony&#x27;s governor. They left Pitcairn Islands on 3 May 1856 and arrived with 194 persons on 8 June.

The Pitcairners occupied many of the buildings remaining from the penal settlements, and gradually established their traditional farming and whaling industries on the island. Although some families decided to return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863, the island&#x27;s population continued to slowly grow as the island accepted settlers, often arriving with whaling fleets.

In 1867, the headquarters of the Melanesian Mission of the Church of England were established on the island, and in 1882 the church of St. Barnabas was erected to the memory of the mission&#x27;s head Bishop John Coleridge Patteson, with windows designed by Edward Burne-Jones and executed by William Morris. In 1920 the mission was relocated from the island to the Solomon Islands to be closer to its target population.

==Twentieth century==

After the creation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901, Norfolk Island was placed under the authority of the new Commonwealth government to be administered as an external territory.

During World War II, the island became a key airbase and refuelling depot between Australia and New Zealand, and New Zealand and the Solomon Islands. Since Norfolk Island fell within New Zealand&#x27;s area of responsibility it was garrisoned by a New Zealand Army unit known as N Force at a large army camp which had the capacity to house a 1,500 strong force. N Force relieved a company of the Second Australian Imperial Force. The island proved too remote to come under attack during the war and N Force left the island in February 1944.

In the late 1960s a mini-invasion by British ex-pats followed after the island was featured on a BBC television documentary presented by Alan Whicker. Fifty families decided to emigrate from the United Kingdom to Norfolk Island as a result of the programme.

In 1979, Norfolk was granted limited self-government by Australia, under which the island elects a government that runs most of the island&#x27;s affairs. As such, residents of Norfolk Island are not represented in the Commonwealth Parliament of Australia, making them the only group of residents of an Australian state or territory not represented there.

In 2006, a formal review process took place, in which the Australian government considered revising this model of government. The review was completed on 20 December 2006, when it was decided that there would be no changes in the governance of Norfolk Island.

Financial problems and a reduction in tourism led to Norfolk Island&#x27;s administration appealing to the Australian federal government for assistance in 2010. In return, the islanders were to pay income tax for the first time but would be eligible for greater welfare benefits. However, by May 2013 agreement had not been reached and islanders were having to leave to find work and welfare. An agreement was finally signed in Canberra on 12 March 2015 to replace self-government with a local council but against the wishes of the Norfolk Island government. A majority of Norfolk Islanders objected to the Australian plan to make changes to Norfolk Island without first consulting them and allowing their say, with 68% of voters against forced changes. An example of growing friction between Norfolk Island and increased Australian rule was featured in a 2019 episode of Discovery Channel&#x27;s annual Shark Week. The episode featured Norfolk Island&#x27;s policy of culling growing cattle populations by killing older cattle and feeding the carcasses to tiger sharks well off the coast. This is done to help prevent tiger sharks from coming further toward shore in search of food. Norfolk Island holds one of the largest populations of tiger sharks in the world. Australia has banned the culling policy as cruelty to animals. Norfolk Islanders fear this will lead to increased shark attacks and damage an already waning tourist industry.

On 4 October 2015, the time zone for Norfolk Island was changed from UTC+11:30 to UTC+11:00.

=== Reduced autonomy 2016 ===

In March 2015, the Australian Government announced comprehensive reforms for Norfolk Island. The action was justified on the grounds it was necessary &quot;to address issues of sustainability which have arisen from the model of self-government requiring Norfolk Island to deliver local, state and federal functions since 1979&quot;. On 17 June 2015, the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly was abolished, with the territory becoming run by an Administrator and an advisory council. Elections for a new Regional Council were held on 28 May 2016, with the new council taking office on 1 July 2016.

From that date, most Australian Commonwealth laws were extended to Norfolk Island. This means that taxation, social security, immigration, customs and health arrangements apply on the same basis as in mainland Australia. Travel between Norfolk Island and mainland Australia became domestic travel on 1 July 2016. For the 2016 Australian federal election, 328 people on Norfolk Island voted in the ACT electorate of Canberra, out of 117,248 total votes. Since 2018, Norfolk Island is covered by the electorate of Bean.

There is opposition to the reforms, led by Norfolk Island People for Democracy Inc., an association appealing to the United Nations to include the island on its list of &quot;non-self-governing territories&quot;. There has also been movement to join New Zealand since the autonomy reforms.

In October 2019, the Norfolk Island People For Democracy advocacy group conducted a survey of 457 island residents (about one quarter of the entire population) and found that 37% preferred free association with New Zealand, 35% preferred free association with Australia, 25% preferred full independence, and 3% preferred full integration with Australia.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="15" end="29" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="103" end="112" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="185" end="194" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="222" end="238" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadec Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="272" end="284" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q339418" start="512" end="526" title="Polynesian rat" label="Polynesian rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="532" end="543" title="banana tree" label="banana tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q607380" start="607" end="621" title="Phormium tenax" label="Phormium tenax"/>
<link wikidata="Q28048" start="728" end="740" title="Raoul Island" label="Raoul Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q156275" start="850" end="857" title="daylily" label="daylily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1041" end="1059" title="Captain James Cook" label="Captain James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898494" start="1115" end="1141" title="HMS Resolution (Cook)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Resolution&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779798" start="1165" end="1183" title="Mary Howard, Duchess of Norfolk (d. 1773)" label="Duchess of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q111310792" start="1478" end="1494" title="New Zealand flax" label="New Zealand flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="1558" end="1562" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1714" end="1724" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757616" start="1727" end="1740" title="Andrew Kippis" label="Andrew Kippis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170116" start="1849" end="1866" title="Cordyline obtecta" label="Cordyline obtecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="2038" end="2042" title="sail" label="sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="2049" end="2053" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="2086" end="2090" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="2116" end="2126" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="2233" end="2244" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2298" end="2326" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q593424" start="2470" end="2486" title="Geoffrey Blainey" label="Geoffrey Blainey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2496" end="2515" title="The Tyranny of Distance: How Distance Shaped Australia&amp;#x27;s History" label="Tyranny of Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="2571" end="2589" title="convict settlement" label="convict settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2593" end="2608" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="2616" end="2627" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527640" start="2661" end="2674" title="Sir John Call, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="2760" end="2778" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q58062" start="2893" end="2907" title="Georg Forster" label="George Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="3074" end="3106" title="Vilnius University" label="University of Vilna (or Vilnius)"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="3159" end="3169" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139085" start="3643" end="3654" title="James Matra" label="James Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3730" end="3745" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="3759" end="3769" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735997" start="3972" end="3982" title="man-of-war" label="man of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="5245" end="5267" title="Catherine II of Russia" label="Catherine II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="5433" end="5442" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="5448" end="5452" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="6997" end="7013" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7197" end="7226" title="Transportation, etc. Act 1784" label="Transportation, etc. Act 1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q122835057" start="7228" end="7246" title="24 Geo. 3. Sess. 2" label="24 Geo. 3. Sess. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="8313" end="8327" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q294478" start="8658" end="8702" title="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de La Pérouse" label="Jean-François de Galaup, comte de La Pérouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="10371" end="10383" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="10428" end="10446" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425018" start="10516" end="10530" title="Thomas Jamison" label="Thomas Jamison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10564" end="10579" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11088" end="11097" title="Ann Inett" label="Ann Inett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631489" start="11228" end="11248" title="HMS Ballahoo (1804)" label="&amp;quot;Ballahoo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="14138" end="14143" title="Cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="14263" end="14274" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890752" start="14379" end="14392" title="Manning Clark" label="Manning Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759501" start="14617" end="14633" title="Margaret Hazzard" label="Margaret Hazzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q744558" start="15075" end="15097" title="HMS Sirius (1786)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Sirius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q745839" start="15478" end="15490" title="Second Fleet (Australia)" label="Second Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q459906" start="15900" end="15920" title="Alessandro Malaspina" label="Alessandro Malaspina"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="17114" end="17132" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349391" start="17179" end="17190" title="Robert Ross (British Marines officer)" label="Robert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261104" start="17300" end="17312" title="John Townson" label="John Townson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793657" start="17361" end="17374" title="Thomas Rowley (soldier)" label="Thomas Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707004" start="17430" end="17444" title="Joseph Foveaux" label="Joseph Foveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252957" start="17503" end="17513" title="John Piper (military officer)" label="John Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788677" start="17570" end="17582" title="Thomas Crane" label="Thomas Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012741" start="17649" end="17667" title="William Hutchinson (Superintendent)" label="William Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707004" start="17838" end="17852" title="Joseph Foveaux" label="Joseph Foveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q333417" start="18332" end="18343" title="Robert Hobart, 4th Earl of Buckinghamshire" label="Lord Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="18447" end="18469" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329586" start="19519" end="19533" title="Richard Turton (Commandant)" label="Richard Turton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914065" start="19570" end="19591" title="Vance Young Donaldson (Commandant)" label="Vance Young Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789281" start="19640" end="19660" title="Thomas Edward Wright (Commandant)" label="Thomas Edward Wright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19702" end="19713" title="Robert Hunt (Commandant)" label="Robert Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287735" start="19752" end="19768" title="Joseph Wakefield (Commandant)" label="Joseph Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144168" start="19811" end="19832" title="James Thomas Morisset (Commandant)" label="James Thomas Morisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473686" start="19861" end="19873" title="Foster Fyans (Commandant)" label="Foster Fyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281042" start="19922" end="19937" title="Joseph Anderson (Commandant)" label="Joseph Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788031" start="19975" end="19989" title="Thomas Bunbury (British Army officer, born 1791)" label="Thomas Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875228" start="20034" end="20045" title="Thomas Ryan (Commandant)" label="Thomas Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275964" start="20100" end="20120" title="Alexander Maconochie (penal reformer)" label="Alexander Maconochie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282106" start="20174" end="20187" title="Joseph Childs (Commandant)" label="Joseph Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235339" start="20223" end="20239" title="John Giles Price (Commandant)" label="John Giles Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380275" start="20293" end="20307" title="Rupert Deering" label="Rupert Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628168" start="20347" end="20353" title="H. Day (Commandant)" label="H. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668682" start="20382" end="20394" title="T.S. Stewart" label="T.S. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q376367" start="20482" end="20497" title="Thomas Brisbane" label="Thomas Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365838" start="21874" end="21887" title="Ralph Darling" label="Ralph Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q826766" start="22158" end="22164" title="Sir George Arthur, 1st Baronet" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387918" start="22760" end="22792" title="For the Term of his Natural Life" label="For the Term of his Natural Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481362" start="22802" end="22815" title="Marcus Clarke" label="Marcus Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005463" start="23042" end="23060" title="William Ullathorne" label="William Ullathorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044528" start="23062" end="23075" title="vicar general" label="vicar general"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23566" end="23587" title="Robert Pringle Stuart" label="Robert Pringle Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351147" start="23767" end="23781" title="Robert Willson (bishop)" label="Robert Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144168" start="25388" end="25396" title="James Thomas Morisset (Commandant)" label="Morisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235339" start="25414" end="25419" title="John Giles Price (Commandant)" label="Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275964" start="25804" end="25824" title="Alexander Maconochie (penal reformer)" label="Alexander Maconochie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166051" start="25930" end="25949" title="Norfolk Island Convict Mutinies" label="1826, 1834 and 1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="26594" end="26602" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="26721" end="26736" title="penal servitude" label="penal servitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q900379" start="26907" end="26929" title="HMS Bounty" label="HMS &amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="26960" end="26976" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="27256" end="27272" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811227" start="27731" end="27749" title="Melanesian Mission" label="Melanesian Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="27757" end="27774" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="27833" end="27845" title="St. Barnabas" label="St. Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037310" start="27906" end="27929" title="John Coleridge Patteson" label="John Coleridge Patteson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="27956" end="27974" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Edward Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="27991" end="28005" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="28064" end="28079" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="28169" end="28194" title="Commonwealth of Australia" label="Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28338" end="28350" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732089" start="28376" end="28383" title="Norfolk Island Airport" label="airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="28464" end="28479" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630039" start="28579" end="28595" title="New Zealand Army" label="New Zealand Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956299" start="28610" end="28617" title="N Force" label="N Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742845" start="28727" end="28759" title="Second Australian Imperial Force" label="Second Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="28918" end="28925" title="ex-pats" label="ex-pats"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="28970" end="28973" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708035" start="29010" end="29022" title="Alan Whicker" label="Alan Whicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="29364" end="29387" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489816" start="30654" end="30664" title="Shark Week" label="Shark Week"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31261" end="31270" title="UTC+11:30" label="UTC+11:30"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31274" end="31283" title="UTC+11:00" label="UTC+11:00"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="32235" end="32267" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="32311" end="32314" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973482" start="32315" end="32337" title="Division of Canberra" label="electorate of Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q56041098" start="32412" end="32430" title="Division of Bean" label="electorate of Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="32608" end="32638" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138279" start="32913" end="32929" title="Associated state" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="33009" end="33026" title="Self-governance" label="full independence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21426" wikidata="Q7225305" url="?curid=21426" title="Politics of Norfolk Island">
<text>Politics of Norfolk Island takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic entity. Norfolk Island is the only non-mainland Australian territory to have achieved self-governance. The Norfolk Island Act 1979, passed by the Parliament of Australia in 1979, is the Act under which the island is governed.

==Executive branch==
The Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly was abolished on 1 July 2015 and replaced with the Australian Government maintaining authority on the island through an Administrator (currently Eric Hutchinson) who is appointed by the Governor-General of Australia. Two of the members of the Assembly would form the Executive Council, which devises policy and acts as an advisory body to the Administrator. This council would be headed by the Administrator of Norfolk Island.

==Relationship with Australia==
Controversy exists as to the exact status of Norfolk Island. Despite the island&#x27;s status as a self-governing territory of Australia, some Islanders claim that it was actually granted independence at the time Queen Victoria granted permission to Pitcairn Islanders to re-settle on the island. These views have been repeatedly rejected by the Australian parliament&#x27;s joint committee on territories, most recently in 2004, and were also rejected by the High Court of Australia in &quot;Berwick Ltd v Gray&quot;.

Disagreements over the island&#x27;s relationship with Australia were put in sharper relief by a 2006 review undertaken by the Australian government. Under the more radical of two proposed models proposed as a result of the review, the island&#x27;s legislative assembly would be reduced to the status of a local council.

In a move that apparently surprised many islanders, the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island David Buffett announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its tax free status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts.

It was announced on 19 March 2015 that self-governance for the island would be revoked by the Commonwealth and replaced by a local council with the state of New South Wales providing services to the island. A reason given was that the island had never gained self-sufficiency and was being heavily subsidised by the Commonwealth, by $12.5 million in 2015 alone. It meant residents would have to start paying Australian income tax, but they would also be covered by Australian welfare schemes such as Medicare.

The Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly decided to hold a referendum on the proposal in 2015. Voters were asked if Norfolk Islanders should freely determine their political status, their economic, social and cultural development, and to &quot;be consulted at referendum or plebiscite on the future model of governance for Norfolk Island before such changes are acted upon by the Australian parliament.&quot; The outcome of the referendum was a 68% &#x27;Yes&#x27; vote. The Norfolk Island Chief Minister said that &quot;the referendum results blow a hole in Canberra&#x27;s assertion that the reforms introduced before the Australian Parliament that propose abolishing the Legislative Assembly and Norfolk Island Parliament were overwhelmingly supported by the people of Norfolk Island&quot;.

The Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Bill 2015 passed the Australian Parliament on 14 May 2015 (Assented on 26 May 2015) abolishing self-government on Norfolk Island and transferring Norfolk Island into a council as part of New South Wales law. From 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island legislation was transferred to New South Wales and subject to NSW legislation. From 1 July 2016, the Norfolk Island Regional Council was established to govern Norfolk Island at the local level as a local government area subject to the laws of New South Wales.

===Changes from July 2016===
Residents of Norfolk Island who are citizens of Australia and meet the normal enrolment requirements are required to enrol to vote in Australian federal and once enrolled must vote. 393 people voted at the polling booths on Norfolk Island for the Canberra electorate at the 2016 Federal election, with 16.5% of votes being informal. 777 Norfolk Island residents were on the Commonwealth electoral roll , and 669 people voted at the booths on Norfolk Island in the 2019 Federal election in the newly created Bean electorate, with 17.8% of votes being informal.

The election for the inaugural Norfolk Island Regional Council occurred on 28 May 2016, with the new council taking office on 1 July 2016. Three of the five councilors elected supported self-determination.

From 1 July 2016, Norfolk Island residents came under Australian levies, personal or business income and corporation taxation by the Australian Tax Office. Also both Centrelink and Medicare will apply to Norfolk Island. In addition, flights between mainland Australia and Norfolk Island became classified as domestic not international meaning a passport was no longer required by visiting Australian citizens. Despite New South Wales laws being applied on Norfolk Island, residents are not eligible to vote in New South Wales elections.

===State-based services switch to Queensland from 2022===
Since 1 January 2022, Queensland has provided state-based services directly for Norfolk Island, taking over from New South Wales.

===Independence===
Some residents on Norfolk Island advocate independence from Australia. In 2013, Chief Minister Lisle Snell claimed that Norfolk Island could survive alone. He also told Radio Australia that &#x27;Norfolk-Pitcairn people see themselves as a people with some rights to self-determination&#x27; that the Island&#x27;s future relationship with Australia was not clear, but also stated that for the time being they need to integrate further with Australia for financial reasons.

==Foreign relations==
As a territory of Australia, Norfolk Island does not have diplomatic representation abroad or within the territory. It is however a full participant in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (an international organisation) and a member in its own right of a number of international sporting organisations (e.g. the Commonwealth Games).

==See also==

*Politics of Australia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7225305" start="0" end="26" title="Politics of Norfolk Island" label="Politics of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="59" end="72" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="73" end="98" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="107" end="121" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="147" end="167" title="States and territories of Australia" label="Australian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051054" start="206" end="229" title="Norfolk Island Act 1979" label="Norfolk Island Act 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="245" end="268" title="Parliament of Australia" label="Parliament of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="438" end="459" title="Government of Australia" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730000" start="532" end="547" title="Eric Hutchinson (politician)" label="Eric Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="573" end="602" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419809" start="654" end="671" title="Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q952413" start="781" end="812" title="Administrator of Norfolk Island" label="Administrator of Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="1060" end="1074" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="1307" end="1330" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="1674" end="1687" title="Local government in Australia" label="local council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231877" start="1779" end="1792" title="David Buffett" label="David Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625401" start="2102" end="2115" title="Norfolk Island Regional Council" label="local council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="2134" end="2149" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051064" start="2492" end="2527" title="Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly" label="Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q124434593" start="2546" end="2556" title="2015 Norfolk Island status referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="3344" end="3365" title="Australian Parliament" label="Australian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="3491" end="3498" title="council" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625401" start="3664" end="3695" title="Norfolk Island Regional Council" label="Norfolk Island Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299260" start="3761" end="3782" title="local government area" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973482" start="4100" end="4119" title="Division of Canberra" label="Canberra electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="4127" end="4148" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 Federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q26271553" start="4317" end="4338" title="2019 Australian federal election" label="2019 Federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q56041098" start="4360" end="4375" title="Division of Bean" label="Bean electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="4600" end="4618" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056112" start="4754" end="4775" title="Australian Tax Office" label="Australian Tax Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590113" start="4802" end="4810" title="Medicare (Australia)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15258788" start="5462" end="5473" title="Lisle Snell" label="Lisle Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q164921" start="5536" end="5551" title="Radio Australia" label="Radio Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="6183" end="6201" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153672" start="6220" end="6241" title="Politics of Australia" label="Politics of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21433" wikidata="Q18813" url="?curid=21433" title="New Testament">
<text>The New Testament (NT) is the second division of the Christian biblical canon. It discusses the teachings and person of Jesus, as well as events relating to first-century Christianity. The New Testament&#x27;s background, the first division of the Christian Bible, is called the Old Testament, which is based primarily upon the Hebrew Bible; together they are regarded as Sacred Scripture by Christians.

The New Testament is a collection of 27 Christian texts written in Koine Greek by various authors, forming the second major division of the Christian Bible. Widely accepted across Christian traditions since Late Antiquity, it includes four gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, epistles attributed to Paul and other authors, and the Book of Revelation. The canon was formally recognized by the 4th century AD through ecclesiastical councils, solidifying its role in Christian theology and practice.

Literary analysis suggests many of its texts were written in the mid-to-late first century. There is no scholarly consensus on the date of composition of the latest New Testament text. The earliest New Testament manuscripts date from the late second to early third centuries AD, with the possible exception of Papyrus 52.

The New Testament was transmitted through thousands of manuscripts in various languages and church quotations and contains variants. Textual criticism uses surviving manuscripts to reconstruct the oldest version feasible and to chart the history of the written tradition. It has varied reception among Christians today. It is viewed as a holy scripture alongside Sacred Tradition among Catholics and Orthodox, while Evangelicals and some other Protestants view it as the inspired word of God without tradition.

==Etymology==
=== The word &quot;testament&quot; ===
The word &quot;&quot; in the expression &quot;New Testament&quot; refers to a Christian new covenant that Christians believe completes or fulfils the Mosaic covenant (the Jewish covenant) that Yahweh (the God of Israel) made with the people of Israel on Mount Sinai through Moses, described in the books of the Old Testament of the Christian Bible. While Christianity traditionally even claims this &quot;Christian new covenant&quot; as being prophesied in the Jewish Bible&#x27;s Book of Jeremiah, Judaism traditionally disagrees:
The word &quot;covenant&quot; means &#x27;agreement&#x27; (from Latin &quot;con-venio&quot; &#x27;to agree&#x27; lit. &#x27;to come together&#x27;): the use of the word &quot;testament&quot;, which describes the different idea of written instructions for inheritance after death, to refer to the covenant with Israel in the Old Testament, is foreign to the original Hebrew word &quot;brit&quot; (בְּרִית) describing it, which only means &#x27;alliance, covenant, pact&#x27; and never &#x27;inheritance instructions after death&#x27;. This use comes from the transcription of Latin &quot;testamentum&quot; &#x27;will (left after death)&#x27;, a literal translation of Greek &quot;diatheke&quot; (διαθήκη) &#x27;will (left after death)&#x27;, which is the word used to translate Hebrew &quot;brit&quot; in the Septuagint.

The choice of this word &quot;diatheke&quot;, by the Jewish translators of the Septuagint in Alexandria in the 3rd and 2nd century BCE, has been understood in Christian theology to imply a reinterpreted view of the Old Testament covenant with Israel as possessing characteristics of a &#x27;will left after death&#x27; (the death of Jesus) and has generated considerable attention from biblical scholars and theologians: in contrast to the Jewish usage where &quot;brit&quot; was the usual Hebrew word used to refer to pacts, alliances and covenants in general, like a common pact between two individuals, and to the one between God and Israel in particular, in the Greek world &quot;diatheke&quot; was virtually never used to refer to an alliance or covenant (one exception is noted in a passage from Aristophanes) and referred instead to a will left after the death of a person. There is scholarly debate as to the reason why the translators of the Septuagint chose the term &quot;diatheke&quot; to translate Hebrew &quot;brit&quot;, instead of another Greek word generally used to refer to an alliance or covenant.

=== The phrase &quot;New Testament&quot; as the collection of scriptures ===
The use of the phrase &quot;New Testament&quot; (Koine Greek: , ) to describe a collection of first- and second-century Christian Greek scriptures can be traced back to Tertullian in his work &quot;Against Praxeas&quot;. Irenaeus uses the phrase &quot;New Testament&quot; several times, but does not use it in reference to any written text. In &quot;Against Marcion&quot;, written c. 208 AD, Tertullian writes of:
And Tertullian continues later in the book, writing:
By the 4th century, the existence—even if not the exact contents—of both an Old and New Testament had been established. Lactantius, a 3rd–4th century Christian author wrote in his early-4th-century Latin &quot;Institutiones Divinae&quot; (&quot;Divine Institutes&quot;):
Eusebius describes the collection of Christian writings as &quot;covenanted&quot; (ἐνδιαθήκη) books in &quot;Hist. Eccl.&quot; 3.3.1–7; 3.25.3; 5.8.1; 6.25.1.

==Books==
===The Gospels===
Each of the four gospels in the New Testament narrates the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth (the gospel of Mark in the original text ends with the empty tomb and has no account of the post-resurrection appearances, but the emptiness of the tomb implies a resurrection). The word &quot;gospel&quot; derives from the Old English &quot;gōd-spell&quot; (rarely &quot;godspel&quot;), meaning &quot;good news&quot; or &quot;glad tidings&quot;. Its Hebrew equivalent being &quot;besorah&quot; (בְּשׂוֹרָה). The gospel was considered the &quot;good news&quot; of the coming Kingdom of Messiah, and the redemption through the life and death of Jesus, the central Christian message. 

Starting in the late second century, the four narrative accounts of the life and work of Jesus Christ have been referred to as &quot;The Gospel of ...&quot; or &quot;The Gospel according to ...&quot; followed by the name of the supposed author. The first author to explicitly name the canonical gospels is Irenaeus of Lyon, who promoted the four canonical gospels in his book &quot;Against Heresies&quot;, written around 180.
* The Gospel of Matthew, ascribed to the Apostle Matthew. This gospel begins with a genealogy of Jesus and a story of his birth that includes a visit from magi and a flight into Egypt, and it ends with the commissioning of the disciples by the resurrected Jesus.
* The Gospel of Mark, ascribed to Mark the Evangelist. This gospel begins with the preaching of John the Baptist and the baptism of Jesus and ends with the Ascension of Jesus. 
* The Gospel of Luke, ascribed to Luke the Evangelist, who was not one of the Twelve Apostles, but was mentioned as a companion of the Apostle Paul and as a physician. 
* The Gospel of John, ascribed to John the Evangelist. This gospel begins with a philosophical prologue and ends with appearances of the resurrected Jesus.

These four gospels that were eventually included in the New Testament were only a few among many other early Christian gospels. The existence of such texts is even mentioned at the beginning of the Gospel of Luke. Many non-canonical gospels were also written, all later than the four canonical gospels, and like them advocating the particular theological views of their various authors. In modern scholarship, the Synoptic Gospels are the primary sources for reconstructing Christ&#x27;s ministry.

===Acts of the Apostles===
The Acts of the Apostles is a narrative of the apostles&#x27; ministry and activity after Christ&#x27;s death and resurrection, from which point it resumes and functions as a sequel to the Gospel of Luke. Examining style, phraseology, and other evidence, modern scholarship generally concludes that Acts and the Gospel of Luke share the same author, referred to as Luke–Acts. Luke–Acts does not name its author. Church tradition identified him as Luke the Evangelist, the companion of Paul, but the majority of scholars reject this due to the many differences between Acts and the authentic Pauline letters, though most scholars still believe the author, whether named Luke or not, met Paul. The most probable date of composition is around 80–90 AD, although some scholars date it significantly later, and there is evidence that it was still being substantially revised well into the 2nd century.

====Pauline letters to churches====

The Pauline letters are the thirteen New Testament books that present Paul the Apostle as their author. Paul&#x27;s authorship of six of the letters is disputed. Four are thought by most modern scholars to be pseudepigraphic, i.e., not actually written by Paul even if attributed to him within the letters themselves. Opinion is more divided on the other two disputed letters (2 Thessalonians and Colossians). These letters were written to Christian communities in specific cities or geographical regions, often to address issues faced by that particular community. Prominent themes include the relationship both to broader &quot;pagan&quot; society, to Judaism, and to other Christians.
*Epistle to the Romans
*First Epistle to the Corinthians
*Second Epistle to the Corinthians
*Epistle to the Galatians
*Epistle to the Ephesians*
*Epistle to the Philippians
*Epistle to the Colossians*
*First Epistle to the Thessalonians
*Second Epistle to the Thessalonians*
[Disputed letters are marked with an asterisk (*).]

====Pauline letters to persons====
The last four Pauline letters in the New Testament are addressed to individual persons. They include the following:
* First Epistle to Timothy*
* Second Epistle to Timothy*
* Epistle to Titus*
* Epistle to Philemon
[Disputed letters are marked with an asterisk (*).]

All of the above except for Philemon are known as the pastoral epistles. They are addressed to individuals charged with pastoral oversight of churches and discuss issues of Christian living, doctrine and leadership. They often address different concerns to those of the preceding epistles. These letters are believed by many to be pseudepigraphic. Some scholars (e.g., Bill Mounce, Ben Witherington, R.C. Sproul) will argue that the letters are genuinely Pauline, or at least written under Paul&#x27;s supervision.

====Hebrews====
The Epistle to the Hebrews addresses a Jewish audience who had come to believe that Jesus was the Anointed One (Hebrew: מָשִׁיחַ—transliterated in English as &quot;Moshiach&quot;, or &quot;Messiah&quot;; Greek: Χριστός—transliterated in English as &quot;Christos&quot;, for &quot;Christ&quot;) who was predicted in the writings of the Hebrew Scriptures. The author discusses the superiority of the new covenant and the ministry of Jesus, to the Mosaic Law Covenant and urges the readers in the practical implications of this conviction through the end of the epistle.

The book has been widely accepted by the Christian church as inspired by God and thus authoritative, despite the acknowledgment of uncertainties about who its human author was. Regarding authorship, although the Epistle to the Hebrews does not internally claim to have been written by the Apostle Paul, some similarities in wordings to some of the Pauline Epistles have been noted and inferred. In antiquity, some began to ascribe it to Paul in an attempt to provide the anonymous work an explicit apostolic pedigree.

In the 4th century, Jerome and Augustine of Hippo supported Paul&#x27;s authorship. The Church largely agreed to include Hebrews as the fourteenth letter of Paul, and affirmed this authorship until the Reformation. The letter to the Hebrews had difficulty in being accepted as part of the Christian canon because of its anonymity. As early as the 3rd century, Origen wrote of the letter, &quot;Men of old have handed it down as Paul&#x27;s, but who wrote the Epistle God only knows.&quot;

Contemporary scholars often reject Pauline authorship for the epistle to the Hebrews, based on its distinctive style and theology, which are considered to set it apart from Paul&#x27;s writings.

====Catholic epistles====
* Second Epistle of Peter, ascribed to the Apostle Peter, though widely considered not to have been written by him.

===Book of Revelation===

The final book of the New Testament is the Book of Revelation, also known as the Apocalypse of John. In the New Testament canon, it is considered prophetical or apocalyptic literature. Its authorship has been attributed either to John the Apostle (in which case it is often thought that John the Apostle is John the Evangelist, i.e. author of the Gospel of John) or to another John designated &quot;John of Patmos&quot; after the island where the text says the revelation was received (1:9). Some ascribe the writership date as AD, and others at around 68 AD. The work opens with letters to seven local congregations of Asia Minor and thereafter takes the form of an apocalypse, a &quot;revealing&quot; of divine prophecy and mysteries, a literary genre popular in ancient Judaism and Christianity.

===New Testament canons===

;Table notes

==Book order==
The order in which the books of the New Testament appear differs between some collections and ecclesiastical traditions. In the Latin West, prior to the Vulgate (an early 5th-century Latin version of the Bible), the four Gospels were arranged in the following order: Matthew, John, Luke, and Mark. The Syriac Peshitta places the major Catholic epistles (James, 1 Peter, and 1 John) immediately after Acts and before the Pauline epistles.

The order of an early edition of the letters of Paul is based on the size of the letters: longest to shortest, though keeping 1 and 2 Corinthians and 1 and 2 Thessalonians together. The Pastoral epistles were apparently not part of the &quot;Corpus Paulinum&quot; in which this order originated and were later inserted after 2 Thessalonians and before Philemon. Hebrews was variously incorporated into the &quot;Corpus Paulinum&quot; either after 2 Thessalonians, after Philemon (i.e. at the very end), or after Romans.

Luther&#x27;s canon, found in the 16th-century Luther Bible, continues to place Hebrews, James, Jude, and the Apocalypse (Revelation) last. This reflects the thoughts of the Reformer Martin Luther on the canonicity of these books.

==Authors==

It is considered the books of the New Testament were all or nearly all written by Jewish Christians—that is, Jewish disciples of Christ, who lived in the Roman Empire, and under Roman occupation. The author of the Gospel of Luke and the Book of Acts is frequently thought of as an exception; scholars are divided as to whether he was a Gentile or a Hellenistic Jew. A few scholars identify the author of the Gospel of Mark as probably a Gentile, and similarly for the Gospel of Matthew, though most assert Jewish-Christian authorship.

However, more recently the above understanding has been challenged by the publication of evidence showing only educated elites after the Jewish War would have been capable of producing the prose found in the Gospels.

===Gospels===
Authorship of the Gospels remains divided among both evangelical and critical scholars. The names of each Gospel stems from church tradition, and yet the authors of the Gospels do not identify themselves in their respective texts. All four gospels and the Acts of the Apostles are anonymous works. The Gospel of John claims to be based on eyewitness testimony from the Disciple whom Jesus loved, but never names this character. The author of Luke-Acts claimed to access an eyewitness to Paul; this claim remains accepted by most scholars. Objections to this viewpoint mainly take the form of the following two interpretations, but also include the claim that Luke-Acts contains differences in theology and historical narrative which are irreconcilable with the authentic letters of Paul the Apostle. According to Bart D. Ehrman of the University of North Carolina, none of the authors of the Gospels were eyewitnesses or even explicitly claimed to be eyewitnesses of Jesus&#x27;s life. Ehrman has argued for a scholarly consensus that many New Testament books were not written by the individuals whose names are attached to them. Scholarly opinion is that names were fixed to the gospels by the mid second century AD. Many scholars believe that none of the gospels were written in the region of Palestine.

Christian tradition identifies John the Apostle with John the Evangelist, the supposed author of the Gospel of John. Traditionalists tend to support the idea that the writer of the Gospel of John himself claimed to be an eyewitness in their commentaries of John 21:24 and therefore the gospel was written by an eyewitness. This idea is rejected by the majority of modern scholars.

Most scholars hold to the two-source hypothesis, which posits that the Gospel of Mark was the first gospel to be written. On this view, the authors of the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke used as sources the Gospel of Mark and a hypothetical Q document to write their individual gospel accounts. These three gospels are called the Synoptic Gospels, because they include many of the same stories, often in the same sequence, and sometimes in exactly the same wording. Scholars agree that the Gospel of John was written last, by using a different tradition and body of testimony. In addition, most scholars agree that the author of Luke also wrote the Acts of the Apostles. Scholars hold that these books constituted two-halves of a single work, Luke–Acts.

===Acts===

The same author appears to have written the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles, and most refer to them as the Lucan texts. The most direct evidence comes from the prefaces of each book; both were addressed to Theophilus, and the preface to the Acts of the Apostles references &quot;my former book&quot; about the ministry of Jesus. Furthermore, there are linguistic and theological similarities between the two works, suggesting that they have a common author.
===Pauline epistles===
The Pauline epistles are the thirteen books in the New Testament traditionally attributed to Paul of Tarsus. Seven letters are generally classified as &quot;undisputed&quot;, expressing contemporary scholarly near consensus that they are the work of Paul: Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon. Six additional letters bearing Paul&#x27;s name do not currently enjoy the same academic consensus: Ephesians, Colossians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy and Titus.

The anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews is, despite unlikely Pauline authorship, often functionally grouped with these thirteen to form a corpus of fourteen &quot;Pauline&quot; epistles.

While many scholars uphold the traditional view, some question whether the first three, called the &quot;Deutero-Pauline Epistles&quot;, are authentic letters of Paul. As for the latter three, the &quot;Pastoral epistles&quot;, some scholars uphold the traditional view of these as the genuine writings of the Apostle Paul; most regard them as pseudepigrapha.

One might refer to the Epistle to the Laodiceans and the Third Epistle to the Corinthians as examples of works identified as pseudonymous. Since the early centuries of the church, there has been debate concerning the authorship of the anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews, and contemporary scholars generally reject Pauline authorship.

The epistles all share common themes, emphasis, vocabulary and style; they exhibit a uniformity of doctrine concerning the Mosaic Law, Jesus, faith, and various other issues. All of these letters easily fit into the chronology of Paul&#x27;s journeys depicted in Acts of the Apostles.

===Other epistles===
The author of the Epistle of James identifies himself in the opening verse as &quot;James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ&quot;. From the middle of the 3rd century, patristic authors cited the &quot;Epistle&quot; as written by James the Just. Ancient and modern scholars have always been divided on the issue of authorship. Many consider the epistle to be written in the late 1st or early 2nd centuries.

The author of the First Epistle of Peter identifies himself in the opening verse as &quot;Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ&quot;, and the view that the epistle was written by St. Peter is attested to by a number of Church Fathers: Irenaeus (140–203), Tertullian (150–222), Clement of Alexandria (155–215) and Origen of Alexandria (185–253). Unlike The Second Epistle of Peter, the authorship of which was debated in antiquity, there was little debate about Peter&#x27;s authorship of this first epistle until the 18th century. Although 2 Peter internally purports to be a work of the apostle, many biblical scholars have concluded that Peter is not the author. For an early date and (usually) for a defense of the Apostle Peter&#x27;s authorship see Kruger, Zahn, Spitta, Bigg, and Green.

The Epistle of Jude title is written as follows: &quot;Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James&quot;. The debate has continued over the author&#x27;s identity as the apostle, the brother of Jesus, both, or neither.

===Johannine works===

The Gospel of John, the three Johannine epistles, and the Book of Revelation, exhibit marked similarities, although more so between the gospel and the epistles (especially the gospel and 1 John) than between those and Revelation. Most scholars therefore treat the five as a single corpus of Johannine literature, albeit not from the same author.

The gospel went through two or three &quot;editions&quot; before reaching its current form around AD 90–110. It speaks of an unnamed &quot;disciple whom Jesus loved&quot; as the source of its traditions, but does not say specifically that he is its author; Christian tradition identifies this disciple as the apostle John, but while this idea still has supporters, for a variety of reasons the majority of modern scholars have abandoned it or hold it only tenuously. It is significantly different from the synoptic gospels, with major variations in material, theological emphasis, chronology, and literary style, sometimes amounting to contradictions.

The author of the Book of Revelation identifies himself several times as &quot;John&quot;. and states that he was on Patmos when he received his first vision. As a result, the author is sometimes referred to as John of Patmos. The author has traditionally been identified with John the Apostle to whom the Gospel and the epistles of John were attributed. It was believed that he was exiled to the island of Patmos during the reign of the Roman emperor Domitian, and there wrote Revelation. Justin Martyr (c. 100–165 AD) who was acquainted with Polycarp, who had been mentored by John, makes a possible allusion to this book, and credits John as the source. Irenaeus (c. 115–202) assumes it as a conceded point. According to the &quot;Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Bible&quot;, modern scholars are divided between the apostolic view and several alternative hypotheses put forth in the last hundred years or so. Ben Witherington points out that linguistic evidence makes it unlikely that the books were written by the same person.

==Dating the New Testament==
There is no scholarly consensus on the date of composition of the latest New Testament texts. John A. T. Robinson, Dan Wallace, William F. Albright, Maurice Casey, and James Crossley all dated many or all of the books of the New Testament before 70 AD. Jonathan Bernier&#x27;s recent argument for early dates has enjoyed a positive reception, with endorsements from Chris Keith and Anders Runesson, among others. Many other scholars, such as Bart D. Ehrman and Stephen L. Harris, date some New Testament texts much later than this; Richard Pervo dated Luke–Acts to , and David Trobisch places Acts in the mid-to-late second century, contemporaneous with the publication of the first New Testament canon. Whether the Gospels were composed before or after 70 AD, according to Bas van Os, the lifetime of various eyewitnesses that includes Jesus&#x27;s own family through the end of the First Century is very likely statistically. Markus Bockmuehl finds this structure of lifetime memory in various early Christian traditions.

===External evidence===
The earliest manuscripts of New Testament books date from the late second to early third centuries (although see Papyrus 52 for a possible exception). 

===Internal evidence===
Literary analysis of the New Testament texts themselves can be used to date many of the books of the New Testament to the mid-to-late first century. The earliest works of the New Testament are the letters of the Apostle Paul. It can be determined that 1 Thessalonians is likely the earliest of these letters, written around 52 AD.

==Language==

The major languages spoken by both Jews and Greeks in the Holy Land at the time of Jesus were Aramaic and Koine Greek, and also a colloquial dialect of Mishnaic Hebrew. It is generally agreed by most scholars that the historical Jesus primarily spoke Aramaic, perhaps also some Hebrew and Koine Greek. The majority view is that all of the books that would eventually form the New Testament were written in the Koine Greek language.

As Christianity spread, these books were later translated into other languages, most notably, Latin, Syriac, and Egyptian Coptic. Some of the Church Fathers imply or claim that Matthew was originally written in Hebrew or Aramaic, and then soon after was written in Koine Greek. Nevertheless, some scholars believe the Gospel of Matthew known today was composed in Greek and is neither directly dependent upon nor a translation of a text in a Semitic language.

=== Style ===
The style of Koine Greek in which the New Testament is written differs from the general Koine Greek used by Greek writers of the same era, a difference that some scholars have explained by the fact that the authors of the New Testament, nearly all Jews and deeply familiar with the Septuagint, wrote in a Jewish-Greek dialect strongly influenced by Aramaic and Hebrew (see Jewish Koine Greek, related to the Greek of the Septuagint). But other scholars say that this view is arrived at by comparing the linguistic style of the New Testament to the preserved writings of the literary men of the era, who imitated the style of the great Attic texts and as a result did not reflect the everyday spoken language, so that this difference in style could be explained by the New Testament being written, unlike other preserved literary material of the era, in the Koine Greek spoken in everyday life, in order to appeal to the common people, a style which has also been found in contemporary non-Jewish texts such as private letters, receipts and petitions discovered in Egypt (where the dry air has preserved these documents which, as everyday material not deemed of literary importance, had not been copied by subsequent generations).

==Development of the New Testament canon==

The process of canonization of the New Testament was complex and lengthy. In the initial centuries of early Christianity, there were many books widely considered by the church to be inspired, but there was no single formally recognized New Testament canon. The process was characterized by a compilation of books that apostolic tradition considered authoritative in worship and teaching, relevant to the historical situations in which they lived, and consonant with the Old Testament. Writings attributed to the apostles circulated among the earliest Christian communities and the Pauline epistles were circulating, perhaps in collected forms, by the end of the 1st century AD.

One of the earliest attempts at solidifying a canon was made by Marcion, AD, who accepted only a modified version of Luke (the Gospel of Marcion) and ten of Paul&#x27;s letters, while rejecting the Old Testament entirely. His canon was largely rejected by other groups of Christians, notably the proto-orthodox Christians, as was his theology, Marcionism. Adolf von Harnack, John Knox, and David Trobisch, among other scholars, have argued that the church formulated its New Testament canon partially in response to the challenge posed by Marcion.

Polycarp, Irenaeus and Tertullian held the epistles of Paul to be divinely inspired &quot;scripture&quot;. Other books were held in high esteem but were gradually relegated to the status of New Testament apocrypha. Justin Martyr, in the mid 2nd century, mentions &quot;memoirs of the apostles&quot; as being read on Sunday alongside the &quot;writings of the prophets&quot;.

The Muratorian fragment, dated at between 170 and as late as the end of the 4th century (according to the &quot;Anchor Bible Dictionary&quot;), may be the earliest known New Testament canon attributed to mainstream Christianity. It is similar, but not identical, to the modern New Testament canon.

The oldest clear endorsement of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John being the only legitimate gospels was written AD. A four gospel canon (the &quot;Tetramorph&quot;) was asserted by Irenaeus, who refers to it directly in his polemic &quot;Against Heresies&quot;:

The books considered to be authoritative by Irenaeus included the four gospels and many of the letters of Paul, although, based on the arguments Irenaeus made in support of only four authentic gospels, some interpreters deduce that the fourfold Gospel must have still been a novelty in Irenaeus&#x27;s time.

===Origen (3rd century)===
By the early 200s, Origen may have been using the same twenty-seven books as in the Catholic New Testament canon, though there were still disputes over the canonicity of the Letter to the Hebrews, Epistle of James, II Peter, II John and III John and the Book of Revelation, known as the Antilegomena. Likewise, the Muratorian fragment is evidence that, perhaps as early as 200, there existed a set of Christian writings somewhat similar to the twenty-seven book NT canon, which included four gospels and argued against objections to them. Thus, while there was a good measure of debate in the Early Church over the New Testament canon, the major writings are claimed to have been accepted by almost all Christians by the middle of the 3rd century.

Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information regarding the texts that became the New Testament. The information used to create the late-4th-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the &quot;Ecclesiastical History&quot; (HE) of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen&#x27;s list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were then accepted and what were then disputed, by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.

In fact, Origen would have possibly included in his list of &quot;inspired writings&quot; other texts kept out by the likes of Eusebius—including the Epistle of Barnabas, Shepherd of Hermas, and 1 Clement. Notwithstanding these facts, &quot;Origen is not the originator of the idea of biblical canon, but he certainly gives the philosophical and literary-interpretative underpinnings for the whole notion.&quot;

===Eusebius&#x27;s Ecclesiastical History===
Eusebius, , gave a detailed list of New Testament writings in his &quot;Ecclesiastical History&quot; Book 3, Chapter XXV:
: &quot;1... First then must be put the holy quaternion of the gospels; following them the Acts of the Apostles... the epistles of Paul... the epistle of John... the epistle of Peter... After them is to be placed, if it really seem proper, the Book of Revelation, concerning which we shall give the different opinions at the proper time. These then belong among the accepted writings.&quot;

: &quot;3 Among the disputed writings, which are nevertheless recognized by many, are extant the so-called epistle of James and that of Jude, also the second epistle of Peter, and those that are called the second and third of John, whether they belong to the evangelist or to another person of the same name. Among the rejected [Kirsopp Lake translation: &quot;not genuine&quot;] writings must be reckoned also the Acts of Paul, and the so-called Shepherd, and the Apocalypse of Peter, and in addition to these the extant epistle of Barnabas, and the so-called Teachings of the Apostles; and besides, as I said, the Apocalypse of John, if it seem proper, which some, as I said, reject, but which others class with the accepted books. And among these some have placed also the Gospel according to the Hebrews... And all these may be reckoned among the disputed books.&quot;

: &quot;6... such books as the Gospels of Peter, of Thomas, of Matthias, or of any others besides them, and the Acts of Andrew and John and the other apostles... they clearly show themselves to be the fictions of heretics. Wherefore they are not to be placed even among the rejected writings, but are all of them to be cast aside as absurd and impious.&quot;

The Book of Revelation is counted as both accepted (Kirsopp Lake translation: &quot;recognized&quot;) and disputed, which has caused some confusion over what exactly Eusebius meant by doing so. From other writings of the church fathers, it was disputed with several canon lists rejecting its canonicity. EH 3.3.5 adds further detail on Paul: &quot;Paul&#x27;s fourteen epistles are well known and undisputed. It is not indeed right to overlook the fact that some have rejected the Epistle to the Hebrews, saying that it is disputed by the church of Rome, on the ground that it was not written by Paul.&quot; EH 4.29.6 mentions the Diatessaron: &quot;But their original founder, Tatian, formed a certain combination and collection of the gospels, I know not how, to which he gave the title Diatessaron, and which is still in the hands of some. But they say that he ventured to paraphrase certain words of the apostle Paul, in order to improve their style.&quot;

===4th century and later===
In his Easter letter of 367, Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, gave a list of the books that would become the twenty-seven-book NT canon, and he used the word &quot;canonized&quot; (&quot;kanonizomena&quot;) in regards to them. The first council that accepted the present canon of the New Testament may have been the Synod of Hippo Regius in North Africa (393 AD). The acts of this council are lost. A brief summary of the acts was read at and accepted by the Council of Carthage (397) and the Council of Carthage (419). These councils were under the authority of St. Augustine, who regarded the canon as already closed.

Pope Damasus I&#x27;s Council of Rome in 382, if the &quot;Decretum Gelasianum&quot; is correctly associated with it, issued a biblical canon identical to that mentioned above, or, if not, the list is at least a 6th-century compilation. Likewise, Damasus&#x27; commissioning of the Latin Vulgate edition of the Bible, , was instrumental in the fixation of the canon in the West. In , Pope Innocent I sent a list of the sacred books to a Gallic bishop, Exsuperius of Toulouse. Christian scholars assert that, when these bishops and councils spoke on the matter, they were not defining something new but instead &quot;were ratifying what had already become the mind of the Church.&quot;

The New Testament canon as it is now was first listed by St. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, in 367, in a letter written to his churches in Egypt, Festal Letter 39. Also cited is the Council of Rome, but not without controversy. That canon gained wider and wider recognition until it was accepted at the Third Council of Carthage in 397 and 419. The Book of Revelation was not added till the Council of Carthage (419).

Thus, some claim that, from the 4th century, there existed unanimity in the West concerning the New Testament canon (as it is today), and that, by the 5th century, the Eastern Church, with a few exceptions, had come to accept the Book of Revelation and thus had come into harmony on the matter of the canon. Nonetheless, full dogmatic articulations of the canon were not made until the Canon of Trent of 1546 for Roman Catholicism, the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England, the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 for Calvinism, and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for the Greek Orthodox.

On the question of NT Canon formation generally, New Testament scholar Lee Martin McDonald has written that:
According to the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; article on the Canon of the New Testament: &quot;The idea of a complete and clear-cut canon of the New Testament existing from the beginning, that is from Apostolic times, has no foundation in history. The Canon of the New Testament, like that of the Old, is the result of a development, of a process at once stimulated by disputes with doubters, both within and without the Church, and retarded by certain obscurities and natural hesitations, and which did not reach its final term until the dogmatic definition of the Tridentine Council.&quot;

In 331, Constantine I commissioned Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for the Church of Constantinople. Athanasius (&quot;Apol. Const. 4&quot;) recorded Alexandrian scribes around 340 preparing Bibles for Constans. Little else is known, though there is plenty of speculation. For example, it is speculated that this may have provided motivation for canon lists, and that Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus may be examples of these Bibles. Together with the Peshitta and Codex Alexandrinus, these are the earliest extant Christian Bibles. 

==Early manuscripts==


Like other literature from antiquity, the text of the New Testament was (prior to the advent of the printing press) preserved and transmitted in manuscripts. Manuscripts containing at least a part of the New Testament number in the thousands. The earliest of these (like manuscripts containing other literature) are often very fragmentarily preserved. Some of these fragments have even been thought to date as early as the 2nd century (i.e., Papyrus 90, Papyrus 98, Papyrus 104, and famously Rylands Library Papyrus P52, though the early date of the latter has recently been called into question).

==Textual variation==

Textual criticism deals with the identification and removal of transcription errors in the texts of manuscripts. Ancient scribes made errors or alterations (such as including non-authentic additions). The New Testament has been preserved in more than 5,800 Greek manuscripts, 10,000 Latin manuscripts and 9,300 manuscripts in various other ancient languages including Syriac, Slavic, Ethiopic and Armenian. Even if the original Greek versions were lost, the entire New Testament could still be assembled from the translations.

In addition, there are so many quotes from the New Testament in early church documents and commentaries that the entire New Testament could also be assembled from these alone. Not all biblical manuscripts come from orthodox Christian writers. For example, the Gnostic writings of Valentinus come from the 2nd century AD, and these Christians were regarded as heretics by the mainstream church. The sheer number of witnesses presents unique difficulties, but it also gives scholars a better idea of how close modern Bibles are to the original versions.

On noting the large number of surviving ancient manuscripts, Bruce Metzger sums up the view on the issue by saying &quot;The more often you have copies that agree with each other, especially if they emerge from different geographical areas, the more you can cross-check them to figure out what the original document was like. The only way they&#x27;d agree would be where they went back genealogically in a family tree that represents the descent of the manuscripts.

===Interpolations===
In attempting to determine the original text of the New Testament books, some modern textual critics have identified sections as additions of material, centuries after the gospel was written. These are called interpolations. In modern translations of the Bible, the results of textual criticism have led to certain verses, words and phrases being left out or marked as not original. According to Bart D. Ehrman, &quot;These scribal additions are often found in late medieval manuscripts of the New Testament, but not in the manuscripts of the earlier centuries.&quot;

Most modern Bibles have footnotes to indicate passages that have disputed source documents. Bible commentaries also discuss these, sometimes in great detail. While many variations have been discovered between early copies of biblical texts, almost all have no importance, as they are variations in spelling, punctuation, or grammar. Also, many of these variants are so particular to the Greek language that they would not appear in translations into other languages. For example, order of words (i.e. &quot;man bites dog&quot; versus &quot;dog bites man&quot;) often does not matter in Greek, so textual variants that flip the order of words often have no consequences.

Outside of these unimportant variants, there are a couple variants of some importance. The two most commonly cited examples are the last verses of the Gospel of Mark and the story of Jesus and the woman taken in adultery in the Gospel of John. Many scholars and critics also believe that the Johannine Comma reference supporting the Trinity doctrine in the First Epistle of John to have been a later addition. According to Norman Geisler and William Nix, &quot;The New Testament, then, has not only survived in more manuscripts than any other book from antiquity, but it has survived in a purer form than any other great book—a form that is 99.5% pure&quot;.

The often referred to &quot;Interpreter&#x27;s Dictionary of the Bible&quot;, a book written to prove the validity of the New Testament, says: &quot;A study of 150 Greek [manuscripts] of the Gospel of Luke has revealed more than 30,000 different readings... It is safe to say that there is not one sentence in the New Testament in which the [manuscript] is wholly uniform.&quot; 

===Biblical criticism===

Biblical criticism is the scholarly &quot;study and investigation of biblical writings that seeks to make discerning judgments about these writings.&quot; 

===Establishing a critical text===

The textual variation among manuscript copies of books in the New Testament prompted attempts to discern the earliest form of text already in antiquity (e.g., by the 3rd-century Christian author Origen). The efforts began in earnest again during the Renaissance, which saw a revival of the study of ancient Greek texts. During this period, modern textual criticism was born. In this context, Christian humanists such as Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus promoted a return to the original Greek of the New Testament. This was the beginning of modern New Testament textual criticism, which over subsequent centuries would increasingly incorporate more and more manuscripts, in more languages (i.e., versions of the New Testament), as well as citations of the New Testament by ancient authors and the New Testament text in lectionaries in order to reconstruct the earliest recoverable form of the New Testament text and the history of changes to it.

==Relationship to earlier and contemporaneous literature==

Books that later formed the New Testament, like other Christian literature of the period, originated in a literary context that reveals relationships not only to other Christian writings, but also to Graeco-Roman and Jewish works. Of singular importance is the extensive use of and interaction with the Jewish Bible and what would become the Christian Old Testament. Both implicit and explicit citations, as well as countless allusions, appear throughout the books of the New Testament, from the Gospels and Acts, to the Epistles, to the Apocalypse.

==Early versions==
The first translations (usually called &quot;versions&quot;) of the New Testament were made beginning already at the end of 2nd century. The earliest versions of the New Testament are the translations into the Syriac, Latin, and Coptic languages.

===Syriac===

The Philoxenian probably was produced in 508 for Bishop Philoxenus of Mabbug.

===Coptic===

There are several dialects of the Coptic language: Bohairic (the Nile Delta), Fayyumic (in the Faiyum in Middle Egypt), Sahidic (in Upper Egypt), Akhmimic (what is now Sohag Governorate in Upper Egypt), and others. The first translation was made by at least the third century into the Sahidic dialect (copsa). This translation represents a mixed text, mostly Alexandrian, though also with Western readings.

A Bohairic translation was made later, but existed already in the 4th century. Though the translation makes less use of Greek words than the Sahidic, it does employ some Greek grammar (e.g., in word-order and the use of particles such as the syntactic construction μεν—δε). For this reason, the Bohairic translation can be helpful in the reconstruction of the early Greek text of the New Testament.

===Other ancient translations===
The continued spread of Christianity, and the foundation of national churches, led to the translation of the Bible—often beginning with books from the New Testament—into a variety of other languages at a relatively early date: Armenian, Georgian, Ethiopic, Persian, Sogdian, and eventually Gothic, Old Church Slavonic, Arabic, and Nubian.

==Modern translations==

The 16th century saw the rise of Protestantism and an explosion of translations of the New (and Old) Testament into the vernacular. Notable are those of Martin Luther (1522), Jacques Lefèvre d&#x27;Étaples (1523), the Froschau Bible (1525–1529, revised in 1574), William Tyndale (1526, revised in 1534, 1535 and 1536), the Brest Bible (1563), and the Authorized Version (also called the &quot;King James Version&quot;) (1611).

Translations of the New Testament made since the appearance of critical editions of the Greek text (notably those of Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort, and von Soden) have largely used them as their base text. Unlike the Textus Receptus, they have a pronounced Alexandrian character. Standard critical editions are those of Nestle-Åland (the text, though not the full critical apparatus of which is reproduced in the United Bible Societies&#x27; &quot;Greek New Testament&quot;), Souter, Vogels, Bover and Merk.

Notable translations of the New Testament based on these most recent critical editions include the Revised Standard Version (1946, revised in 1971), La Bible de Jérusalem (1961, revised in 1973 and 2000), the Einheitsübersetzung (1970, final edition 1979), the New American Bible (1970, revised in 1986 and 2011), the New International Version (1973, revised in 1984 and 2011), the Traduction Oecuménique de la Bible (1988, revised in 2004), the New Revised Standard Version (1989) and the English Standard Version (2001, revised in 2007, 2011 and 2016).

==Theological interpretation in Christian churches==

According to Gary T. Meadors:
===Unity in diversity===
The notion of unity in diversity of Scripture claims that the Bible presents a noncontradictory and consistent message concerning God and redemptive history. The fact of diversity is observed in comparing the diversity of time, culture, authors&#x27; perspectives, literary genre, and the theological themes.

Studies from many theologians considering the &quot;unity in diversity&quot; to be found in the New Testament (and the Bible as a whole) have been collected and summarized by New Testament theologian Frank Stagg. He describes them as some basic presuppositions, tenets, and concerns common among the New Testament writers, giving to the New Testament its &quot;unity in diversity&quot;:
#The reality of God is never argued but is always assumed and affirmed
#Jesus Christ is absolutely central: he is Lord and Savior, the foretold Prophet, the Messianic King, the Chosen, the way, the truth, and the light, the One through whom God the Father not only acted but through whom He came
#The Holy Spirit came anew with Jesus Christ.
#The Christian faith and life are a calling, rooted in divine election.
#The plight of everyone as sinner means that each person is completely dependent upon the mercy and grace of God
#Salvation is both God&#x27;s gift and his demand through Jesus Christ, to be received by faith
#The death and resurrection of Jesus are at the heart of the total event of which he was the center
#God creates a people of his own, designated and described by varied terminology and analogies
#History must be understood eschatologically, being brought along toward its ultimate goal when the kingdom of God, already present in Christ, is brought to its complete triumph
#In Christ, all of God&#x27;s work of creation, revelation, and redemption is brought to fulfillment

===Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Classical Anglicanism===
For the Roman Catholic Church, there are two modes of Revelation: Scripture and Tradition. Both of them are interpreted by the teachings of the Church. The Roman Catholic view is expressed clearly in the Catechism of the Catholic Church (1997):

§ 82: As a result the Church, to whom the transmission and interpretation of Revelation is entrusted, does not derive her certainty about all revealed truths from the holy Scriptures alone. Both Scripture and Tradition must be accepted and honoured with equal sentiments of devotion and reverence.

§ 107: The inspired books teach the truth. Since therefore all that the inspired authors or sacred writers affirm should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.
In Catholic terminology the teaching office is called the Magisterium. The Catholic view should not be confused with the two-source theory. As the Catechism states in §§ 80 and 81, Revelation has &quot;one common source ... two distinct modes of transmission.&quot;

While many Eastern Orthodox writers distinguish between Scripture and Tradition, Bishop Kallistos Ware says that for the Orthodox there is only one source of the Christian faith, Holy Tradition, within which Scripture exists.

Traditional Anglicans believe that &quot;Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation&quot;, (Article VI), but also that the Catholic Creeds &quot;ought thoroughly to be received and believed&quot; (Article VIII), and that the Church &quot;hath authority in Controversies of Faith&quot; and is &quot;a witness and keeper of Holy Writ&quot; (Article XX). 

In the famous words of Thomas Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells: &quot;As for my religion, I dye in the holy catholic and apostolic faith professed by the whole Church before the disunion of East and West, more particularly in the communion of the Church of England, as it stands distinguished from all Papal and Puritan innovations, and as it adheres to the doctrine of the Cross.&quot;

===Protestantism===
Following the doctrine of &quot;sola scriptura&quot;, Protestants believe that their traditions of faith, practice and interpretations carry forward what the scriptures teach, and so tradition is not a source of authority in itself. Their traditions derive authority from the Bible, and are therefore always open to reevaluation. This openness to doctrinal revision has extended in Liberal Protestant traditions even to the reevaluation of the doctrine of Scripture upon which the Reformation was founded, and members of these traditions may even question whether the Bible is infallible in doctrine, inerrant in historical and other factual statements, and whether it has uniquely divine authority. The adjustments made by modern Protestants to their doctrine of scripture vary widely.

====American evangelical and fundamentalist Protestantism====
Within the US, the Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy (1978) articulates evangelical views on this issue. Paragraph four of its summary states: &quot;Being wholly and verbally God-given, Scripture is without error or fault in all its teaching, no less in what it states about God&#x27;s acts in creation, about the events of world history, and about its own literary origins under God, than in its witness to God&#x27;s saving grace in individual lives.&quot;

====American mainline and liberal Protestantism====
Officials of the Presbyterian Church USA report: &quot;We acknowledge the role of scriptural authority in the Presbyterian Church, but Presbyterians generally do not believe in biblical inerrancy. Presbyterians do not insist that every detail of chronology or sequence or prescientific description in scripture be true in literal form. Our confessions do teach biblical infallibility. Infallibility affirms the entire truthfulness of scripture without depending on every exact detail.&quot;

===Messianic Judaism===
Messianic Judaism generally holds the same view of New Testament authority as evangelical Protestants. According to the view of some Messianic Jewish congregations, Jesus did not annul the Torah, but that its interpretation is revised and ultimately explained through the Apostolic Scriptures.

===Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses===
Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses accept the New Testament as divinely inspired Scripture, and as infallible in every detail, with equal authority as the Hebrew Scriptures. They view it as the written revelation and good news of the Messiah, the ransom sacrifice of Jesus, and the Kingdom of God, explaining and expounding the Hebrew Bible, not replacing but vitally supplementing it. They also view the New Testament as the primary instruction guide for Christian living, and church discipline. They generally call the New Testament the &quot;Christian Greek Scriptures&quot;, and see only the &quot;covenants&quot; as &quot;old&quot; or &quot;new&quot;, but not any part of the actual Scriptures themselves.

===United Pentecostals===
Oneness Pentecostalism subscribes to the common Protestant doctrine of &quot;sola scriptura&quot;. They view the Bible as the inspired Word of God, and as absolutely inerrant in its contents (though not necessarily in every translation). They regard the New Testament as perfect and inerrant in every way, revealing the Lord Jesus Christ in the Flesh, and his Atonement, and which also explains and illuminates the Old Testament perfectly, and is part of the Bible canon, not because church councils or decrees claimed it so, but by witness of the Holy Spirit.

===Seventh-day Adventists===
The Seventh-day Adventist Church holds the New Testament as the inspired Word of God, with God influencing the &quot;thoughts&quot; of the Apostles in the writing, not necessarily every word though. The first fundamental belief of the Seventh-Day Adventist church stated that &quot;The Holy Scriptures are the infallible revelation of [God&#x27;s] will.&quot; Adventist theologians generally reject the &quot;verbal inspiration&quot; position on Scripture held by many conservative evangelical Christians. They believe instead that God inspired the thoughts of the biblical authors and apostles, and that the writers then expressed these thoughts in their own words. This view is popularly known as &quot;thought inspiration&quot;, and most Adventist members hold to that view. According to Ed Christian, former &quot;JATS&quot; editor, &quot;few if any ATS members believe in verbal inerrancy&quot;.

How the Mosaic Law should be applied came up at Adventist conferences in the past, and Adventist theologians such as A. T. Jones and E. J. Waggoner looked at the problem addressed by Paul in Galatians as not the ceremonial law, but rather the wrong use of the law (legalism). They were opposed by Uriah Smith and George Butler at the 1888 Conference. Smith in particular thought the Galatians issue had been settled by Ellen White already, yet in 1890 she claimed that justification by faith is &quot;the third angel&#x27;s message in verity.&quot; White interpreted Colossians 2:14 as saying that the ceremonial law was nailed to the cross.

===Latter-day Saints===
Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) believe that the New Testament, as part of the Christian biblical canon, is accurate &quot;as far as it is translated correctly&quot;. They believe the Bible as originally revealed is the word of God, but that the processes of transcription and translation have introduced errors into the texts as currently available, and therefore they cannot be regarded as completely inerrant. In addition to the Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price are considered part of their scriptural canon.

==In the arts==

 Most of the influence of the New Testament upon the arts has come from the Gospels and the Book of Revelation. Literary expansion of the Nativity of Jesus found in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke began already in the 2nd century, and the portrayal of the Nativity has continued in various art forms to this day. The earliest Christian art would often depict scenes from the New Testament such as the raising of Lazarus, the baptism of Jesus or the motif of the Good Shepherd.

Biblical paraphrases and poetic renditions of stories from the life of Christ (e.g., the Heliand) became popular in the Middle Ages, as did the portrayal of the arrest, trial and execution of Jesus in Passion plays. Indeed, the Passion became a central theme in Christian art and music. The ministry and Passion of Jesus, as portrayed in one or more of the New Testament Gospels, has also been a theme in film, almost since the inception of the medium (e.g., &quot;La Passion&quot;, France, 1903).

==See also==
* Authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews
* Catalogue of Vices and Virtues
* Chronology of Jesus
* Earlier Epistle to the Ephesians Non-canonical books referenced in the New Testament
* Historical background of the New Testament
* Life of Jesus in the New Testament
* List of Gospels
* Novum Testamentum Graece

==Notes==

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Bultmann, Rudolf (1951–1955). &quot;Theology of the New Testament&quot;, English translation, 2 volumes. New York: Scribner.
* von Campenhausen, Hans (1972). &quot;The Formation of the Christian Bible&quot;, English translation. Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
* Clark, Gordon (1990). &quot;Logical Criticisms of Textual Criticism&quot;, The Trinity Foundation: Jefferson, Maryland
* Conzelmann, Hans; Lindemann, Andreas (1999). &quot;Interpreting the New Testament: An Introduction to the Principles and Methods of New Testament Exegesis&quot;, English translation. Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson.
* Dormeyer, Detlev (1998). &quot;The New Testament among the Writings of Antiquity&quot;, English translation. Sheffield.
* Duling, Dennis C.; Perrin, Norman (1993). &quot;The New Testament: Proclamation and Parenesis, Myth and History&quot;, 3rd edition. New York: Harcourt Brace.
* Ehrman, Bart D. (2011). &quot;The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings&quot;, 5th edition. New York: Oxford University Press.
* Goodspeed, Edgar J. (1937). &quot;An Introduction to the New Testament&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
* Levine, Amy-Jill; Brettler, Marc Z. (2011). &quot;The Jewish Annotated New Testament&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Koester, Helmut (1995 and 2000). &quot;Introduction to the New Testament&quot;, 2nd edition, 2 volumes. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
* Kümmel, Werner Georg (1996). &quot;Introduction to the New Testament&quot;, revised and enlarged English translation. Nashville: Abingdon Press.
* Mack, Burton L. (1995). &quot;Who Wrote the New Testament?&quot;. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco.
* Neill, Stephen; Wright, Tom (1988). &quot;The Interpretation of the New Testament, 1861–1986&quot;, new edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Thielman, Frank. &quot;Theology of the New Testament: a Canonical and Synthetic Approach&quot;, Zondervan, 2005.
* Wills, Garry, &quot;A Wild and Indecent Book&quot; (review of David Bentley Hart, &quot;The New Testament: A Translation&quot;, Yale University Press, 577 pp.), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXV, no. 2 (8 February 2018), pp. 34–35. Discusses some pitfalls in interpreting and translating the New Testament.
* Zahn, Theodor (1910). &quot;Introduction to the New Testament&quot;, English translation, 3 volumes. Edinburgh: T&amp;T Clark.

==External links==

===General references===
*New Testament Gateway Annotated guide to academic New Testament Web resources including not only other Web sites, but articles and course materials
*Jewish Studies for Christians An Online Study Group exploring the Jewish setting of the early Jesus movement. (An Israeli blog led by Dr. Eliyahu Lizorkin-Eyzenberg).
*&quot;Introduction to New Testament History and Literature&quot; course materials &quot;Open Yale course&quot; taught at Yale University by Dale B. Martin
*New Testament Reading Room: Extensive on-line New Testament resources (including reference works, commentaries, translations, atlases, language tools, and works on New Testament theology), Tyndale Seminary
*Biblicalstudies.org.uk New Testament pages Bibliographies on the New Testament and its individual books
*New Testament Greek Lexicon Bible Study Tools offers two Bible versions, King James and New American Standard, for studying within the New Testament lexicons.
*Pastoral articles on the New Testament for ministerial training Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary (WELS)
* Jewish reading of the New Testament Haaretz essay on reclaiming the New Testament as an integral part of Jewish literature
*Guide to the University of Chicago New Testament Club Records 1894–1958 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center

===Development and authorship===
*The Gospels in the official canon, and some that were not included in the Bible
*Dating the New Testament A compilation of the dates ascribed by various scholars to the composition of the New Testament documents, accompanied by an odd statistical average of the dates

===Greek===
*New Testament Koine Greek Original Side by side with the English (King James) and Russian (Synodal) translation Commentary by the Greek Fathers – Icons from Mount Athos
*New Testament, Greek Polytonic Text according to Ecumenical Patriarchate &quot;(Greek)&quot;
*Greek New Testament text (searchable only; no downloads) with lexical aids

=== Art ===

* Collection: &quot;Christian New Testament&quot; from the University of Michigan Museum of Art
* New Testament art from the Metropolitan Museum of Art</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="4" end="17" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="19" end="21" title="New Testament" label="NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="53" end="77" title="Christian biblical canon" label="Christian biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="120" end="125" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="157" end="183" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="first-century Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="279" end="292" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="328" end="340" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="372" end="388" title="Sacred Scripture" label="Sacred Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="445" end="454" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="472" end="483" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="545" end="560" title="Christian Bible" label="Christian Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="585" end="605" title="Christianity" label="Christian traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="612" end="626" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="645" end="652" title="Gospel" label="gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="658" end="678" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="703" end="707" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="735" end="753" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="759" end="764" title="Biblical canon" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290800" start="796" end="810" title="Development of the New Testament canon" label="4th century AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="1006" end="1025" title="scholarly consensus" label="scholarly consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165472" start="1212" end="1222" title="Papyrus 52" label="Papyrus 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="1358" end="1375" title="Textual criticism" label="Textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="1588" end="1604" title="Sacred Tradition" label="Sacred Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1878" end="1890" title="Covenant_(biblical)#Christianity" label="new covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="1940" end="1955" title="Mosaic covenant" label="Mosaic covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="1983" end="1989" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="1995" end="1998" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="2024" end="2040" title="Israelites" label="people of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169924" start="2044" end="2055" title="Mount Sinai (bible)" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="2064" end="2069" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="2101" end="2114" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="2251" end="2263" title="Jewish Bible" label="Jewish Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q131590" start="2271" end="2287" title="Book of Jeremiah" label="Book of Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2289" end="2296" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="3130" end="3140" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="3236" end="3246" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3396" end="3422" title="Hebrews 9#The New Covenant (9:15-22)" label="possessing characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3476" end="3481" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="3945" end="3957" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="4388" end="4399" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="4508" end="4518" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110601" start="4813" end="4824" title="Christianity in the 4th century" label="4th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q209102" start="4926" end="4936" title="Lactantius" label="Lactantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="5077" end="5085" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="5282" end="5289" title="gospels" label="gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="5357" end="5374" title="Jesus of Nazareth" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="5598" end="5609" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5849" end="5867" title="Messiah#Christianity" label="Kingdom of Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="6264" end="6280" title="Irenaeus of Lyon" label="Irenaeus of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281900" start="6340" end="6356" title="Against Heresies (Irenaeus)" label="Against Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="6390" end="6407" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43600" start="6425" end="6440" title="Matthew the Evangelist" label="Apostle Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q51630" start="6468" end="6486" title="genealogy of Jesus" label="genealogy of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="6539" end="6543" title="Biblical Magi" label="magi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837143" start="6550" end="6567" title="flight into Egypt" label="flight into Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="6590" end="6620" title="Great Commission" label="commissioning of the disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="6653" end="6667" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="6681" end="6700" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="6743" end="6759" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="6768" end="6784" title="baptism of Jesus" label="baptism of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="6803" end="6821" title="Ascension of Jesus" label="Ascension of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="6830" end="6844" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="6858" end="6877" title="Luke the Evangelist" label="Luke the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6898" end="6917" title="Twelve Disciples#The Twelve Apostles" label="the Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6959" end="6971" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="6999" end="7013" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="7027" end="7046" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718887" start="7369" end="7390" title="new Testament apocrypha" label="non-canonical gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="7766" end="7785" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s death" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="7865" end="7879" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702529" start="8041" end="8050" title="Luke–Acts" label="Luke–Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="8123" end="8142" title="Luke the Evangelist" label="Luke the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="8362" end="8366" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="8681" end="8697" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="8820" end="8835" title="Pseudepigraphy" label="pseudepigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="9241" end="9246" title="Gentile" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="9300" end="9321" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="9323" end="9355" title="First Epistle to the Corinthians" label="First Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808" start="9357" end="9390" title="Second Epistle to the Corinthians" label="Second Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="9392" end="9416" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Epistle to the Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q408673" start="9418" end="9442" title="Epistle to the Ephesians" label="Epistle to the Ephesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51613" start="9445" end="9471" title="Epistle to the Philippians" label="Epistle to the Philippians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131095" start="9473" end="9498" title="Epistle to the Colossians" label="Epistle to the Colossians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="9501" end="9535" title="First Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="First Epistle to the Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131107" start="9537" end="9572" title="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131180" start="9780" end="9804" title="First Epistle to Timothy" label="First Epistle to Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131489" start="9808" end="9833" title="Second Epistle to Timothy" label="Second Epistle to Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131493" start="9837" end="9853" title="Epistle to Titus" label="Epistle to Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131104" start="9857" end="9876" title="Epistle to Philemon" label="Epistle to Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q369042" start="9984" end="10001" title="pastoral epistles" label="pastoral epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="10466" end="10488" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="10560" end="10572" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Anointed One"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="10742" end="10748" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="10907" end="10926" title="Mosaic covenant" label="Mosaic Law Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="11320" end="11332" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="11570" end="11576" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="11581" end="11599" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825988" start="11610" end="11632" title="Authorship of the Pauline epistles" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s authorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="11752" end="11763" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="11910" end="11916" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178" start="12264" end="12287" title="Second Epistle of Peter" label="Second Epistle of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="12448" end="12466" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915341" start="12551" end="12562" title="Bible prophecy" label="prophetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199667" start="12566" end="12588" title="apocalyptic literature" label="apocalyptic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="12712" end="12731" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="12752" end="12766" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733634" start="12804" end="12818" title="John of Patmos" label="John of Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432625" start="12996" end="13035" title="Seven churches of Asia" label="seven local congregations of Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q696203" start="13072" end="13082" title="apocalypse" label="apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="13415" end="13422" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q795334" start="13571" end="13579" title="Peshitta" label="Peshitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705469" start="14222" end="14241" title="Luther&amp;#x27;s canon" label="Luther&amp;#x27;s canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571095" start="14269" end="14281" title="Luther Bible" label="Luther Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="14549" end="14566" title="Jewish Christians" label="Jewish Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="14621" end="14633" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="14645" end="14661" title="Judea (Roman province)" label="Roman occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="14803" end="14810" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="14816" end="14831" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205368" start="15140" end="15150" title="Jewish-Roman Wars" label="Jewish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q567620" start="15516" end="15530" title="anonymous work" label="anonymous work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564479" start="15604" end="15629" title="Disciple whom Jesus loved" label="Disciple whom Jesus loved"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702529" start="15677" end="15686" title="Luke-Acts" label="Luke-Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="15722" end="15726" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="16017" end="16033" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="16048" end="16062" title="Bart D. Ehrman" label="Bart D. Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="16070" end="16098" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="16530" end="16539" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110396" start="16542" end="16561" title="Christian tradition" label="Christian tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="16573" end="16589" title="John the Apostle" label="John the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="16595" end="16614" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="16643" end="16657" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119802" start="16799" end="16806" title="John 21" label="John 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q233047" start="16950" end="16971" title="two-source hypothesis" label="two-source hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737782" start="16995" end="17044" title="Marcan priority" label="Gospel of Mark was the first gospel to be written"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="17079" end="17096" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="17105" end="17119" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="17140" end="17154" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q111065" start="17174" end="17184" title="Q document" label="Q document"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="17263" end="17279" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="17582" end="17602" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702529" start="17676" end="17685" title="Luke–Acts" label="Luke–Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384449" start="17918" end="17928" title="Theophilus (Biblical)" label="Theophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="18286" end="18300" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="19243" end="19257" title="Pseudepigraphy" label="pseudepigrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231095" start="19283" end="19308" title="Epistle to the Laodiceans" label="Epistle to the Laodiceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223342" start="19317" end="19349" title="Third Epistle to the Corinthians" label="Third Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="19716" end="19726" title="Mosaic Law" label="Mosaic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q131097" start="19918" end="19934" title="Epistle of James" label="Epistle of James"/>
<link wikidata="Q189380" start="20080" end="20089" title="patristic" label="patristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="20142" end="20156" title="James the Just" label="James the Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q131119" start="20338" end="20360" title="First Epistle of Peter" label="First Epistle of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699988" start="20420" end="20427" title="apostle" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="20536" end="20550" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="20552" end="20560" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="20572" end="20582" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="20594" end="20615" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="20630" end="20650" title="Origen of Alexandria" label="Origen of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178" start="20669" end="20696" title="The Second Epistle of Peter" label="The Second Epistle of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q654807" start="21393" end="21411" title="Johannine epistles" label="Johannine epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="21421" end="21439" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329596" start="21654" end="21674" title="Johannine literature" label="Johannine literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="22019" end="22031" title="apostle John" label="apostle John"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="22381" end="22399" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190053" start="22480" end="22486" title="Patmos" label="Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733634" start="22574" end="22588" title="John of Patmos" label="John of Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="22640" end="22656" title="John the Apostle" label="John the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="22669" end="22675" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q654807" start="22684" end="22700" title="epistles of John" label="epistles of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="22801" end="22814" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="22815" end="22823" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="22853" end="22866" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q192371" start="22907" end="22915" title="Polycarp" label="Polycarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="23020" end="23028" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q816641" start="23283" end="23299" title="Ben Witherington" label="Ben Witherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="23444" end="23463" title="scholarly consensus" label="scholarly consensus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23526" end="23545" title="John Robinson (bishop of Woolwich)#Redating the New Testament (1976)" label="John A. T. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216469" start="23547" end="23558" title="Daniel B. Wallace" label="Dan Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q451799" start="23560" end="23579" title="William F. Albright" label="William F. Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792939" start="23581" end="23594" title="Maurice Casey" label="Maurice Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="23874" end="23888" title="Bart D. Ehrman" label="Bart D. Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609731" start="23893" end="23910" title="Stephen L. Harris" label="Stephen L. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q47006486" start="23964" end="23977" title="Richard Pervo" label="Richard Pervo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702529" start="23984" end="23993" title="Luke–Acts" label="Luke–Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590209" start="24003" end="24017" title="David Trobisch" label="David Trobisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8106" start="24316" end="24329" title="First Century" label="First Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771427" start="24360" end="24376" title="Markus Bockmuehl" label="Markus Bockmuehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266076" start="24494" end="24505" title="Biblical manuscript" label="manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165472" start="24594" end="24604" title="Rylands Library Papyrus P52" label="Papyrus 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="24870" end="24882" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="24910" end="24925" title="First Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="1 Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="25062" end="25071" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564223" start="25079" end="25092" title="Cultural and historical background of Jesus" label="time of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332483" start="25098" end="25105" title="Aramaic of Jesus" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="25110" end="25121" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649362" start="25156" end="25171" title="Mishnaic Hebrew" label="Mishnaic Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q51666" start="25222" end="25238" title="historical Jesus" label="historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332483" start="25255" end="25262" title="Aramaic of Jesus" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="25282" end="25288" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="25293" end="25304" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="25437" end="25459" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="As Christianity spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="25531" end="25536" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="25538" end="25544" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="25550" end="25565" title="Coptic language" label="Egyptian Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="25579" end="25593" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278558" start="25648" end="25654" title="Hebrew Gospel of Matthew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695847" start="25658" end="25665" title="Aramaic Matthew" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="25879" end="25895" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="25925" end="25936" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="26194" end="26204" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189862" start="26285" end="26303" title="Jewish Koine Greek" label="Jewish Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26320" end="26343" title="Septuagint#Language" label="Greek of the Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="27289" end="27307" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="27505" end="27524" title="Sacred tradition" label="apostolic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="27729" end="27759" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="earliest Christian communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="27849" end="27863" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="1st century AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="27930" end="27937" title="Marcion" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q779950" start="27993" end="28010" title="Gospel of Marcion" label="Gospel of Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="28162" end="28187" title="Proto-orthodox Christianity" label="proto-orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q754941" start="28210" end="28220" title="Marcionism" label="Marcionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164699" start="28222" end="28239" title="Adolf von Harnack" label="Adolf von Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590209" start="28256" end="28270" title="David Trobisch" label="David Trobisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q192371" start="28415" end="28423" title="Polycarp" label="Polycarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="28425" end="28433" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="28438" end="28448" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="28458" end="28474" title="Pauline epistles" label="epistles of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718887" start="28605" end="28628" title="New Testament apocrypha" label="New Testament apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771070" start="28656" end="28667" title="Christianity in the 2nd century" label="2nd century"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="28752" end="28788" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="&amp;quot;writings of the prophets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q692665" start="28795" end="28814" title="Muratorian fragment" label="Muratorian fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q489181" start="28903" end="28926" title="Anchor Bible Dictionary" label="Anchor Bible Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="29310" end="29317" title="polemic" label="polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281900" start="29324" end="29340" title="Against Heresies (Irenaeus)" label="Against Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="29704" end="29710" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705056" start="29972" end="29984" title="Antilegomena" label="Antilegomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q692665" start="30000" end="30019" title="Muratorian fragment" label="Muratorian fragment"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="30278" end="30290" title="Early Church" label="Early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771070" start="30420" end="30431" title="Christianity in the 3rd century" label="3rd century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329918" start="30608" end="30621" title="Easter Letter" label="Easter Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="30736" end="30756" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705056" start="30971" end="30979" title="Antilegomena" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="30988" end="31037" title="Early centers of Christianity" label="third-century churches throughout the known world"/>
<link wikidata="Q262557" start="31306" end="31325" title="Epistle of Barnabas" label="Epistle of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="31327" end="31345" title="Shepherd of Hermas" label="Shepherd of Hermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993949" start="31351" end="31360" title="1 Clement" label="1 Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="31614" end="31622" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q764765" start="32543" end="32555" title="Acts of Paul" label="Acts of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="32575" end="32583" title="Shepherd of Hermas" label="Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231862" start="32593" end="32612" title="Apocalypse of Peter" label="Apocalypse of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q262557" start="32650" end="32669" title="epistle of Barnabas" label="epistle of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210752" start="32689" end="32714" title="Didache" label="Teachings of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="32744" end="32762" title="Book of Revelation" label="Apocalypse of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231372" start="32904" end="32935" title="Gospel of the Hebrews" label="Gospel according to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q762054" start="33033" end="33049" title="Gospel of Peter" label="Gospels of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131546" start="33054" end="33060" title="Gospel of Thomas" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381435" start="33065" end="33073" title="Gospel of Matthias" label="Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q667096" start="33114" end="33128" title="Acts of Andrew" label="Acts of Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q776123" start="33133" end="33137" title="Acts of John" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q932676" start="33993" end="34004" title="Diatessaron" label="Diatessaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="34381" end="34391" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745306" start="34669" end="34690" title="Synod of Hippo" label="Synod of Hippo Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493851" start="34812" end="34837" title="Council of Carthage (397)" label="Council of Carthage (397)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493851" start="34846" end="34871" title="Council of Carthage (419)" label="Council of Carthage (419)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="34916" end="34929" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130997" start="34974" end="34988" title="Pope Damasus I" label="Pope Damasus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281392" start="34996" end="35011" title="Council of Rome" label="Council of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182112" start="35033" end="35052" title="Decretum Gelasianum" label="Decretum Gelasianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="35262" end="35269" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134694" start="35358" end="35373" title="Pope Innocent I" label="Pope Innocent I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232795" start="35426" end="35448" title="Exuperius" label="Exsuperius of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="35493" end="35500" title="bishops" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="35717" end="35753" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="St. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281392" start="35845" end="35860" title="Council of Rome" label="Council of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493851" start="35966" end="35991" title="Third Council of Carthage" label="Third Council of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="36012" end="36030" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493851" start="36054" end="36079" title="Council of Carthage (419)" label="Council of Carthage (419)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36114" end="36125" title="Christianity in the 4th century#Defining scripture" label="4th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="36158" end="36162" title="Western Church" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110603" start="36233" end="36244" title="Christianity in the 5th century" label="5th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="36250" end="36264" title="Eastern Church" label="Eastern Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="36312" end="36330" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033321" start="36468" end="36482" title="Canon of Trent" label="Canon of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="36495" end="36512" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="36518" end="36538" title="Thirty-Nine Articles" label="Thirty-Nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="36555" end="36572" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q815013" start="36578" end="36609" title="Westminster Confession of Faith" label="Westminster Confession of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="36622" end="36631" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q539002" start="36641" end="36659" title="Synod of Jerusalem (1672)" label="Synod of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="36676" end="36690" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="36825" end="36846" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="37373" end="37391" title="Council of Trent" label="Tridentine Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568524" start="37408" end="37421" title="Constantine I and Christianity" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447633" start="37455" end="37467" title="Fifty Bibles of Constantine" label="fifty Bibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="37476" end="37500" title="Church of Constantinople" label="Church of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="37502" end="37512" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q185538" start="37603" end="37611" title="Constans" label="Constans"/>
<link wikidata="Q209285" start="37769" end="37784" title="Codex Vaticanus Graecus 1209" label="Codex Vaticanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152962" start="37789" end="37805" title="Codex Sinaiticus" label="Codex Sinaiticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q795334" start="37857" end="37865" title="Peshitta" label="Peshitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q318233" start="37870" end="37888" title="Codex Alexandrinus" label="Codex Alexandrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="37991" end="38000" title="classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="38064" end="38078" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="38109" end="38120" title="manuscripts" label="manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q971864" start="38406" end="38416" title="Papyrus 90" label="Papyrus 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576004" start="38418" end="38428" title="Papyrus 98" label="Papyrus 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768438" start="38430" end="38441" title="Papyrus 104" label="Papyrus 104"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165472" start="38456" end="38483" title="Rylands Library Papyrus P52" label="Rylands Library Papyrus P52"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="38586" end="38603" title="Textual criticism" label="Textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="38677" end="38682" title="Writing" label="texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="38686" end="38697" title="manuscripts" label="manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q916292" start="38707" end="38714" title="scribes" label="scribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668124" start="38775" end="38784" title="Interpolation (manuscripts)" label="additions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="38843" end="38848" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="38869" end="38874" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="38954" end="38960" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="38962" end="38968" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="38970" end="38978" title="Ethiopic" label="Ethiopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="38983" end="38991" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="39374" end="39381" title="Gnostic" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="39394" end="39404" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q643210" start="39728" end="39741" title="Bruce Metzger" label="Bruce Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668124" start="40365" end="40379" title="Interpolation (manuscripts)" label="interpolations"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="40552" end="40566" title="Bart D. Ehrman" label="Bart D. Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320835" start="41528" end="41561" title="Mark 16" label="last verses of the Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q492663" start="41579" end="41616" title="Jesus and the woman taken in adultery" label="Jesus and the woman taken in adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115006" start="41688" end="41703" title="Johannine Comma" label="Johannine Comma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41729" end="41745" title="Trinity#Theology" label="Trinity doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131101" start="41753" end="41774" title="First Epistle of John" label="First Epistle of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q10337407" start="41819" end="41833" title="Norman Geisler" label="Norman Geisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="42463" end="42481" title="Biblical criticism" label="Biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266076" start="42532" end="42549" title="Biblical manuscript" label="biblical writings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42660" end="42677" title="#Textual variation" label="textual variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="42851" end="42857" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="42906" end="42917" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="43003" end="43020" title="textual criticism" label="textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327432" start="43048" end="43067" title="Christian humanism" label="Christian humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q214115" start="43076" end="43089" title="Lorenzo Valla" label="Lorenzo Valla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="43094" end="43101" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13232341" start="43197" end="43228" title="New Testament textual criticism" label="New Testament textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q284465" start="43468" end="43480" title="lectionary" label="lectionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="43856" end="43868" title="Classics" label="Graeco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43873" end="43879" title="Judaism#Antiquity" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="43959" end="43971" title="Tanakh" label="Jewish Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="44436" end="44442" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="44444" end="44449" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="44455" end="44461" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q973954" start="44492" end="44503" title="Philoxenian" label="Philoxenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q973954" start="44537" end="44564" title="Philoxenus of Mabbug" label="Bishop Philoxenus of Mabbug"/>
<link wikidata="Q890733" start="44632" end="44640" title="Bohairic" label="Bohairic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="44646" end="44656" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="44659" end="44667" title="Fayyumic" label="Fayyumic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203299" start="44676" end="44682" title="Faiyum" label="Faiyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422037" start="44686" end="44698" title="Middle Egypt" label="Middle Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="44701" end="44708" title="Sahidic" label="Sahidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203751" start="44713" end="44724" title="Upper Egypt" label="Upper Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="44727" end="44735" title="Akhmimic" label="Akhmimic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30669" start="44749" end="44766" title="Sohag Governorate" label="Sohag Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517110" start="44940" end="44951" title="Alexandrian text-type" label="Alexandrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749877" start="44970" end="44977" title="Western text-type" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903143" start="45649" end="45657" title="Bible translations into Armenian" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903172" start="45659" end="45667" title="Bible translations into Georgian" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="45669" end="45677" title="Ethiopic" label="Ethiopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903207" start="45679" end="45686" title="Bible translations into Persian" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117824" start="45688" end="45695" title="Bible translations into Sogdian" label="Sogdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q498766" start="45712" end="45718" title="Gothic Bible" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053150" start="45720" end="45739" title="Bible translations into Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903144" start="45741" end="45747" title="Bible translations into Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118819" start="45753" end="45759" title="Bible translations into Nubian" label="Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="45820" end="45833" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="45907" end="45917" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571095" start="45940" end="45953" title="Luther Bible" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q356513" start="45962" end="45992" title="Jacques Lefèvre d&amp;#x27;Étaples" label="Jacques Lefèvre d&amp;#x27;Étaples"/>
<link wikidata="Q248436" start="46005" end="46019" title="Zürich Bible" label="Froschau Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462802" start="46050" end="46065" title="Tyndale Bible" label="William Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492456" start="46110" end="46121" title="Brest Bible" label="Brest Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="46138" end="46156" title="Authorized King James Version" label="Authorized Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q76743" start="46332" end="46343" title="Constantin von Tischendorf" label="Tischendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q992680" start="46345" end="46362" title="The New Testament in the Original Greek" label="Westcott and Hort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266076" start="46368" end="46377" title="Von Soden catalogue" label="von Soden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754533" start="46411" end="46420" title="Source text" label="base text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130001" start="46433" end="46448" title="Textus Receptus" label="Textus Receptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746704" start="46536" end="46548" title="Novum Testamentum Graece" label="Nestle-Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15891753" start="46629" end="46651" title="United Bible Societies" label="United Bible Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720124" start="46692" end="46698" title="Alexander Souter" label="Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270198" start="46824" end="46848" title="Revised Standard Version" label="Revised Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46874" end="46895" title=":fr:La Bible de Jérusalem" label="La Bible de Jérusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307901" start="46934" end="46953" title="Einheitsübersetzung" label="Einheitsübersetzung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304105" start="46986" end="47004" title="New American Bible" label="New American Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200072" start="47043" end="47068" title="New International Version" label="New International Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519597" start="47107" end="47141" title="Traduction Oecuménique de la Bible" label="Traduction Oecuménique de la Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248900" start="47171" end="47199" title="New Revised Standard Version" label="New Revised Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572685" start="47215" end="47239" title="English Standard Version" label="English Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893834" start="47404" end="47422" title="unity in diversity" label="unity in diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489733" start="47900" end="47911" title="Frank Stagg (theologian)" label="Frank Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="49263" end="49284" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="49335" end="49344" title="Sacred tradition" label="Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="49459" end="49491" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485951" start="50217" end="50228" title="Magisterium" label="Magisterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="50437" end="50453" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="50665" end="50674" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="51461" end="51475" title="sola scriptura" label="sola scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="51811" end="51829" title="Liberal Protestant" label="Liberal Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059765" start="51873" end="51894" title="doctrine of Scripture" label="doctrine of Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071810" start="52298" end="52337" title="Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy" label="Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216952" start="53313" end="53330" title="Messianic Judaism" label="Messianic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="53639" end="53663" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="53863" end="53870" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="53876" end="53901" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="ransom sacrifice of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="53911" end="53925" title="Kingdom of God" label="Kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q733981" start="54107" end="54124" title="church discipline" label="church discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466181" start="54367" end="54389" title="Oneness Pentecostalism" label="Oneness Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="54444" end="54458" title="sola scriptura" label="sola scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q158857" start="54533" end="54541" title="Biblical inerrancy" label="inerrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="54962" end="54990" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235794" start="55268" end="55278" title="Biblical infallibility" label="infallible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381150" start="55318" end="55339" title="Seventh-day Adventist theology" label="Adventist theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="55440" end="55462" title="evangelical Christians" label="evangelical Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296083" start="55776" end="55780" title="Journal of the Adventist Theological Society" label="JATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="55812" end="55815" title="Adventist Theological Society" label="ATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="55868" end="55878" title="Mosaic Law" label="Mosaic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734589" start="55977" end="55988" title="A. T. Jones" label="A. T. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365272" start="55993" end="56007" title="E. J. Waggoner" label="E. J. Waggoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="56051" end="56060" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q639174" start="56125" end="56133" title="legalism (theology)" label="legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552301" start="56157" end="56168" title="Uriah Smith" label="Uriah Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540936" start="56173" end="56186" title="George Ide Butler" label="George Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4464704" start="56365" end="56391" title="Three Angels&amp;#x27; Messages" label="third angel&amp;#x27;s message"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="56538" end="56585" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="56646" end="56670" title="Christian biblical canons" label="Christian biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57027" end="57041" title="Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ" label="Book of Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q462463" start="57047" end="57069" title="Doctrine and Covenants" label="Doctrine and Covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q459864" start="57078" end="57098" title="Pearl of Great Price (Mormonism)" label="Pearl of Great Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="57213" end="57221" title="the arts" label="the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="57240" end="57247" title="Gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="57256" end="57274" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51628" start="57302" end="57319" title="Nativity of Jesus" label="Nativity of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q429811" start="57481" end="57503" title="Early Christian art" label="earliest Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q539890" start="57565" end="57583" title="raising of Lazarus" label="raising of Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="57589" end="57605" title="baptism of Jesus" label="baptism of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q950667" start="57626" end="57639" title="Good Shepherd" label="Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903289" start="57642" end="57661" title="Biblical paraphrase" label="Biblical paraphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q505670" start="57731" end="57738" title="Heliand" label="Heliand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="57762" end="57773" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q51634" start="57803" end="57809" title="Arrest of Jesus" label="arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="57811" end="57816" title="Trial of Jesus" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="57821" end="57830" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349065" start="57843" end="57855" title="Passion play" label="Passion play"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="57870" end="57877" title="Passion (Christianity)" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389211" start="57914" end="57917" title="Crucifixion in the arts" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q781815" start="57922" end="57927" title="Passion (music)" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57933" end="57941" title=":Category:Portrayals of Jesus in film" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57946" end="57953" title="Passion (Christianity)#Film" label="Passion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57999" end="58020" title=":Category:Films based on the Gospels" label="New Testament Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825979" start="58156" end="58196" title="Authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051325" start="58199" end="58229" title="Catalogue of Vices and Virtues" label="Catalogue of Vices and Virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q51629" start="58232" end="58251" title="Chronology of Jesus" label="Chronology of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119762" start="58254" end="58286" title="Earlier Epistle to the Ephesians" label="Earlier Epistle to the Ephesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564223" start="58341" end="58383" title="Historical background of the New Testament" label="Historical background of the New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012407" start="58386" end="58420" title="Life of Jesus in the New Testament" label="Life of Jesus in the New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q910136" start="58423" end="58438" title="List of Gospels" label="List of Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q746704" start="58441" end="58465" title="Novum Testamentum Graece" label="Novum Testamentum Graece"/>
<link wikidata="Q76327" start="58634" end="58650" title="Rudolf Bultmann" label="Bultmann, Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q72196" start="59016" end="59032" title="Hans Conzelmann" label="Conzelmann, Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052691" start="59379" end="59393" title="Norman Perrin" label="Perrin, Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="59520" end="59535" title="Bart D. Ehrman" label="Ehrman, Bart D."/>
<link wikidata="Q3567041" start="59684" end="59703" title="Edgar J. Goodspeed" label="Goodspeed, Edgar J."/>
<link wikidata="Q4749053" start="59802" end="59818" title="Amy-Jill Levine" label="Levine, Amy-Jill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755973" start="59820" end="59837" title="Marc Zvi Brettler" label="Brettler, Marc Z."/>
<link wikidata="Q96837" start="59929" end="59944" title="Helmut Koester" label="Koester, Helmut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000879" start="60209" end="60224" title="Burton L. Mack" label="Mack, Burton L."/>
<link wikidata="Q7610088" start="60312" end="60326" title="Stephen Neill" label="Neill, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073886" start="60556" end="60565" title="Zondervan" label="Zondervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524249" start="60575" end="60587" title="Garry Wills" label="Wills, Garry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173718" start="60637" end="60655" title="David Bentley Hart" label="David Bentley Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="60703" end="60724" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="60742" end="60770" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q89662" start="60901" end="60914" title="Theodor Zahn" label="Zahn, Theodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978417" start="62781" end="62810" title="Russian Synodal Bible" label="Russian (Synodal) translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="62856" end="62867" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495870" start="63111" end="63147" title="University of Michigan Museum of Art" label="University of Michigan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="63177" end="63203" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
