<doc id="21241" wikidata="Q20" url="?curid=21241" title="Norway">
<text>Norway, officially the Kingdom of Norway, is a Nordic country located on the Scandinavian Peninsula in Northern Europe. The remote Arctic island of Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard also form part of the Kingdom of Norway. Bouvet Island, located in the Subantarctic, is a dependency, and not a part of the Kingdom; Norway also claims the Antarctic territories of Peter I Island and Queen Maud Land. Norway has a population of 5.6 million. Its capital and largest city is Oslo.

Norway has a total area of . The country shares a long eastern border with Sweden, and is bordered by Finland and Russia to the northeast. Norway has an extensive coastline facing the Skagerrak strait, the North Atlantic Ocean, and the Barents Sea.

The unified kingdom of Norway was established in 872 as a merger of petty kingdoms and has existed continuously for years. From 1537 to 1814, Norway was part of Denmark–Norway, and, from 1814 to 1905, it was in a personal union with Sweden. Norway was neutral during the First World War, and in the Second World War until April 1940 when it was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany until the end of the war.

Harald V of the House of Glücksburg is the current King of Norway. Jonas Gahr Støre has been Prime Minister of Norway since 2021. As a unitary state with a constitutional monarchy, Norway divides state power between the parliament, the cabinet, and the supreme court, as determined by the 1814 constitution. Norway has both administrative and political subdivisions on two levels: counties and municipalities. The Sámi people have a certain amount of self-determination and influence over traditional territories through the Sámi Parliament and the Finnmark Act. Norway maintains close ties with the European Union and the United States. Norway is a founding member of the United Nations, NATO, the European Free Trade Association, the Council of Europe, the Antarctic Treaty, and the Nordic Council; a member of the European Economic Area, the WTO, and the OECD; and a part of the Schengen Area. The Norwegian dialects share mutual intelligibility with Danish and Swedish.

Norway maintains the Nordic welfare model with universal health care and a comprehensive social security system, and its values are rooted in egalitarian ideals. The Norwegian state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, having extensive reserves of petroleum, natural gas, minerals, lumber, seafood, and fresh water. The petroleum industry accounts for around a quarter of the country&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP). On a per-capita basis, Norway is the world&#x27;s largest producer of oil and natural gas outside of the Middle East. The country has the fourth- and eighth-highest per-capita income in the world on the World Bank&#x27;s and IMF&#x27;s list, respectively. It has the world&#x27;s largest sovereign wealth fund, with a value of US$1.3 trillion.

== Etymology ==

Norway has two official names: &quot;Norge&quot; in Bokmål and &quot;Noreg&quot; in Nynorsk. The English name Norway comes from the Old English word &quot;Norþweg&quot; mentioned in 880, meaning &quot;northern way&quot; or &quot;way leading to the north&quot;, which is how the Anglo-Saxons referred to the coastline of Atlantic Norway. The Anglo-Saxons of Britain also referred to the kingdom of Norway in 880 as &quot;Norðmanna land&quot;.

There is some disagreement about whether the native name of Norway originally had the same etymology as the English form. According to the traditional dominant view, the first component was originally &quot;norðr&quot;, a cognate of English &quot;north&quot;, so the full name was &quot;Norðr &quot;, &quot;the way northwards&quot;, referring to the sailing route along the Norwegian coast, and contrasting with &quot;suðrvegar&quot; &quot;southern way&quot; (from Old Norse suðr) for (Germany), and &quot;austrvegr&quot; &quot;eastern way&quot; (from austr) for the Baltic.

== History ==
=== Prehistory ===

The earliest traces of human occupation in Norway are found along the coast, where the huge ice shelf of the last ice age first melted between 11,000 and 8000 BC. The oldest finds are stone tools dating from 9500 to 6000 BC, discovered in Finnmark (Komsa culture) in the north and Rogaland (Fosna culture) in the southwest. Theories about the two cultures being separate were deemed obsolete in the 1970s.

Between 3000 and 2500 BC, new settlers (Corded Ware culture) arrived in eastern Norway. They were Indo-European farmers who grew grain and kept livestock, and gradually replaced the hunting-fishing population of the west coast.

=== Metal Ages ===
From about 1500 BC, bronze was gradually introduced. Burial cairns built close to the sea as far north as Harstad and also inland in the south are characteristic of this period, with rock carving motifs that differ from those of the Stone Age, depicting ships resembling the Hjortspring boat, while large stone burial monuments known as stone ships were also erected.

There is little archaeological evidence dating to the early Iron Age (the last 500 years BC). The dead were cremated, and their graves contained few goods. During the first four centuries AD, the people of Norway were in contact with Roman-occupied Gaul; about 70 Roman bronze cauldrons, often used as burial urns, have been found. Contact with countries farther south brought a knowledge of runes; the oldest known Norwegian runic inscription dates from the third century.

=== Viking Age ===

By the time of the first historical records of Scandinavia, about the 8th century, several small political entities existed in Norway. It has been estimated that there were nine petty realms in Western Norway during the early Viking Age. Archaeologist Bergljot Solberg on this basis estimates that there would have been at least 20 in the whole country.

In the Viking period, Norwegian Viking explorers discovered Iceland by accident in the ninth century when heading for the Faroe Islands, and eventually came across Vinland, known today as Newfoundland, in Canada. The Vikings from Norway were most active in the northern and western British Isles and eastern North America isles.

According to tradition, Harald Fairhair unified them into one in 872 after the Battle of Hafrsfjord in Stavanger, thus becoming the first king of a united Norway. Harald&#x27;s realm was mainly a South Norwegian coastal state. Fairhair ruled with a strong hand and according to the sagas, many Norwegians left the country to live in Iceland, the Faroe Islands, Greenland, and parts of Britain and Ireland.

Haakon I the Good was Norway&#x27;s first Christian king, in the mid-10th century, though his attempt to introduce the religion was rejected. Norse traditions were replaced slowly by Christian ones in the late 10th and early 11th centuries. This is largely attributed to the missionary kings Olaf I Tryggvasson and Olaf II Haraldsson (St. Olaf). Olaf Tryggvasson conducted raids in England, including attacking London. Arriving back in Norway in 995, Olaf landed in Moster where he built a church which became the first Christian church in Norway. From Moster, Olaf sailed north to Trondheim where he was proclaimed King of Norway by the Eyrathing in 995. One of the most important sources for the history of the 11th century Vikings is the treaty between the Icelanders and Olaf II Haraldsson, king of Norway circa 1015 to 1028.

Feudalism never really developed in Norway or Sweden, as it did in the rest of Europe. However, the administration of government took on a very conservative feudal character. The Hanseatic League forced royalty to cede to them greater and greater concessions over foreign trade and the economy, because of the loans the Hansa had made to the royals and the large debt the kings were carrying. The League&#x27;s monopolistic control over the economy of Norway put pressure on all classes, especially the peasantry, to the degree that no real burgher class existed in Norway.

===High Middle Ages===

From the 1040s to 1130, the country was at peace. In 1130, the civil war era broke out on the basis of unclear succession laws, which allowed the king&#x27;s sons to rule jointly. The Archdiocese of Nidaros was created in 1152 and attempted to control the appointment of kings. The church inevitably had to take sides in the conflicts. The wars ended in 1217 with the appointment of Håkon IV Håkonsson, who introduced clear laws of succession.

From 1000 to 1300, the population increased from 150,000 to 400,000, resulting both in more land being cleared and the subdivision of farms. While in the Viking Age farmers owned their own land, by 1300, seventy per cent of the land was owned by the king, the church, or the aristocracy, and about twenty per cent of yields went to these landowners.

The 14th century is described as Norway&#x27;s golden age, with peace and increase in trade, especially with the British Islands, although Germany became increasingly important towards the end of the century. Throughout the High Middle Ages, the king established Norway as a sovereign state with a central administration and local representatives.

In 1349, the Black Death spread to Norway and within a year killed a third of the population. Later plagues reduced the population to half the starting point by 1400. Many communities were entirely wiped out, resulting in an abundance of land, allowing farmers to switch to more animal husbandry. The reduction in taxes weakened the king&#x27;s position, and many aristocrats lost the basis for their surplus. High tithes to church made it increasingly powerful and the archbishop became a member of the Council of State.

The Hanseatic League took control over Norwegian trade during the 14th century and established a trading centre in Bergen. In 1380, Olaf Haakonsson inherited both the Norwegian (as Olaf IV) and Danish thrones (as Olaf II), creating a union between the two countries. In 1397, under Margaret I, the Kalmar Union was created between the three Scandinavian countries. She waged war against the Germans, resulting in a trade blockade and higher taxation on Norwegian goods, which led to a rebellion. However, the Norwegian Council of State was too weak to pull out of the union.

Margaret pursued a centralising policy which inevitably favoured Denmark because of its greater population. Margaret also granted trade privileges to the Hanseatic merchants of Lübeck in Bergen in return for recognition of her rule, and these hurt the Norwegian economy. The Hanseatic merchants formed a state within a state in Bergen for generations. The &quot;Victual Brothers&quot; launched three devastating pirate raids on the port (the last in 1427).

Norway slipped ever more to the background under the Oldenburg dynasty (established 1448). There was one revolt under Knut Alvsson in 1502. Norway took no part in the events which led to Swedish independence from Denmark in the 1520s.

==== Kalmar Union ====
Upon the death of King Haakon V in 1319, Magnus Eriksson, at just three years old, inherited the throne as King Magnus VII. A simultaneous movement to make Magnus King of Sweden proved successful (he was a grandson of King Magnus Ladulås of Sweden), and both the kings of Sweden and of Denmark were elected to the throne by their respective nobles. Thus Sweden and Norway were united under King Magnus VII.

In 1349, the Black Death killed between 50% and 60% of Norway&#x27;s population and led to a period of social and economic decline. Although the death rate was comparable with the rest of Europe, economic recovery took much longer because of the small, scattered population. Even before the plague, the population was only about 500,000. After the plague, many farms lay idle while the population slowly increased. However, the few surviving farms&#x27; tenants found their bargaining positions with their landlords greatly strengthened.

King Magnus VII ruled Norway until 1350, when his son, Haakon, was placed on the throne as Haakon VI. In 1363, Haakon married Margaret, daughter of King Valdemar IV of Denmark. Upon the death of Haakon in 1379, his 10-year-old son Olaf IV acceded to the throne. As Olaf had already been elected to the throne of Denmark in 1376, Denmark and Norway entered a personal union. Olaf&#x27;s mother and Haakon&#x27;s widow, Queen Margaret, managed the foreign affairs of Denmark and Norway during Olaf&#x27;s minority.

Margaret was on the verge of achieving a union of Sweden with Denmark and Norway when Olaf IV suddenly died. Denmark made Margaret temporary ruler on the death of Olaf. On 2 February 1388, Norway followed suit and crowned Margaret. Queen Margaret knew that her power would be more secure if she were able to find a king to rule in her place. She settled on Eric of Pomerania, grandson of her sister. Thus at an all-Scandinavian meeting held at Kalmar, Erik of Pomerania was crowned king of all three Scandinavian countries, bringing the thrones of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden under the control of Queen Margaret when the country entered into the Kalmar Union.

===Early modern period===

After Sweden broke out of the Kalmar Union in 1521, Norway tried to follow suit, but the subsequent rebellion was defeated, and Norway remained in a union with Denmark until 1814. This period was by some referred to as the &quot;400-Year Night&quot;, since all of the kingdom&#x27;s intellectual and administrative power was centred in Copenhagen.

With the introduction of Protestantism in 1536, the archbishopric in Trondheim was dissolved; Norway lost its independence and effectually became a colony of Denmark. The Church&#x27;s income and possessions were instead redirected to the court in Copenhagen. Norway lost the steady stream of pilgrims to the relics of St. Olav at the Nidaros shrine and, with them, much of the contact with cultural and economic life in the rest of Europe.

Eventually restored as a kingdom (albeit in legislative union with Denmark) in 1661, Norway saw its land area decrease in the 17th century with the loss of the provinces Båhuslen, Jemtland, and Herjedalen to Sweden, as the result of a number of disastrous wars. In the north, its territory was increased by the acquisition of the provinces of Troms and Finnmark, at the expense of Sweden and Russia.

The famine of 1695–1696 killed roughly 10% of Norway&#x27;s population. The harvest failed in Scandinavia at least nine times between 1740 and 1800, with great loss of life.

===Later modern period===

After Denmark–Norway was attacked by the United Kingdom at the 1807 Battle of Copenhagen, it entered into an alliance with Napoleon, with the war leading to dire conditions and mass starvation in 1812. As the Danish kingdom was on the losing side in 1814, it was forced by the Treaty of Kiel to cede Norway to Sweden, while the old Norwegian provinces of Iceland, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands remained with the Danish crown. Norway took this opportunity to declare independence, adopted a constitution based on American and French models, and elected the Crown Prince of Denmark and Norway, Christian Frederick, as king on 17 May 1814 – celebrated as the Syttende mai (Seventeenth of May) holiday.

Norwegian opposition to the decision to link Norway with Sweden caused the Norwegian–Swedish War to break out as Sweden tried to subdue Norway by military means. As Sweden&#x27;s military was not strong enough to defeat the Norwegian forces outright, and Norway&#x27;s treasury was not large enough to support a protracted war, and as British and Russian navies blockaded the Norwegian coast, the belligerents were forced to negotiate the Convention of Moss. Christian Frederik abdicated the Norwegian throne and authorised the Parliament of Norway to make the necessary constitutional amendments to allow for the personal union that Norway was forced to accept. On 4 November 1814, the Parliament (Storting) elected Charles XIII of Sweden as king of Norway, thereby establishing the union with Sweden. Under this arrangement, Norway kept its liberal constitution and its own independent institutions, though it shared a monarch and foreign policy with Sweden. Following the recession caused by the Napoleonic Wars, economic development of Norway remained slow until 1830.

This period also saw the rise of Norwegian romantic nationalism, as Norwegians sought to define and express a distinct national character. The movement covered all branches of culture, including literature (Henrik Wergeland, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Jørgen Moe), painting (Hans Gude, Adolph Tidemand), music (Edvard Grieg), and even language policy, where attempts to define a native written language for Norway led to today&#x27;s two official written forms for Norwegian: Bokmål and Nynorsk.

King Charles III John came to the throne of Norway and Sweden in 1818 and reigned to 1844. He protected the constitution and liberties of Norway and Sweden during the age of Metternich. As such, he was regarded as a liberal monarch. However, he was ruthless in his use of paid informers, secret police and restrictions on the freedom of the press to put down public movements for reform—especially the Norwegian national independence movement.

The Romantic Era that followed the reign of Charles III John brought some significant social and political reforms. In 1854, women won the right to inherit property. In 1863, the last trace of keeping unmarried women in the status of minors was removed. Furthermore, women were eligible for different occupations, particularly the common school teacher. By mid-century, Norway&#x27;s democracy was limited; voting was limited to officials, property owners, leaseholders and burghers of incorporated towns.

Norway remained a conservative society. Life in Norway (especially economic life) was &quot;dominated by the aristocracy of professional men who filled most of the important posts in the central government&quot;. There was no strong bourgeois class to demand a breakdown of this aristocratic control. Thus, even while revolution swept over most of the countries of Europe in 1848, Norway was largely unaffected.

Marcus Thrane was a Utopian socialist who in 1848 organised a labour society in Drammen. In just a few months, this society had a membership of 500 and was publishing its own newspaper. Within two years, 300 societies had been organised all over Norway, with a total membership of 20,000 drawn from the lower classes of both urban and rural areas. In the end, the revolt was easily crushed; Thrane was captured and jailed.

In 1898, all men were granted universal suffrage, followed by all women in 1913.

=== Dissolution of the union and the First World War ===

Christian Michelsen, Prime Minister of Norway from 1905 to 1907, played a central role in the peaceful separation of Norway from Sweden on 7 June 1905. A national referendum confirmed the people&#x27;s preference for a monarchy over a republic. However, no Norwegian could legitimately claim the throne, since none of Norway&#x27;s noble families could claim royal descent.

The government then offered the throne of Norway to Prince Carl of Denmark, a prince of the Dano-German royal house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg and a distant relative of Norway&#x27;s medieval kings. Following the plebiscite, he was unanimously elected king by the Norwegian Parliament; he took the name Haakon VII.

Throughout the First World War, Norway remained neutral; however, diplomatic pressure from the British government meant that it heavily favoured the Allies. During the war, Norway exported fish to both Germany and Britain, until an ultimatum from the British government and anti-German sentiments as a result of German submarines targeting Norwegian merchantmen led to a termination of trade with Germany. 436 Norwegian merchantmen were sunk by the &quot;Kaiserliche Marine&quot;, with 1,150 Norwegian sailors killed.

=== Second World War ===
Norway once more proclaimed its neutrality during the Second World War, but was invaded by German forces on 9 April 1940. Although Norway was unprepared for the German surprise attack (see: Battle of Drøbak Sound, Norwegian Campaign, and Invasion of Norway), military and naval resistance lasted for two months. Norwegian armed forces in the north launched an offensive against the German forces in the Battles of Narvik, but were forced to surrender on 10 June after losing British support which had been diverted to France during the German invasion of France.

King Haakon and the Norwegian government escaped to Rotherhithe in London. Throughout the war they sent radio speeches and supported clandestine military actions against the Germans. On the day of the invasion, the leader of the small National-Socialist party Nasjonal Samling, Vidkun Quisling, tried to seize power, but was forced by the German occupiers to step aside. Real power was wielded by the leader of the German occupation authority, Josef Terboven. Quisling, as &quot;minister president&quot;, later formed a collaborationist government under German control. Up to 15,000 Norwegians volunteered to fight in German units, including the Waffen-SS.

Many Norwegians and persons of Norwegian descent joined the Allied forces as well as the Free Norwegian Forces. In June 1940, a small group had left Norway following their king to Britain. This group included 13 ships, five aircraft, and 500 men from the Royal Norwegian Navy. By the end of the war, the force had grown to 58 ships and 7,500 men in service in the Royal Norwegian Navy, 5 squadrons of aircraft in the newly formed Norwegian Air Force, and land forces including the Norwegian Independent Company 1 and 5 Troop as well as No. 10 Commandos.

During German occupation, Norwegians built a resistance movement which incorporated civil disobedience and armed resistance including the destruction of Norsk Hydro&#x27;s heavy water plant and stockpile of heavy water at Vemork, which crippled the German nuclear programme. More important to the Allied war effort, however, was the role of the Norwegian Merchant Marine, the fourth-largest merchant marine fleet in the world. It was led by the Norwegian shipping company Nortraship under the Allies throughout the war and took part in every war operation from the evacuation of Dunkirk to the Normandy landings. Every December Norway gives a Christmas tree to the United Kingdom as thanks for the British assistance during the war.

Svalbard was not occupied by German troops, but Germany secretly established a meteorological station there in 1944.

=== Post–World War II history ===
From 1945 to 1962, the Labour Party held an absolute majority in the parliament. The government, led by prime minister Einar Gerhardsen, embarked on a programme inspired by Keynesian economics, emphasising state financed industrialisation and co-operation between trade unions and employers&#x27; organisations. Many measures of state control of the economy imposed during the war were continued, although the rationing of dairy products was lifted in 1949, while price controls and rationing of housing and cars continued until 1960.

The wartime alliance with the United Kingdom and the United States continued in the post-war years. Although pursuing the goal of a socialist economy, the Labour Party distanced itself from the Communists, especially after the Communists&#x27; seizure of power in Czechoslovakia in 1948, and strengthened its foreign policy and defence policy ties with the US. Norway received Marshall Plan aid from the United States starting in 1947, joined the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) one year later, and became a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949.

Oil was discovered at the small Balder field in 1967, but production only began in 1999. In 1969, the Phillips Petroleum Company discovered petroleum resources at the Ekofisk field west of Norway. In 1973, the Norwegian government founded the State oil company, Statoil (now Equinor). Oil production did not provide net income until the early 1980s because of the large capital investment required. Around 1975, both the proportion and absolute number of workers in industry peaked. Since then labour-intensive industries and services like factory mass production and shipping have largely been outsourced.

Norway was a founding member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Norway was twice invited to join the European Union, but ultimately declined after referendums that failed by narrow margins in 1972 and 1994.

In 1981, a Conservative Party government led by Kåre Willoch replaced the Labour Party with a policy of stimulating the stagflated economy with tax cuts, economic liberalisation, deregulation of markets, and measures to curb record-high inflation (13.6% in 1981).

Norway&#x27;s first female prime minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of the Labour Party continued many of the reforms, while backing traditional Labour concerns such as social security, high taxes, the industrialisation of nature, and feminism. By the late 1990s, Norway had paid off its foreign debt and had started accumulating a sovereign wealth fund. Since the 1990s, a divisive question in politics has been how much of the income from petroleum production the government should spend, and how much it should save.

In 2011, Norway suffered two terrorist attacks by Anders Behring Breivik which struck the government quarter in Oslo and a summer camp of the Labour party&#x27;s youth movement at Utøya island, resulting in 77 deaths and 319 wounded.

Jens Stoltenberg led Norway as prime minister for eight years from 2005 to 2013. The 2013 Norwegian parliamentary election brought a more conservative government to power, with the Conservative Party and the Progress Party winning 43% of the electorate&#x27;s votes. In the Norwegian parliamentary election 2017 the centre-right government of Prime Minister Erna Solberg won re-election. The 2021 Norwegian parliamentary election saw a big win for the left-wing opposition in an election fought on climate change, inequality, and oil; Labour leader Jonas Gahr Støre was sworn in as prime minister.

== Geography ==

Norway&#x27;s core territory comprises the western and northernmost portion of the Scandinavian Peninsula; the remote island of Jan Mayen and the archipelago of Svalbard are also included. The Antarctic Peter I Island and the sub-Antarctic Bouvet Island are dependent territories and thus not considered part of the Kingdom. Norway also claims a section of Antarctica known as Queen Maud Land. Norwegian possessions in the North Atlantic, Faroe Islands, Greenland, and Iceland, remained Danish when Norway was passed to Sweden at the Treaty of Kiel. Norway also comprised Bohuslän until 1658, Jämtland and Härjedalen until 1645, Shetland and Orkney until 1468, and the Hebrides and Isle of Man until the Treaty of Perth in 1266.

Norway comprises the western and northernmost part of Scandinavia in Northern Europe, between latitudes 57° and 81° N, and longitudes 4° and 32° E. Norway is the northernmost of the Nordic countries and if Svalbard is included also the easternmost. Norway includes the northernmost point on the European mainland. The rugged coastline is broken by huge fjords and thousands of islands. The coastal baseline is . The coastline of the mainland including fjords stretches , when islands are included the coastline has been estimated to . Norway shares a land border with Sweden, with Finland, and with Russia to the east. To the north, west and south, Norway is bordered by the Barents Sea, the Norwegian Sea, the North Sea, and Skagerrak. The Scandinavian Mountains form much of the border with Sweden.

At (including Svalbard and Jan Mayen; without), much of the country is dominated by mountainous or high terrain, with a great variety of natural features caused by prehistoric glaciers and varied topography. The most noticeable of these are the fjords. Sognefjorden is the world&#x27;s second deepest fjord, and the world&#x27;s longest at . The lake Hornindalsvatnet is the deepest lake in Europe. Norway has about 400,000 lakes and 239,057 registered islands. Permafrost can be found all year in the higher mountain areas and in the interior of Finnmark county. Numerous glaciers are found in Norway. The land is mostly made of hard granite and gneiss rock, but slate, sandstone, and limestone are also common, and the lowest elevations contain marine deposits.

=== Climate ===
Because of the Gulf Stream and prevailing westerlies, Norway experiences higher temperatures and more precipitation than expected at such northern latitudes, especially along the coast. The mainland experiences four distinct seasons, with colder winters and less precipitation inland. The northernmost part has a mostly maritime Subarctic climate, while Svalbard has an Arctic tundra climate. The southern and western parts of Norway, fully exposed to Atlantic storm fronts, experience more precipitation and have milder winters than the eastern and far northern parts. Areas to the east of the coastal mountains are in a rain shadow, and have lower rain and snow totals than the west. The lowlands around Oslo have the warmest summers, but also cold weather and snow in wintertime. The sunniest weather is along the south coast, but sometimes even the coast far north can be very sunny – the sunniest month with 430 sun hours was recorded in Tromsø.

Because of Norway&#x27;s high latitude, there are large seasonal variations in daylight. From late May to late July, the sun never completely descends beneath the horizon in areas north of the Arctic Circle, and the rest of the country experiences up to 20 hours of daylight per day. Conversely, from late November to late January, the sun never rises above the horizon in the north, and daylight hours are very short in the rest of the country.

Temperature anomalies found in coastal locations are exceptional, with southern Lofoten and Bø Municipality having all monthly means above freezing in spite of being north of the Arctic Circle. The very northernmost coast of Norway would be ice-covered in winter if not for the Gulf Stream. The east of the country has a more continental climate, and the mountain ranges have subarctic and tundra climates. There is also higher rainfall in areas exposed to the Atlantic, especially the western slopes of the mountain ranges and areas close, such as Bergen. The valleys east of the mountain ranges are the driest; some of the valleys are sheltered by mountains in most directions. Saltdal Municipality in Nordland is the driest place with precipitation annually (1991–2020). In southern Norway, Skjåk Municipality in Innlandet county gets precipitation. Finnmarksvidda and some interior valleys of Troms county receive around annually, and the high Arctic Longyearbyen .

Parts of southeastern Norway including parts of Mjøsa have a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb), the southern and western coasts and also the coast north to Bodø have an oceanic climate (Cfb), and the outer coast further north almost to North Cape has a subpolar oceanic climate (Cfc). Further inland in the south and at higher altitudes, and also in much of Northern Norway, the subarctic climate (Dfc) dominates. A small strip of land along the coast east of North Cape (including Vardø) earlier had tundra/alpine/polar climate (ET), but this is mostly gone with the updated 1991–2020 climate normals, making this also subarctic. Large parts of Norway are covered by mountains and high altitude plateaus, and about one third of the land is above the treeline and thus exhibit tundra/alpine/polar climate (ET).

=== Biodiversity ===
Norway has a larger number of different habitats than almost any other European country. There are approximately 60,000 species in Norway and adjacent waters (excluding bacteria and viruses). The Norwegian Shelf large marine ecosystem is considered highly productive. The total number of species include 16,000 species of insects (probably 4,000 more species yet to be described), 20,000 species of algae, 1,800 species of lichen, 1,050 species of mosses, 2,800 species of vascular plants, up to 7,000 species of fungi, 450 species of birds (250 species nesting in Norway), 90 species of mammals, 45 fresh-water species of fish, 150 salt-water species of fish, 1,000 species of fresh-water invertebrates, and 3,500 species of salt-water invertebrates. About 40,000 of these species have been described by science. The red list of 2010 encompasses 4,599 species. Norway contains five terrestrial ecoregions: Sarmatic mixed forests, Scandinavian coastal conifer forests, Scandinavian and Russian taiga, Kola Peninsula tundra, and Scandinavian montane birch forest and grasslands.

Seventeen species are listed mainly because they are endangered on a global scale, such as the European beaver, even if the population in Norway is not seen as endangered. The number of threatened and near-threatened species equals to 3,682; it includes 418 fungi species, many of which are closely associated with the small remaining old-growth forests, 36 bird species, and 16 species of mammals. In 2010, 2,398 species were listed as endangered or vulnerable; of these 1,250 were listed as vulnerable (VU), 871 as endangered (EN), and 276 species as critically endangered (CR), among which were the grey wolf, the Arctic fox, and the pool frog.

The largest predator in Norwegian waters is the sperm whale, and the largest fish is the basking shark. The largest predator on land is the polar bear, while the brown bear is the largest predator on the Norwegian mainland. The largest land animal on the mainland is the elk (American English: moose).

=== Environment ===
Attractive and dramatic scenery and landscape are found throughout Norway. The west coast of southern Norway and the coast of northern Norway present some of the most visually impressive coastal sceneries in the world. National Geographic has listed the Norwegian fjords as the world&#x27;s top tourist attraction. The country is also home to the natural phenomena of the Midnight sun (during summer), as well as the Aurora borealis known also as the Northern lights.

The 2016 Environmental Performance Index from Yale University, Columbia University and the World Economic Forum put Norway in seventeenth place, immediately below Croatia and Switzerland. The index is based on environmental risks to human health, habitat loss, and changes in emissions. The index notes over-exploitation of fisheries, but not Norway&#x27;s whaling or oil exports. Norway had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.98/10, ranking it 60th globally out of 172 countries.

== Politics and government ==



Norway is considered to be one of the most developed democracies and states of justice in the world. Since 2010, Norway has been classified as the world&#x27;s most democratic country by the Democracy Index.

According to the Constitution of Norway, which was adopted on 17 May 1814 and was inspired by the United States Declaration of Independence and French Revolution, Norway is a unitary constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of government, wherein the King of Norway is the head of state and the prime minister is the head of government. Power is separated among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, as defined by the Constitution, which serves as the country&#x27;s supreme legal document.

The monarch officially retains executive power. But following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch became strictly representative and ceremonial. The Monarch is commander-in-chief of the Norwegian Armed Forces, and serves as chief diplomatic official abroad and as a symbol of unity. Harald V of the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg ascended to the Norwegian throne in 1991, the first since the 14th century who has been born in the country. Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway, is the heir to the throne.

In practice, the Prime Minister exercises the executive powers. Constitutionally, legislative power is vested with both the government and the Parliament of Norway, but the latter is the supreme legislature and a unicameral body. Norway is fundamentally structured as a representative democracy. The Parliament can pass a law by simple majority of the 169 representatives, of which 150 are elected directly from 19 constituencies, and an additional 19 seats (&quot;levelling seats&quot;) are allocated on a nationwide basis to make the representation in parliament correspond better with the popular vote for the political parties. A 4% election threshold is required for a party to gain levelling seats in Parliament.

The Parliament of Norway, called the &quot;Storting&quot;, ratifies national treaties developed by the executive branch. It can impeach members of the government if their acts are declared unconstitutional. If an indicted suspect is impeached, Parliament has the power to remove the person from office.

The position of prime minister is allocated to the member of Parliament who can obtain the confidence of a majority in Parliament, usually the current leader of the largest political party or, more effectively, through a coalition of parties; Norway has often been ruled by minority governments. The prime minister nominates the cabinet, traditionally drawn from members of the same political party or parties in the Storting, making up the government. The PM organises the executive government and exercises its power as vested by the Constitution.

Norway has a state church, the Lutheran Church of Norway, which has gradually been granted more internal autonomy in day-to-day affairs, but which still has a special constitutional status. Formerly, the PM had to have more than half the members of cabinet be members of the Church of Norway; this rule was removed in 2012. The issue of separation of church and state in Norway has been increasingly controversial. A part of this is the evolution of the public school subject Christianity, a required subject since 1739. Even the state&#x27;s loss in a battle at the European Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg in 2007 did not settle the matter. As of 1 January 2017, the Church of Norway is a separate legal entity, and no longer a branch of the civil service.
Through the Council of State, a privy council presided over by the monarch, the prime minister and the cabinet meet at the Royal Palace and formally consult the Monarch. All government bills need formal approval by the monarch before and after introduction to Parliament. The Council approves all of the monarch&#x27;s actions as head of state.

Members of the Storting are directly elected from party-list proportional representation in nineteen plural-member constituencies in a national multi-party system. Historically, both the Norwegian Labour Party and Conservative Party have played leading political roles. In the early 21st century, the Labour Party has been in power since the 2005 election, in a Red–Green Coalition with the Socialist Left Party and the Centre Party. Since 2005, both the Conservative Party and the Progress Party have won numerous seats in the Parliament.

In national elections in September 2013, two political parties, Høyre and Fremskrittspartiet, were elected on promises of tax cuts, more spending on infrastructure and education, better services and stricter rules on immigration, formed a government. Erna Solberg became prime minister, the second female prime minister after Gro Harlem Brundtland and the first conservative prime minister since Jan P. Syse. Solberg said her win was &quot;a historic election victory for the right-wing parties&quot;. Her centre-right government won re-election in the 2017 Norwegian parliamentary election. Norway&#x27;s new centre-left cabinet under Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Støre, the leader the Labour Party, took office on 14 October 2021.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Norway, a unitary state, is divided into fifteen first-level administrative counties (&quot;fylke&quot;). The counties are administered through directly elected county councils who elect the County Mayor. Additionally, the King and government are represented in every county by a County Governor (). The counties are then sub-divided into 357 second-level municipalities (), which in turn are administered by directly elected municipal council, headed by a mayor and a small executive cabinet. The capital of Oslo is considered both a county and a municipality. Norway has two integral overseas territories out of mainland: Jan Mayen and Svalbard, the only developed island in the archipelago of the same name, located far to the north of the Norwegian mainland.

There are 108 settlements that have town/city status in Norway (the Norwegian word is used to represent these places and that word can be translated as either town or city in English). Cities/towns in Norway were historically designated by the King and used to have special rules and privileges under the law. This was changed in the late 20th century, so now towns/cities have no special rights and a municipality can designate an urban settlement as a city/town. Towns and cities in Norway do not have to be large. Some cities have over a million residents such as Oslo, while others are much smaller such as Honningsvåg with about 2,200 residents. Usually, there is only one town within a municipality, but there are some municipalities that have more than one town within it (such as Larvik Municipality which has the town of Larvik and the town of Stavern.

==== Dependencies of Norway ====
There are three Antarctic and Subantarctic dependencies: Bouvet Island, Peter I Island, and Queen Maud Land. On most maps, there was an unclaimed area between Queen Maud Land and the South Pole until 12 June 2015 when Norway formally annexed that area.
=== Largest populated areas ===

=== Judicial system and law enforcement ===

Norway uses a civil law system where laws are created and amended in Parliament and the system regulated through the Courts of justice of Norway. It consists of the Supreme Court of 20 permanent judges and a Chief Justice, appellate courts, city and district courts, and conciliation councils. The judiciary is independent of executive and legislative branches. While the Prime Minister nominates Supreme Court Justices for office, their nomination must be approved by Parliament and formally confirmed by the Monarch. Usually, judges attached to regular courts are formally appointed by the Monarch on the advice of the Prime Minister.

The Courts&#x27; formal mission is to regulate the Norwegian judicial system, interpret the Constitution, and implement the legislation adopted by Parliament. In its judicial reviews, it monitors the legislative and executive branches to ensure that they comply with provisions of enacted legislation.

The law is enforced in Norway by the Norwegian Police Service. It is a Unified National Police Service made up of 27 Police Districts and several specialist agencies, such as Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime, known as &quot;Økokrim&quot;; and the National Criminal Investigation Service, known as &quot;Kripos&quot;, each headed by a chief of police. The Police Service is headed by the National Police Directorate, which reports to the Ministry of Justice and the Police. The Police Directorate is headed by a National Police Commissioner. The only exception is the Norwegian Police Security Agency, whose head answers directly to the Ministry of Justice and the Police.

Norway abolished the death penalty for regular criminal acts in 1902 and for high treason in war and war-crimes in 1979. Norwegian prisons are humane, rather than tough, with emphasis on rehabilitation. At 20%, Norway&#x27;s re-conviction rate is among the lowest in the world.

Reporters Without Borders, in its 2023 World Press Freedom Index, ranked Norway in first place out of 180 countries. In general, the legal and institutional framework in Norway is characterised by a high degree of transparency, accountability and integrity, and the perception and the occurrence of corruption are very low.

=== Human rights ===

Norway has been considered a progressive country, which has adopted legislation and policies to support women&#x27;s rights, minority rights, and LGBT rights. As early as 1884, 171 of the leading figures, among them five Prime Ministers, co-founded the Norwegian Association for Women&#x27;s Rights. They successfully campaigned for women&#x27;s right to education, women&#x27;s suffrage, the right to work, and other gender equality policies. From the 1970s, gender equality also came high on the state agenda, with the establishment of a public body to promote gender equality, which evolved into the Gender Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud. Civil society organisations also continue to play an important role; women&#x27;s rights organisations are today organised in the Norwegian Women&#x27;s Lobby umbrella organisation.

In 1990, the Norwegian constitution was amended to grant absolute primogeniture to the Norwegian throne, meaning that the eldest child, regardless of gender, takes precedence in the line of succession. As it was not retroactive, the current successor to the throne is the eldest son of the King, rather than his eldest child.
The Sámi people have for centuries been the subject of discrimination and abuse by the dominant cultures in Scandinavia and Russia, those countries claiming possession of Sámi lands. Norway has been greatly criticised by the international community for the politics of Norwegianization of and discrimination against the indigenous population of the country. Nevertheless, Norway was, in 1990, the first country to recognise ILO-convention 169 on indigenous people recommended by the UN.

Norway was the first country in the world to enact an anti-discrimination law protecting the rights of gay men and lesbians. In 1993, Norway became the second country to legalise civil union partnerships for same-sex couples, and on 1 January 2009, Norway became the sixth country to legalise same-sex marriage. As a promoter of human rights, Norway has held the annual Oslo Freedom Forum conference, a gathering described by &quot;The Economist&quot; as &quot;on its way to becoming a human-rights equivalent of the Davos economic forum&quot;.

=== Foreign relations ===

Norway maintains embassies in 82 countries. 60 countries maintain an embassy in Norway, all of them in the capital, Oslo.

Norway is a founding member of the United Nations (UN), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Council of Europe and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Norway issued applications for accession to the European Union (EU) and its predecessors in 1962, 1967 and 1992, respectively. While Denmark, Sweden and Finland obtained membership, the Norwegian electorate rejected the treaties of accession in referendums in 1972 and 1994.

After the 1994 referendum, Norway maintained its membership in the European Economic Area (EEA), granting the country access to the internal market of the Union, on the condition that Norway implements the Union&#x27;s pieces of legislation which are deemed relevant. Successive Norwegian governments have, since 1994, requested participation in parts of the EU&#x27;s co-operation that go beyond the provisions of the EEA agreement. Non-voting participation by Norway has been granted in, for instance, the Union&#x27;s Common Security and Defence Policy, the Schengen Agreement, and the European Defence Agency, as well as 19 separate programmes.

Norway participated in the 1990s brokering of the Oslo Accords, an unsuccessful attempt to resolve the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.

=== Military ===
The Norwegian Armed Forces numbers about 25,000 personnel, including civilian employees. According to 2009 mobilisation plans, full mobilisation produces approximately 83,000 combatant personnel. Norway has conscription (including 6–12 months of training); in 2013, the country became the first in Europe and NATO to draft women as well as men. However, due to less need for conscripts after the Cold War, few people have to serve if they are not motivated. The Armed Forces are subordinate to the Norwegian Ministry of Defence. The Commander-in-Chief is King Harald V. The military of Norway is divided into the Norwegian Army, the Royal Norwegian Navy, the Royal Norwegian Air Force, the Norwegian Cyber Defence Force and the Home Guard.

The country was one of the founding nations of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 4 April 1949. Norway contributed in the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. Additionally, Norway has contributed in several missions in contexts of the United Nations, NATO, and the Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union.

== Economy ==


Norwegians enjoy the second-highest GDP per capita among European countries (after Luxembourg), and the sixth-highest GDP (PPP) per capita in the world. Norway ranks as the second-wealthiest country in monetary value, with the largest capital reserve per capita of any nation. According to the CIA World Factbook, Norway is a net external creditor of debt. Norway reclaimed first place in the world in the UNDP Human Development Index (HDI) in 2009. The standard of living in Norway is among the highest in the world. &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; magazine ranks Norway last in its Failed States Index for 2009 and 2023, judging Norway to be the world&#x27;s most well-functioning and stable country. The OECD ranks Norway fourth in the 2013 equalised Better Life Index and third in intergenerational earnings elasticity according to a 2010 study.

The Norwegian economy is an example of a mixed economy; a prosperous capitalist welfare state, it features a combination of free market activity and large state ownership in certain key sectors, influenced by both liberal governments from the late 19th century and later by social democratic governments in the postwar era. Public healthcare in Norway is free (after an annual charge of around 2000 kroner for those over 16), and parents have 46 weeks paid parental leave. The state income derived from natural resources includes a significant contribution from petroleum production. , Norway has an unemployment rate of 4.8%, with 68% of the population aged 15–74 employed. People in the labour force are either employed or looking for work. , 9.5% of the population aged 18–66 receive a disability pension and 30% of the labour force are employed by the government, the highest in the OECD. The hourly productivity levels, as well as average hourly wages in Norway, are among the highest in the world.

The egalitarian values of Norwegian society have kept the wage difference between the lowest paid worker and the CEO of most companies as much less than in comparable western economies. This is also evident in Norway&#x27;s low Gini coefficient.

The state has large ownership positions in key industrial sectors, such as the strategic petroleum sector (Equinor), hydroelectric energy production (Statkraft), aluminium production (Norsk Hydro), the largest Norwegian bank (DNB), and telecommunication provider (Telenor). Through these big companies, the government controls approximately 30% of the stock values at the Oslo Stock Exchange. When non-listed companies are included, the state has even higher share in ownership (mainly from direct oil licence ownership). Norway is a major shipping nation and has the world&#x27;s sixth largest merchant fleet, with 1,412 Norwegian-owned merchant vessels.

By referendums in 1972 and 1994, Norwegians rejected proposals to join the European Union (EU). However, Norway, together with Iceland and Liechtenstein, participates in the European Union&#x27;s single market through the European Economic Area (EEA) agreement. The EEA Treaty between the European Union countries and the EFTA countries—transposed into Norwegian law via &quot;EØS-loven&quot;—describes the procedures for implementing European Union rules in Norway and the other EFTA countries. Norway is a highly integrated member of most sectors of the EU internal market. Some sectors, such as agriculture, oil and fish, are not wholly covered by the EEA Treaty. Norway has also acceded to the Schengen Agreement and several other intergovernmental agreements among the EU member states.

The country is richly endowed with natural resources including petroleum, hydropower, fish, forests, and minerals. Large reserves of petroleum and natural gas were discovered in the 1960s, which led to an economic boom. Norway has obtained one of the highest standards of living in the world in part by having a large amount of natural resources compared to the size of the population. In 2011, 28% of state revenues were generated from the petroleum industry.

Norway was the first country to ban deforestation, with a view to preventing its rain forests from vanishing. The country declared its intention at the UN Climate Summit in 2014 alongside Great Britain and Germany.

=== Resources ===

==== Oil industry ====
Export revenues from oil and gas have risen to over 40% of total exports and constitute almost 20% of the GDP. Norway is the fifth-largest oil exporter and third-largest gas exporter in the world, but it is not a member of OPEC. In 1995, the Norwegian government established the sovereign wealth fund (&quot;Government Pension Fund – Global&quot;) to be funded with oil revenues.

The government controls its petroleum resources through a combination of state ownership in major operators in the oil fields (with approximately 62% ownership in Equinor in 2007) and the fully state-owned Petoro, which has a market value of about twice Equinor, and SDFI. Finally, the government controls licensing of exploration and production of fields. The fund invests in developed financial markets outside Norway. Spending from the fund is constrained by the budgetary rule (&quot;Handlingsregelen&quot;), which limits spending over time to no more than the real value yield of the fund, lowered in 2017 to 3% of the fund&#x27;s total value.

Between 1966 and 2013, Norwegian companies drilled 5,085 oil wells, mostly in the North Sea. Oil fields not yet in the production phase include: Wisting Central—calculated size in 2013 at 65–156 million barrels of oil and , (&quot;utvinnbar&quot;) of gas. and the Castberg Oil Field (&quot;Castberg-feltet&quot;)—calculated size at 540 million barrels of oil, and (&quot;utvinnbar&quot;) of gas. Both oil fields are located in the Barents Sea.

Norway is also the world&#x27;s second-largest exporter of fish (in value, after China). Fish from fish farms and catch constitutes the second largest (behind oil/natural gas) export product measured in value. Norway is the world&#x27;s largest producer of salmon, followed by Chile.

Hydroelectric plants generate roughly 98–99% of Norway&#x27;s electric power, more than any other country in the world.

Norway contains significant mineral resources, and in 2013, its mineral production was valued at US$1.5 billion (Norwegian Geological Survey data). The most valuable minerals are calcium carbonate (limestone), building stone, nepheline syenite, olivine, iron, titanium, and nickel.

In 2017, the Government Pension Fund controlled assets surpassed a value of US$1 trillion (equal to US$190,000 per capita), about 250% of Norway&#x27;s 2017 GDP. It is the largest sovereign wealth fund in the world.

Other nations with economies based on natural resources, such as Russia, are trying to learn from Norway by establishing similar funds. The investment choices of the Norwegian fund are directed by ethical guidelines; for example, the fund is not allowed to invest in companies that produce parts for nuclear weapons. Norway&#x27;s highly transparent investment scheme is lauded by the international community.

=== Transport ===
Due to the low population density, narrow shape and long coastlines of Norway, its public transport is less developed than in many European countries, especially outside the major cities. The country has long-standing water transport traditions, but the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications has in recent years implemented rail, road, and air transport through numerous subsidiaries to develop the country&#x27;s infrastructure. Under discussion is development of a new high-speed rail system between the nation&#x27;s largest cities.

Norway&#x27;s main railway network consists of of standard gauge lines, of which is double track and high-speed rail (210 km/h) while 62% is electrified at . The railways transported 56,827,000 passengers, 2,956 million passenger-kilometres, and 24,783,000 tonnes of cargo for 3,414 million tonne-kilometres. The entire network is owned by Bane NOR. Domestic passenger trains are operated by various companies, including Vy, SJ, Go-Ahead and Flytoget, while freight trains are operated by CargoNet and OnRail.

Investment in new infrastructure and maintenance is financed through the state budget, and subsidies are provided for passenger train operations. NSB operates long-haul trains, including night trains, regional services and four commuter train systems, around Oslo, Trondheim, Bergen and Stavanger.

Norway has approximately of road network, of which are paved and are motorway. The four tiers of road routes are national, county, municipal and private, with national and primary county roads numbered en route. The most important national routes are part of the European route scheme. The two most prominent are the European route E6 going north–south through the entire country, and the E39, which follows the West Coast. National and county roads are managed by the Norwegian Public Roads Administration.

Norway has the world&#x27;s largest registered stock of plug-in electric vehicles per capita. In March 2014, Norway became the first country where over 1 in every 100 passenger cars on the roads is a plug-in electric. The plug-in electric segment market share of new car sales is also the highest in the world. According to a report by in June 2016, the country would like to ban sales of gasoline and diesel powered vehicles as early as 2025.

Of the 98 airports in Norway, 52 are public, and 46 are operated by the state-owned Avinor. Seven airports have more than one million passengers annually. A total of 41,089,675 passengers passed through Norwegian airports in 2007, of whom 13,397,458 were international.

The central gateway to Norway by air is Oslo Airport, Gardermoen. Located about northeast of Oslo, it is hub for the two major Norwegian airlines: Scandinavian Airlines and Norwegian Air Shuttle, and for regional aircraft from Western Norway. There are departures to most European countries and some intercontinental destinations. A direct high-speed train connects to Oslo Central Station every 10 minutes for a 20 min ride.

=== Research ===
Norway has a rich history of contributions to science, mathematics, and technology, with several internationally recognized scientists and innovators.

In mathematics, Niels Henrik Abel and Sophus Lie made groundbreaking contributions to analysis and group theory. Caspar Wessel was the first to describe vectors and complex numbers in the complex plane, laying the foundation for modern vector and complex analysis. Thoralf Skolem made revolutionary contributions to mathematical logic, while Øystein Ore and Ludwig Sylow advanced group theory. Atle Selberg, a major figure in 20th-century mathematics, was honored with the Fields Medal, Wolf Prize, and Abel Prize. Ernst S. Selmer&#x27;s work significantly influenced modern cryptographic algorithms.

In physics, notable figures include Kristian Birkeland, known for his work on the aurora borealis, and Ivar Giaever, a Nobel laureate in physics. Carl Anton Bjerknes and Christopher Hansteen made contributions to hydrodynamics and geomagnetism, respectively. The meteorologists Vilhelm Bjerknes and Ragnar Fjørtoft were instrumental in the development of numerical weather prediction.

Norwegian chemists like Lars Onsager, a Nobel laureate, and Odd Hassel, recognized for his work in stereochemistry, have left a lasting legacy. Peter Waage and Cato Maximilian Guldberg formulated the law of mass action, fundamental to chemical reaction theory.

In technology, Victor Goldschmidt is regarded as a founder of modern geochemistry. Håkon Wium Lie pioneered Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), a cornerstone of web design. Pål Spilling contributed to the development of the Internet Protocol, bringing the Internet to Europe. Computer scientists Ole-Johan Dahl and Kristen Nygaard developed Simula, the first object-oriented programming language, earning them the prestigious Turing Award.

Norwegian academics have also advanced social sciences. Arne Næss founded deep ecology, while Johan Galtung established the field of peace studies. Criminologists Nils Christie and Thomas Mathiesen, sociologists Vilhelm Aubert, Harriet Holter, and Erik Grønseth, and political scientist Stein Rokkan made pioneering contributions to their fields. Economists Ragnar Frisch, Trygve Haavelmo, and Finn E. Kydland were honored with Nobel Prizes for their work in econometrics and macroeconomics.

As of 2024, Norway is ranked 21st in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. The country has produced fourteen Nobel laureates across various disciplines.

=== Tourism ===
In 2008, Norway ranked 17th in the World Economic Forum&#x27;s Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report. Tourism in Norway contributed to 4.2% of the gross domestic product as reported in 2016. Every one in fifteen people throughout the country work in the tourism industry. Tourism is seasonal in Norway, with more than half of total tourists visiting between the months of May and August.
The main attractions of Norway are the varied landscapes that extend across the Arctic Circle. It is famous for its coastline and its mountains, ski resorts, lakes and woods. Popular tourist destinations in Norway include Oslo, Ålesund, Bergen, Stavanger, Trondheim, Kristiansand, Arendal, Tromsø, Fredrikstad, and Tønsberg. Much of the nature of Norway remains unspoiled, and thus attracts numerous hikers and skiers. The fjords, mountains and waterfalls in Western Norway and Northern Norway attract several hundred thousand foreign tourists each year. In the cities, cultural idiosyncrasies such as the Holmenkollen ski jump in Oslo and Saga Oseberg in Tønsberg attract many visitors, as do landmarks such as Bryggen in Bergen, Vigeland installation in Frogner Park in Oslo, Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim, Fredrikstad Fortress (&quot;Gamlebyen&quot;) in Fredrikstad, and the ruin park of Tønsberg Fortress in Tønsberg.

== Demographics ==
=== Population ===
Norway&#x27;s population was 5,384,576 people in the third quarter of 2020. Norwegians are an ethnic North Germanic people. The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2018 was estimated at 1.56 children born per woman, below the replacement rate of 2.1, it remains considerably below the high of 4.69 children born per woman in 1877. In 2018 the median age of the Norwegian population was 39.3 years.

The Sámi people are indigenous to the Far North and have traditionally inhabited central and northern parts of Norway and Sweden, as well as areas in northern Finland and in Russia on the Kola Peninsula. Another national minority are the Kven people, descendants of Finnish-speaking people who migrated to northern Norway from the 18th up to the 20th century. From the 19th century up to the 1970s, the Norwegian government tried to assimilate both the Sámi and the Kven, encouraging them to adopt the majority language, culture and religion. Because of this &quot;Norwegianization process&quot;, many families of Sámi or Kven ancestry now identify as ethnic Norwegian.

The national minorities of Norway are Kvens, Jews, Forest Finns, and Romani people.

In 2017, the population of Norway ranked first on the World Happiness Report.
=== Migration ===
Particularly in the 19th century, when economic conditions were difficult in Norway, tens of thousands of people migrated to the United States and Canada, where they could work and buy land in frontier areas. Many went to the Midwest and Pacific Northwest. In 2006, according to the US Census Bureau, almost 4.7 million persons identified as Norwegian Americans, which was larger than the population of ethnic Norwegians in Norway itself. In the 2011 Canadian census, 452,705 Canadian citizens identified as having Norwegian ancestry.

In 2024, approximately 931,081 individuals (16.8% of the population) of the population of Norway were immigrants. Of these, 386,559 (41.5%) had a Western background (Europe, USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand), while 544,521 (58.5%) had a non-Western background (Asia, Africa, South and Central America). 221,459 individuals (4% of the population) were children of immigrants, born in Norway.

The largest groups of immigrants have come from Poland, Lithuania, Sweden and Syria, as well as Ukraine since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022.

Immigrants have settled in all Norwegian municipalities. In 2013, the cities with the highest share of immigrants were Oslo (32%) and Drammen (27%). According to Reuters, Oslo is the &quot;fastest growing city in Europe because of increased immigration&quot;. In recent years, immigration has accounted for most of Norway&#x27;s population growth.

=== Religion ===
==== Church of Norway ====

Separation of church and state happened significantly later in Norway than in most of Europe, and remains incomplete. In 2012, the Norwegian parliament voted to grant the Church of Norway greater autonomy, a decision which was confirmed in a constitutional amendment on 21 May 2012.

Until 2012 parliamentary officials were required to be members of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church of Norway, and at least half of all government ministers had to be a member of the state church. As state church, the Church of Norway&#x27;s clergy were viewed as state employees, and the central and regional church administrations were part of the state administration. Members of the Royal family are required to be members of the Lutheran church. On 1 January 2017, Norway made the church independent of the state, but retained the Church&#x27;s status as the &quot;people&#x27;s church&quot;.

Most Norwegians are registered at baptism as members of the Church of Norway. Many remain in the church to participate in the community and practices such as baptism, confirmation, marriage, and burial rites. About 70.6% of Norwegians were members of the Church of Norway in 2017. In 2017, about 53.6% of all newborns were baptised and about 57.9% of all 15-year-olds were confirmed in the church.

==== Religious affiliation ====

According to the 2010 Eurobarometer Poll, 22% of Norwegian citizens responded that &quot;they believe there is a God&quot;, 44% responded that &quot;they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force&quot; and 29% responded that &quot;they don&#x27;t believe there is any sort of spirit, God or life force&quot;. Five per cent gave no response. In the early 1990s, studies estimated that between 4.7% and 5.3% of Norwegians attended church on a weekly basis. This figure has dropped to about 2%.

In 2010, 10% of the population was religiously unaffiliated, while another 9% were members of religious communities outside the Church of Norway. Other Christian denominations total about 4.9% of the population, the largest of which is the Roman Catholic Church, with 83,000 members, according to 2009 government statistics. The (Evening Post) in October 2012 reported there were about 115,234 registered Roman Catholics in Norway; the reporter estimated that the total number of people with a Roman Catholic background may be 170,000–200,000 or higher.

Others include Pentecostals (39,600), the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church of Norway (19,600), the United Methodist Church in Norway (11,000), Baptists (9,900), Eastern Orthodox (9,900), Brunstad Christian Church (6,800), Seventh-day Adventists (5,100), Assyrians of the ACOE and the Chaldean Catholic Church, and others. The Swedish, Finnish and Icelandic Lutheran congregations in Norway have about 27,500 members in total. Other Christian denominations comprise less than 1% each, including 4,000 members in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and 12,000 Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.
Among non-Christian religions, Islam is the largest, with 166,861 registered members (2018), and probably fewer than 200,000 in total.

Other religions comprise less than 1% each, including 819 adherents of Judaism. Indian immigrants introduced Hinduism to Norway, which in 2011 has slightly more than 5,900 adherents, or 1% of non-Lutheran Norwegians. Sikhism has approximately 3,000 adherents, with most living in Oslo, which has two gurdwaras. Drammen also has a sizeable population of Sikhs; the largest gurdwara in north Europe was built in Lier. There are eleven Buddhist organisations, grouped under the Buddhistforbundet organisation, with slightly over 14,000 members, which make up 0.2% of the population. The Baháʼí Faith religion has slightly more than 1,000 adherents. Around 1.7% (84,500) of Norwegians belong to the secular Norwegian Humanist Association.

From 2006 to 2011, the fastest-growing religious communities in Norway were Eastern Orthodox Christianity and Oriental Orthodox Christianity, which grew in membership by 80%; however, their share of the total population remains small, at 0.2%. It is associated with the immigration from Eritrea and Ethiopia, and to a lesser extent from Central and Eastern European and Middle Eastern countries. Other fast-growing religions were Roman Catholicism (78.7%), Hinduism (59.6%), Islam (48.1%), and Buddhism (46.7%).

==== Indigenous religions ====
As in other Scandinavian countries, the ancient Norse followed a form of Germanic paganism known as Norse paganism. By the end of the 11th century, when Norway had been Christianised, the indigenous Norse religion and practices were prohibited. Remnants of the native religion and beliefs of Norway survive today in the form of names, referential names of cities and locations, the days of the week, and everyday language. Modern interest in the old ways has led to a revival of pagan religious practices in the form of &quot;Åsatru.&quot; The Norwegian &quot;Åsatrufellesskapet Bifrost&quot; formed in 1996; in 2011, the fellowship had about 300 members. &quot;Foreningen Forn Sed&quot; was formed in 1999 and has been recognised by the Norwegian government.

The Sámi minority retained their shamanistic religion well into the 18th century, when most converted to Christianity under the influence of Dano-Norwegian Lutheran missionaries. Today there is a renewed appreciation for the Sámi traditional way of life, which has led to a revival of &quot;Noaidevuohta&quot;. Some Norwegian and Sámi celebrities are reported to visit shamans for guidance.

=== Health ===
Norway was awarded first place according to the UN&#x27;s Human Development Index (HDI) for 2013. From the 1900s, improvements in public health occurred as a result of development in several areas such as social and living conditions, changes in disease and medical outbreaks, establishment of the health care system, and emphasis on public health matters. Vaccination and increased treatment opportunities with antibiotics resulted in great improvements within the Norwegian population. Improved hygiene and better nutrition were factors that contributed to improved health.

The disease pattern in Norway changed from communicable diseases to non-communicable diseases and chronic diseases as cardiovascular disease. Inequalities and social differences are still present in public health in Norway.

In 2013 the infant mortality rate was 2.5 per 1,000 live births among children under the age of one. For girls it was 2.7 and for boys 2.3, which is the lowest infant mortality rate for boys ever recorded in Norway.

=== Education ===
Higher education in Norway is offered by a range of seven universities, five specialised colleges, 25 university colleges as well as a range of private colleges. Education follows the Bologna Process involving Bachelor (3 years), Master (2 years) and PhD (3 years) degrees. Acceptance is offered after finishing upper secondary school with general study competence.

Public education is virtually free for citizens from EU/EEA and Switzerland, but other nationalities need to pay tuition fees. Higher education has historically been free for everyone regardless of nationality, but tuition fees for all students from outside EU/EEA and Switzerland was implemented in 2023.

The academic year has two semesters, from August to December and from January to June. The ultimate responsibility for the education lies with the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research.

=== Languages ===

Norwegian in its two forms, Bokmål and Nynorsk, is the main national official language of all of Norway. Sámi, a group which includes three separate languages, is recognised as a minority language on the national level and is a co-official language alongside Norwegian in the Sámi administrative linguistic area (&quot;Forvaltningsområdet for samisk språk&quot;) in Northern Norway. Kven is a minority language and is a co-official language alongside Norwegian in one municipality, also in Northern Norway.

====Norwegian====
Norwegian is a North Germanic language descended from Old Norse. It is the main national language of Norway and is spoken throughout the country. Norwegian is spoken natively by over 5 million people mainly in Norway, but is generally understood throughout Scandinavia and to a lesser degree other Nordic countries. It has two official written forms, &quot;Bokmål&quot; and &quot;Nynorsk&quot;. Both are used in public administration, schools, churches, and media. Bokmål is the written language used by a majority of about 85%. Around 95% of the population speak Norwegian as their first or native language, although many speak dialects that may differ significantly from the written languages. Norwegian dialects are mutually intelligible, although listeners with limited exposure to dialects other than their own may struggle with certain phrases and pronunciations.

Norwegian is closely related to and generally mutually intelligible with its neighbour Scandinavian languages; Danish and Swedish, and the three main Scandinavian languages thus form both a dialect continuum and a larger language community with about 25 million speakers. All three languages are commonly employed in communication among inhabitants of the Scandinavian countries. As a result of the co-operation within the Nordic Council, inhabitants of all Nordic countries always have the right to communicate with Norwegian authorities in Danish or Swedish as equal alternatives to Norwegian. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the Norwegian language was subject to strong political and cultural controversies. This led to the development of Nynorsk in the 19th century and to the formation of alternative spelling standards in the 20th century.

====Sámi and Kven====
Several Uralic Sámi languages, which are related but not generally mutually intelligible, are traditionally spoken by the Sámi people primarily in Northern Norway and to much lesser extent in some parts of Central Norway. Around 15,000 people have officially registered as Sámi in the Sámi census (&quot;Samemanntallet&quot;), but the number of people of recent Sámi heritage is often estimated at 50,000 people. The number of people who have some knowledge of Northern Sámi, including as a second language, is estimated at 25,000 people, but only a minority are native speakers. The other Sámi languages are heavily endangered and spoken by at most a few hundred people. Most people of Sámi heritage are today native speakers of Norwegian as a result of past assimilation policies.

Speakers have a right to be educated and to receive communication from the government in their own language in a special &quot;forvaltningsområde&quot; (administrative area) for Sámi languages. The Kven minority historically spoke the Uralic Kven language (considered a separate language in Norway, but generally perceived as a Finnish dialect in Finland). Today the majority of ethnic Kven have little or no knowledge of the language. As Norway has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML) the Kven language together with Romani and Scandoromani language has become officially recognised minority languages.

====Other languages====
Some supporters have also advocated making Norwegian Sign Language an official language.

The primary foreign language taught in Norwegian schools is English, and the majority of the population, especially those born after World War II, is fairly fluent in English. German, French and Spanish are also commonly taught as second or, more often, third languages. Russian, Japanese, Italian, Latin, and rarely Chinese (Mandarin) are offered in some schools, mostly in the cities. Traditionally, English, German and French were considered the main foreign languages in Norway. These languages, for instance, were used on Norwegian passports until the 1990s, and university students have a general right to use these languages when submitting their theses.

90% of Norwegians are fluent in English.

== Culture ==
The Norwegian farm culture continues to play a role in contemporary Norwegian culture. In the 19th century, it inspired a strong romantic nationalistic movement, which is still visible in the Norwegian language and media. Norwegian culture expanded with nationalist efforts to achieve an independent identity in the areas of literature, art and music. This continues today in the performing arts and as a result of government support for exhibitions, cultural projects and artwork.

=== Cinema ===

Norwegian cinema has received international recognition. The documentary film &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; (1950) won an Academy Award. Another notable film is &quot;The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix&quot;, an animated feature film directed by Ivo Caprino. The film was released in 1975 and is the most widely seen Norwegian film of all time. Nils Gaup&#x27;s &quot;Pathfinder&quot; (1987), the story of the Sámi, was nominated for an Oscar. Berit Nesheim&#x27;s &quot;The Other Side of Sunday&quot; was nominated for an Oscar in 1997.

Since the 1990s, the film industry has expanded, producing up to 20 feature films each year. Particular successes were &quot;Kristin Lavransdatter&quot;, based on a novel by a Nobel Prize winner; &quot;The Telegraphist&quot; and &quot;Gurin with the Foxtail&quot;. Knut Erik Jensen was among the more successful new directors, together with Erik Skjoldbjærg, who is remembered for &quot;Insomnia&quot;. &quot;Elling&quot; and the 2012 adaption of &quot;Kon-Tiki&quot; was nominated for an Oscar for the best foreign language film. The TV-series &quot;Skam&quot; created by Julie Andem received a cult following and international recognition, with many countries making their own adaptations.

Norwegian directors such as Joachim Rønning, Anja Breien, Espen Sandberg, Liv Ullmann and Morten Tyldum have made internationally successful movies such as &quot;The Imitation Game&quot;, &quot;Passengers&quot;, &quot;Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar&#x27;s Revenge&quot; and &quot;&quot;, as well as the TV series &quot;Jack Ryan&quot; and &quot;Marco Polo&quot;. Composers include Thomas Bergersen, who composed for &quot;Avatar&quot;, &quot;The Dark Knight&quot;, &quot;Harry Potter&quot; and &quot;Narnia&quot;. Egil Monn-Iversen has been one of the most influential modern composers in Norway, having composed scores to over 100 Norwegian movies and TV series.

Norway has been used as filming location for Hollywood and other international productions, including Star Wars &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; (1980). Among the thousands of movies filmed in Norway include &quot;Die Another Day&quot;, &quot;No Time to Die&quot;, &quot;The Golden Compass&quot;, &quot;Spies Like Us&quot;, &quot;&quot; and &quot;&quot;, &quot;Black Widow&quot;, &quot;Tenet&quot;, &quot;Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince&quot; and &quot;Heroes of Telemark,&quot; as well as the TV series &quot;Lilyhammer&quot; and &quot;Vikings&quot;.

=== Music ===


The classical music of the romantic composers Edvard Grieg, Rikard Nordraak and Johan Svendsen is internationally known, as is the modern music of Arne Nordheim. Norway&#x27;s classical performers include Leif Ove Andsnes, a pianist; Truls Mørk, an outstanding cellist; and the Wagnerian soprano Kirsten Flagstad.

The Norwegian ballad tradition, known as the &quot;ballad wave&quot; (Norwegian: &quot;visebølgen&quot;), started as a cultural movement in the 1960s, greatly inspired by the Swedish ballad tradition and its modern representatives such as Olle Adolphson and Cornelis Vreeswijk. Some of its prominent representatives are Ole Paus, Lillebjørn Nilsen and Finn Kalvik.

The jazz scene is thriving. Jan Garbarek, Terje Rypdal, Mari Boine, Arild Andersen and Bugge Wesseltoft are internationally recognised while Paal Nilssen-Love, Supersilent, Jaga Jazzist and Wibutee are becoming world-class artists.

Norway has a strong folk music tradition which remains popular. Among the most prominent folk musicians are Hardanger fiddlers Andrea Een, Olav Jørgen Hegge and Annbjørg Lien, and the vocalists Agnes Buen Garnås, Kirsten Bråten Berg and Odd Nordstoga.

Norwegian black metal, a form of rock music in Norway, has been an influence in world music since the late 20th century. Since the 1990s, Norway&#x27;s export of black metal has been developed by such bands as Emperor, Darkthrone, Gorgoroth, Mayhem, Burzum and Immortal. Bands such as Enslaved, Kvelertak, Dimmu Borgir and Satyricon have evolved the genre while still garnering worldwide fans.

Notable female solo artists from Norway include Susanne Sundfør, Sigrid, Astrid S, Adelén, Julie Bergan, Maria Mena, Tone Damli, Margaret Berger, Lene Marlin, Christel Alsos, Maria Arredondo, Marion Raven and Marit Larsen (both former members of the defunct pop-rock band M2M), Lene Nystrøm (vocalist of the Danish Eurodance group Aqua), Anni-Frid Lyngstad (vocalist of the Swedish pop group ABBA), and Aurora Aksnes. Norwegian songwriters and producers for international artists include Stargate, Espen Lind, Lene Marlin and Ina Wroldsen.

Norway has been a constant competitor in the Eurovision Song Contest, participating 62 times. Since its first participation in 1960, Norway has won the competition three times: Bobbysocks&#x27;s win in , Secret Garden&#x27;s win in and Alexander Rybak&#x27;s win in . Alexander Rybak&#x27;s win in 2009 with his song Fairytale was a major win in Eurovision&#x27;s history as it scored the biggest margin of victory ever. The song was an international hit, peaking at number one in several countries.

Norway enjoys many music festivals throughout the year, all over the country. Norway is the host of one of the world&#x27;s biggest extreme sport festivals with music, Ekstremsportveko—a festival held annually in Voss. Oslo is the host of many festivals, such as Øyafestivalen and . Oslo used to have a summer parade similar to the German Love Parade. In 1992, the city of Oslo wanted to adopt the French music festival &quot;Fête de la Musique&quot;. Fredrik Carl Størmer established the festival. From its first year, &quot;Musikkens Dag&quot; gathered thousands of people and artists in the streets of Oslo. &quot;Musikkens Dag&quot; is now renamed &quot;Musikkfest Oslo&quot;.

=== Literature ===


The history of Norwegian literature starts with the pagan Eddaic poems and skaldic verse of the ninth and tenth centuries, with poets such as Bragi Boddason and Eyvindr skáldaspillir. The arrival of Christianity around the year 1000 brought Norway into contact with European medieval learning, hagiography and history writing. Merged with native oral tradition and Icelandic influence, this influenced the literature written in the late 12th and early 13th centuries. Major works of that period include &quot;Historia Norwegiæ&quot;, &quot;Þiðrekssaga&quot; and &quot;Konungs skuggsjá&quot;.

Little Norwegian literature came out of the period of the Scandinavian Union and the subsequent Dano-Norwegian union (1387–1814), with some notable exceptions such as Petter Dass and Ludvig Holberg. During the union with Denmark, the government imposed using only written Danish, which decreased the writing of Norwegian literature.

Two major events precipitated a major resurgence in Norwegian literature: in 1811 a Norwegian university was established in Christiania, and in 1814 the Norwegians created their first Constitution. Authors were inspired and became recognised first in Scandinavia, and then worldwide; among them were Henrik Wergeland, Peter Christen Asbjørnsen, Jørgen Moe and Camilla Collett.

By the late 19th century, in the Golden Age of Norwegian literature, the so-called &quot;Great Four&quot; emerged: Henrik Ibsen, Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson, Alexander Kielland, and Jonas Lie. Bjørnson&#x27;s &quot;peasant novels&quot;, such as &quot;Ein glad gut&quot; (A Happy Boy) and &quot;Synnøve Solbakken&quot;, are typical of the Norwegian romantic nationalism of their day. Kielland&#x27;s novels and short stories are mostly naturalistic. Although an important contributor to early romantic nationalism, (especially &quot;Peer Gynt&quot;), Henrik Ibsen is better known for his pioneering realistic dramas such as &quot;The Wild Duck&quot; and &quot;A Doll&#x27;s House.&quot;

In the 20th century, three Norwegian novelists were awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature: Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson in 1903, Knut Hamsun for the book &quot;Markens grøde&quot; (&quot;Growth of the Soil&quot;) in 1920, and Sigrid Undset (known for &quot;Kristin Lavransdatter&quot;) in 1928.

=== Architecture ===


With expansive forests, Norway has long had a tradition of building in wood. Many of today&#x27;s most interesting new buildings are made of wood, reflecting the strong appeal that this material continues to hold for Norwegian designers and builders.

With Norway&#x27;s conversion to Christianity, churches were built. Stonework architecture was introduced from Europe for the most important structures, beginning with the construction of Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim. In the early Middle Ages, wooden stave churches were constructed throughout Norway. Some of them have survived; they represent Norway&#x27;s most unusual contribution to architectural history. Urnes Stave Church in inner Sognefjord is on UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage List. Another notable example of wooden architecture is the buildings at Bryggen Wharf in Bergen, also on the list for World Cultural Heritage sites, consisting of a row of tall, narrow wooden structures along the quayside.

In the 17th century, under the Danish monarchy, cities and villages such as Kongsberg and Røros were established. The city Kongsberg had a church built in the Baroque style. Traditional wooden buildings that were constructed in Røros have survived.

After Norway&#x27;s union with Denmark was dissolved in 1814, Oslo became the capital. The architect Christian H. Grosch designed the earliest parts of the University of Oslo, the Oslo Stock Exchange, and many other buildings and churches constructed in that early national period.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the city of Ålesund was rebuilt in the Art Nouveau style, influenced by styles of France. The 1930s, when functionalism dominated, became a strong period for Norwegian architecture. It is only since the late 20th century that Norwegian architects have achieved international renown. One of the most striking modern buildings in Norway is the Sámi Parliament in Kárášjohka, designed by Stein Halvorson and Christian Sundby. Its debating chamber, in timber, is an abstract version of a &quot;lavvo,&quot; the traditional tent used by the nomadic Sámi people.

=== Art ===

For an extended period, the Norwegian art scene was dominated by artwork from Germany and Holland as well as by the influence of Copenhagen. It was in the 19th century that a truly Norwegian era began, first with portraits, later with impressive landscapes. Johan Christian Dahl, originally from the Dresden school, eventually returned to paint the landscapes of western Norway, defining Norwegian painting for the first time.&quot;

Norway&#x27;s newly found independence from Denmark encouraged painters to develop their Norwegian identity, especially with landscape painting by artists such as Kitty Kielland, a female painter who studied under Hans Gude, and Harriet Backer, another pioneer among female artists, influenced by impressionism. Frits Thaulow, an impressionist, was influenced by the art scene in Paris as was Christian Krohg, a realist painter, famous for his paintings of prostitutes.

Of particular note is Edvard Munch, a symbolist/expressionist painter who became world-famous for &quot;The Scream&quot; which is said to represent the anxiety of modern man. Other notable works from Munch includes The Sick Child, Madonna and Puberty.

Other artists of note include Harald Sohlberg, a neo-romantic painter remembered for his paintings of Røros, and Odd Nerdrum, a figurative painter who maintains that his work is not art, but kitsch.

=== Cuisine ===
Norway&#x27;s culinary traditions show the influence of long seafaring and farming traditions, with salmon (fresh and cured), herring (pickled or marinated), trout, codfish, and other seafood, balanced by cheeses (such as brunost, Jarlsberg cheese, and gamalost), dairy products, and breads (predominantly dark/darker).

Lefse is a Norwegian potato flatbread, usually topped with large amounts of butter and sugar, most commonly eaten around Christmas. Traditional Norwegian dishes include lutefisk, smalahove, pinnekjøtt, raspeball, and fårikål. A Norwegian speciality is rakefisk, which is fermented trout, consumed with thin flatbread and sour cream. The most popular pastry is vaffel.

=== Sports ===

Sports are a central part of Norwegian culture, and popular sports include cross-country skiing, ski jumping, mountaineering, hiking, association football, handball, biathlon, speed skating, and, to a lesser degree, ice hockey.

Norway is known internationally for its role in the development of modern winter sports, particularly skiing. From the 19th century Norway also became a premier mountaineering destination, with books such as William Cecil Slingsby&#x27;s &quot;Norway, the Northern Playground&quot; contributing to the country&#x27;s popularity among early mountain climbers.

Association football is the most popular sport in Norway in terms of active membership. In 2014–2015 polling, football ranked far behind biathlon and cross-country skiing in terms of popularity as spectator sports. Ice hockey is the biggest indoor sport. The women&#x27;s handball national team has won several titles, including two Summer Olympics championships (2008, 2012), three World Championships (1999, 2011, 2015), and six European Championship (1998, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2014).

In association football, the women&#x27;s national team has won the FIFA Women&#x27;s World Cup in 1995 and the Olympic Football Tournament in 2000. The women&#x27;s team also has two UEFA European Women&#x27;s Championship titles (1987, 1993). The men&#x27;s national football team has participated three times in the FIFA World Cup (1938, 1994, and 1998), and once in the European Championship (2000). The highest FIFA ranking Norway has achieved is second, a position it has held twice, in 1993 and in 1995.

Norwegian players in the National Football League include Halvor Hagen, Bill Irgens, Leif Olve Dolonen Larsen, Mike Mock, and Jan Stenerud.

Bandy is a traditional sport in Norway and the country is one of the four founders of Federation of International Bandy. In terms of licensed athletes, it is the second biggest winter sport in the world. As of January 2018, the men&#x27;s national team has captured one silver and one bronze, while the women&#x27;s national team has managed five bronzes at the World Championships.

Norway first participated at the Olympic Games in 1900, and has sent athletes to compete in every Games since then, except for the sparsely attended 1904 Games and the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow when they participated in the American-led boycott. Norway leads the overall medal tables at the Winter Olympic Games by a considerable margin. Norway has hosted the Games on two occasions:

* 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo
* 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer

It also hosted the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics in Lillehammer, making Norway the first country to host both Winter regular and Youth Olympics.

Norway featured a women&#x27;s national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018–2020 CEV Beach Volleyball Continental Cup.

Chess has gained huge popularity in Norway. Magnus Carlsen, a Norwegian, was the world chess champion between 2013 and 2023.

== See also ==

* Outline of Norway

== Notes ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


== External links ==
* regjeringen.no , official Norwegian government website
* Norway.no, Norway&#x27;s official portal
* Statistics Norway 
* State of the Environment Norway
* Norway . &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Norway entry at &quot;Britannica.com&quot;
* 
* Norway from &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Norway profile from the BBC News
* Norway.info , official foreign portal of the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
* 
* Official facts about Norway 
* VisitNorway.com, official travel guide to Norway.
* Key Development Forecasts for Norway from International Futures
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Norway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="0" end="6" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="23" end="40" title="Norway" label="Kingdom of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="47" end="61" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic country"/>
<link wikidata="Q73169" start="77" end="99" title="Scandinavian Peninsula" label="Scandinavian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="103" end="118" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="131" end="137" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="148" end="157" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="166" end="177" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="181" end="189" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23408" start="231" end="244" title="Bouvet Island" label="Bouvet Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141556" start="261" end="273" title="Subantarctic" label="Subantarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260616" start="280" end="290" title="Dependencies of Norway" label="dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q783953" start="335" end="341" title="Territorial claims in Antarctica" label="claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q202780" start="371" end="385" title="Peter I Island" label="Peter I Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q189999" start="390" end="405" title="Queen Maud Land" label="Queen Maud Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="479" end="483" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="561" end="567" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="588" end="595" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="600" end="606" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695" start="670" end="679" title="Skagerrak" label="Skagerrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="722" end="733" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q841376" start="804" end="818" title="Petty kingdoms of Norway" label="petty kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="897" end="911" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="949" end="963" title="Union between Sweden and Norway" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1007" end="1022" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1035" end="1051" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="1081" end="1088" title="Operation Weserübung" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="1093" end="1101" title="German occupation of Norway" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1105" end="1117" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="1145" end="1153" title="Harald V" label="Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="1161" end="1180" title="House of Glücksburg" label="House of Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="1196" end="1210" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="King of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q467948" start="1212" end="1228" title="Jonas Gahr Støre" label="Jonas Gahr Støre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="1238" end="1262" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="1280" end="1293" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1301" end="1324" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="1333" end="1352" title="Separation of powers" label="divides state power"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="1365" end="1375" title="Storting" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770421" start="1381" end="1388" title="Council of State (Norway)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574420" start="1398" end="1411" title="Supreme Court of Norway" label="supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="1434" end="1451" title="Constitution of Norway" label="1814 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192299" start="1526" end="1534" title="Counties of Norway" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803752" start="1539" end="1553" title="List of municipalities of Norway" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="1559" end="1570" title="Sámi peoples" label="Sámi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q64203" start="1670" end="1685" title="Sámi Parliament of Norway" label="Sámi Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11968959" start="1694" end="1706" title="Finnmark Act" label="Finnmark Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001342" start="1715" end="1735" title="Norway–European Union relations" label="maintains close ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1745" end="1759" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060969" start="1768" end="1781" title="Norway–United States relations" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1818" end="1832" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1834" end="1838" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="1844" end="1875" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="1881" end="1898" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182814" start="1904" end="1920" title="Antarctic Treaty System" label="Antarctic Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q146165" start="1930" end="1944" title="Nordic Council" label="Nordic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="1962" end="1984" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="1990" end="1993" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2003" end="2007" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="2027" end="2040" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="2071" end="2093" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="2099" end="2105" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="2110" end="2117" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q921098" start="2141" end="2161" title="Nordic model" label="Nordic welfare model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="2167" end="2188" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="2209" end="2224" title="Welfare spending" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="2460" end="2478" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="2566" end="2576" title="Per capita" label="per-capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="2699" end="2725" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="fourth- and eighth-highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2764" end="2774" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2786" end="2789" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196231" start="2849" end="2870" title="Government Pension Fund of Norway" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25167" start="2975" end="2981" title="Bokmål" label="Bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="3007" end="3014" title="Nynorsk" label="Nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3055" end="3066" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3201" end="3213" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3567" end="3584" title=":wikt:norðr" label="&amp;quot;norðr&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="3588" end="3595" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3831" end="3840" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3841" end="3845" title=":wikt:suðr" label="suðr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3918" end="3923" title=":wikt:austr" label="austr"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3933" end="3939" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4085" end="4097" title="Last glacial period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q50632" start="4215" end="4223" title="Finnmark" label="Finnmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577518" start="4225" end="4238" title="Komsa culture" label="Komsa culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q50624" start="4257" end="4265" title="Rogaland" label="Rogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599096" start="4267" end="4280" title="Fosna-Hensbacka culture" label="Fosna culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q933996" start="4423" end="4442" title="Corded Ware culture" label="Corded Ware culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216065" start="4455" end="4469" title="eastern Norway" label="eastern Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="4481" end="4494" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="4651" end="4657" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q62140" start="4737" end="4744" title="Harstad Municipality" label="Harstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="4864" end="4873" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621365" start="4906" end="4922" title="Hjortspring boat" label="Hjortspring boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433492" start="4968" end="4978" title="stone ship" label="stone ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5060" end="5068" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="5249" end="5253" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="5392" end="5397" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="5721" end="5731" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5910" end="5917" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5972" end="5985" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="6014" end="6021" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="6038" end="6050" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="6132" end="6145" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q582948" start="6158" end="6177" title="Norse colonization of North America" label="North America isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="6204" end="6219" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q515561" start="6259" end="6279" title="Battle of Hafrsfjord" label="Battle of Hafrsfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416" start="6283" end="6292" title="Stavanger" label="Stavanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="6526" end="6539" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="6541" end="6550" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="6565" end="6572" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q314477" start="6587" end="6604" title="Haakon I of Norway" label="Haakon I the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="6729" end="6745" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084084" start="6770" end="6784" title="Christian mythology" label="Christian ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="6879" end="6897" title="Olaf I of Norway" label="Olaf I Tryggvasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="6902" end="6920" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="Olaf II Haraldsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20112574" start="7053" end="7059" title="Moster (island)" label="Moster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582982" start="7107" end="7123" title="Old Moster Church" label="Christian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="7169" end="7178" title="Trondheim (city)" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="7418" end="7427" title="Feudalism" label="Feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="7597" end="7613" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941338" start="7959" end="7966" title="burgher (title)" label="burgher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760671" start="8080" end="8093" title="civil war era in Norway" label="civil war era"/>
<link wikidata="Q375352" start="8120" end="8143" title="line of succession to the Norwegian throne" label="unclear succession laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q659423" start="8201" end="8223" title="Archdiocese of Nidaros" label="Archdiocese of Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="8400" end="8418" title="Håkon IV" label="Håkon IV Håkonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233738" start="8860" end="8870" title="Golden age (metaphor)" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="9037" end="9053" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="9175" end="9186" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="9441" end="9457" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="9577" end="9582" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770421" start="9666" end="9682" title="Norwegian Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="9689" end="9705" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="9800" end="9806" title="Bergen (city)" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313879" start="9817" end="9832" title="Olaf II of Denmark" label="Olaf Haakonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q202266" start="9967" end="9977" title="Margaret I of Denmark" label="Margaret I"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="9983" end="9995" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342065" start="10168" end="10179" title="Engelbrekt rebellion" label="a rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="10438" end="10444" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q509392" start="10623" end="10639" title="Victual Brothers" label="Victual Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="10772" end="10789" title="House of Oldenburg" label="Oldenburg dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q655399" start="10837" end="10849" title="Knut Alvsson" label="Knut Alvsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313153" start="11001" end="11009" title="Haakon V of Norway" label="Haakon V"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="11019" end="11034" title="Magnus Eriksson" label="Magnus Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q350220" start="11201" end="11215" title="Magnus III of Sweden" label="Magnus Ladulås"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="11399" end="11410" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q313015" start="12016" end="12025" title="Haakon VI of Norway" label="Haakon VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q202266" start="12051" end="12059" title="Margaret I of Denmark" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q216630" start="12078" end="12100" title="Valdemar IV of Denmark" label="Valdemar IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q313879" start="12156" end="12163" title="Olaf II of Denmark" label="Olaf IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="12283" end="12297" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161958" start="12796" end="12813" title="Eric of Pomerania" label="Eric of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="13085" end="13097" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q62623" start="13157" end="13169" title="Kalmar Union" label="Kalmar Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970882" start="13323" end="13330" title="Nicolai Wergeland" label="by some"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="13463" end="13473" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381174" start="13485" end="13514" title="Reformation in Denmark–Norway and Holstein" label="introduction of Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="13795" end="13803" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q897446" start="13811" end="13818" title="Nidaros" label="Nidaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="14088" end="14096" title="Bohuslän" label="Båhuslen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211661" start="14098" end="14106" title="Jämtland" label="Jemtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207444" start="14112" end="14122" title="Härjedalen" label="Herjedalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50631" start="14261" end="14266" title="Troms" label="Troms"/>
<link wikidata="Q50632" start="14271" end="14279" title="Finnmark" label="Finnmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599175" start="14323" end="14342" title="Great Famine of 1695–1697" label="famine of 1695–1696"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="14562" end="14576" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q376154" start="14589" end="14609" title="Battle of Copenhagen (1807)" label="Battle of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="14644" end="14652" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="14703" end="14713" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156556" start="14798" end="14812" title="Treaty of Kiel" label="Treaty of Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="15036" end="15044" title="United States Constitution" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q832508" start="15049" end="15055" title="Constitution of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q157781" start="15116" end="15135" title="Christian VIII of Denmark" label="Christian Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q974845" start="15180" end="15192" title="Norwegian Constitution Day" label="Syttende mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780850" start="15299" end="15320" title="Swedish–Norwegian War (1814)" label="Norwegian–Swedish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33773" start="15663" end="15681" title="Convention of Moss" label="Convention of Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="15752" end="15772" title="Parliament of Norway" label="Parliament of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="15838" end="15852" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="15941" end="15963" title="Charles XIII of Sweden" label="Charles XIII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="16008" end="16025" title="Union between Sweden and Norway" label="union with Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="16223" end="16238" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q523363" start="16331" end="16361" title="Norwegian romantic nationalism" label="Norwegian romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q351705" start="16505" end="16521" title="Henrik Wergeland" label="Henrik Wergeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="16523" end="16544" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q355485" start="16546" end="16571" title="Peter Christen Asbjørnsen" label="Peter Christen Asbjørnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q470002" start="16573" end="16583" title="Jørgen Moe" label="Jørgen Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q701669" start="16596" end="16605" title="Hans Gude" label="Hans Gude"/>
<link wikidata="Q365544" start="16607" end="16622" title="Adolph Tidemand" label="Adolph Tidemand"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="16632" end="16644" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25167" start="16797" end="16803" title="Bokmål" label="Bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="16808" end="16815" title="Nynorsk" label="Nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="16818" end="16839" title="Charles XIV John of Sweden" label="King Charles III John"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="16992" end="17002" title="Klemens Wenzel, Prince von Metternich" label="Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="17267" end="17279" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q581903" start="18183" end="18196" title="Marcus Thrane" label="Marcus Thrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="18203" end="18220" title="Utopian socialism" label="Utopian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q26525" start="18263" end="18270" title="Drammen (town)" label="Drammen"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="18637" end="18655" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="18673" end="18678" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q319645" start="18747" end="18766" title="Christian Michelsen" label="Christian Michelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375058" start="19106" end="19119" title="royal descent" label="royal descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="19232" end="19281" title="house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="19413" end="19423" title="Parliament of Norway" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="19442" end="19452" title="Haakon VII of Norway" label="Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19470" end="19485" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="19550" end="19568" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="19604" end="19610" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188689" start="19687" end="19696" title="ultimatum" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="19729" end="19750" title="anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="19767" end="19784" title="U-boat" label="German submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="19785" end="19794" title="Unrestricted submarine warfare" label="targeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="19910" end="19928" title="Imperial German Navy" label="Kaiserliche Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20053" end="20069" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="20079" end="20103" title="Operation Weserübung" label="invaded by German forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q567787" start="20189" end="20211" title="Battle of Drøbak Sound" label="Battle of Drøbak Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="20213" end="20231" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="Norwegian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="20237" end="20255" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Invasion of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q708217" start="20402" end="20419" title="Battles of Narvik" label="Battles of Narvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="20535" end="20560" title="Battle of France" label="German invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886632" start="20615" end="20626" title="Rotherhithe" label="Rotherhithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="20823" end="20839" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="Nasjonal Samling"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="20841" end="20856" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q57874" start="21007" end="21021" title="Josef Terboven" label="Josef Terboven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616953" start="21083" end="21131" title="Quisling regime" label="collaborationist government under German control"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="21209" end="21218" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060994" start="21310" end="21331" title="Free Norwegian Forces" label="Free Norwegian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780769" start="21702" end="21733" title="Norwegian Independent Company 1" label="Norwegian Independent Company 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347548" start="21764" end="21773" title="British Commandos" label="Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="21783" end="21800" title="German occupation of Norway" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="21821" end="21840" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q511031" start="21929" end="21940" title="Norsk Hydro" label="Norsk Hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q155890" start="21948" end="21959" title="heavy water" label="heavy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296772" start="21998" end="22004" title="Vemork" label="Vemork"/>
<link wikidata="Q327048" start="22012" end="22049" title="Norwegian heavy water sabotage" label="crippled the German nuclear programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="22073" end="22079" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q865132" start="22131" end="22146" title="Merchant Navy" label="Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770539" start="22248" end="22258" title="Nortraship" label="Nortraship"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="22341" end="22362" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="evacuation of Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="22370" end="22387" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="22419" end="22433" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="22510" end="22518" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315455" start="22575" end="22611" title="Operation Haudegen" label="established a meteorological station"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="22685" end="22697" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q164346" start="22781" end="22797" title="Einar Gerhardsen" label="Einar Gerhardsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="22835" end="22854" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="22883" end="22900" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q627272" start="22943" end="22971" title="employers&amp;#x27; organisation" label="employers&amp;#x27; organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="23072" end="23081" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="23462" end="23476" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="23575" end="23588" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="23645" end="23699" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="23759" end="23793" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476277" start="23913" end="23939" title="Phillips Petroleum Company" label="Phillips Petroleum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323379" start="23978" end="23985" title="Ekofisk oil field" label="Ekofisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776022" start="24086" end="24093" title="Equinor" label="Equinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="24455" end="24486" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="24532" end="24546" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780683" start="24623" end="24627" title="1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774974" start="24632" end="24636" title="1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="24650" end="24668" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q317405" start="24687" end="24699" title="Kåre Willoch" label="Kåre Willoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="24759" end="24777" title="stagflation" label="stagflated economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133009" start="24946" end="24967" title="Gro Harlem Brundtland" label="Gro Harlem Brundtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="25069" end="25084" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="25232" end="25253" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q79967" start="25446" end="25467" title="2011 Norway attacks" label="two terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q44220" start="25471" end="25493" title="Anders Behring Breivik" label="Anders Behring Breivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512114" start="25511" end="25529" title="Regjeringskvartalet" label="government quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q426133" start="25583" end="25597" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Youth League (Norway)" label="youth movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q106357" start="25601" end="25606" title="Utøya" label="Utøya"/>
<link wikidata="Q57665" start="25656" end="25672" title="Jens Stoltenberg" label="Jens Stoltenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035042" start="25741" end="25778" title="2013 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="2013 Norwegian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q485665" start="25864" end="25878" title="Progress Party (Norway)" label="Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018433" start="25930" end="25967" title="2017 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="Norwegian parliamentary election 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q291644" start="26014" end="26026" title="Erna Solberg" label="Erna Solberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317713" start="26048" end="26085" title="2021 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="2021 Norwegian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q467948" start="26205" end="26221" title="Jonas Gahr Støre" label="Jonas Gahr Støre"/>
<link wikidata="Q73169" start="26355" end="26377" title="Scandinavian Peninsula" label="Scandinavian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="26400" end="26409" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="26433" end="26441" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q202780" start="26475" end="26489" title="Peter I Island" label="Peter I Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23408" start="26512" end="26525" title="Bouvet Island" label="Bouvet Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260616" start="26530" end="26551" title="Dependencies of Norway" label="dependent territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="26629" end="26639" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q189999" start="26649" end="26664" title="Queen Maud Land" label="Queen Maud Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="26711" end="26724" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="26726" end="26735" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="26741" end="26748" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156556" start="26806" end="26820" title="Treaty of Kiel" label="Treaty of Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="26844" end="26852" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q211661" start="26865" end="26873" title="Jämtland" label="Jämtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207444" start="26878" end="26888" title="Härjedalen" label="Härjedalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="26901" end="26909" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="26914" end="26920" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="26941" end="26949" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="26954" end="26965" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="26976" end="26991" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="27056" end="27067" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255484" start="27106" end="27109" title="57th parallel north" label="57°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255098" start="27114" end="27119" title="81st parallel north" label="81° N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703806" start="27136" end="27138" title="4th meridian east" label="4°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186530" start="27143" end="27148" title="32nd meridian east" label="32° E"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="27184" end="27200" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="27355" end="27360" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q810247" start="27400" end="27408" title="Baseline (sea)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="27677" end="27688" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q47545" start="27694" end="27707" title="Norwegian Sea" label="Norwegian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="27713" end="27722" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695" start="27728" end="27737" title="Skagerrak" label="Skagerrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q186547" start="27743" end="27765" title="Scandinavian Mountains" label="Scandinavian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="27818" end="27826" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="27831" end="27840" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="27980" end="27987" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="28000" end="28010" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q208495" start="28057" end="28069" title="Sognefjorden" label="Sognefjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q200003" start="28155" end="28171" title="Hornindalsvatnet" label="Hornindalsvatnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="28266" end="28276" title="Permafrost" label="Permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861306" start="28368" end="28385" title="List of glaciers in Norway" label="Numerous glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="28439" end="28446" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="28451" end="28457" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="28468" end="28473" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="28475" end="28484" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="28490" end="28499" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="28600" end="28611" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="28914" end="28931" title="Subarctic climate" label="Subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="28955" end="28961" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="28962" end="28968" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="29207" end="29218" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="29567" end="29575" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="29730" end="29743" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q484012" start="30076" end="30091" title="Bø Municipality (Nordland)" label="Bø Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q48880" start="30664" end="30684" title="Saltdal Municipality" label="Saltdal Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q484116" start="30778" end="30796" title="Skjåk Municipality" label="Skjåk Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q940402" start="30837" end="30851" title="Finnmarksvidda" label="Finnmarksvidda"/>
<link wikidata="Q50631" start="30881" end="30886" title="Troms" label="Troms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25923" start="30939" end="30951" title="Longyearbyen" label="Longyearbyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212209" start="31003" end="31008" title="Mjøsa" label="Mjøsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="31016" end="31041" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="31043" end="31049" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="31129" end="31144" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="31339" end="31356" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="31461" end="31488" title="Polar climate" label="tundra/alpine/polar climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459798" start="31737" end="31764" title="Tundra climate" label="tundra/alpine/polar climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="31833" end="31840" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="32192" end="32197" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="32216" end="32222" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="32241" end="32245" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="32266" end="32280" title="vascular plant" label="vascular plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="32306" end="32311" title="fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="32483" end="32495" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="32611" end="32619" title="IUCN Red List" label="red list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604517" start="32700" end="32722" title="Sarmatic mixed forests" label="Sarmatic mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076286" start="32724" end="32760" title="Scandinavian coastal conifer forests" label="Scandinavian coastal conifer forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705345" start="32762" end="32792" title="Scandinavian and Russian taiga" label="Scandinavian and Russian taiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30899346" start="32794" end="32815" title="Kola Peninsula tundra" label="Kola Peninsula tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079003" start="32821" end="32869" title="Scandinavian montane birch forest and grasslands" label="Scandinavian montane birch forest and grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="32967" end="32982" title="Eurasian beaver" label="European beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="33474" end="33483" title="grey wolf" label="grey wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="33489" end="33499" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q754058" start="33509" end="33518" title="pool frog" label="pool frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="33569" end="33580" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185260" start="33610" end="33623" title="basking shark" label="basking shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="33661" end="33671" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="33683" end="33693" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="33815" end="33820" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="34063" end="34082" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="34261" end="34276" title="Aurora" label="Aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261772" start="34322" end="34353" title="Environmental Performance Index" label="Environmental Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="34359" end="34374" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="34376" end="34395" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="34404" end="34424" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q847224" start="34656" end="34677" title="Whaling in Norway" label="Norway&amp;#x27;s whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588976" start="34681" end="34692" title="Energy in Norway" label="oil exports"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="34712" end="34744" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209223" start="34918" end="34935" title="Rechtsstaat" label="states of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="35040" end="35055" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="35075" end="35097" title="Constitution of Norway" label="Constitution of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="35156" end="35197" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="35202" end="35219" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="35241" end="35264" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="35272" end="35292" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="35320" end="35334" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="King of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="35342" end="35355" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="35364" end="35378" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="35386" end="35404" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418613" start="35592" end="35599" title="Norwegian Royal Family" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="35796" end="35814" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q917374" start="35822" end="35844" title="Norwegian Armed Forces" label="Norwegian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="35919" end="35927" title="Harald V of Norway" label="Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="35935" end="35984" title="House of Glücksburg" label="House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165241" start="36094" end="36124" title="Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway" label="Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="36367" end="36377" title="unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="36424" end="36448" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109016" start="36917" end="36925" title="Parliament of Norway" label="Storting"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="36951" end="36959" title="treaty" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q480498" start="37002" end="37009" title="impeachment" label="impeach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="37194" end="37208" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="37769" end="37785" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="38066" end="38096" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="38296" end="38326" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="38330" end="38340" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770421" start="38504" end="38520" title="Norwegian Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="38524" end="38537" title="privy council" label="privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q863932" start="38615" end="38627" title="Royal Palace, Oslo" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="38888" end="38926" title="party-list proportional representation" label="party-list proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="38939" end="38952" title="plurality voting system" label="plural-member"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="38982" end="39000" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="39025" end="39047" title="Norwegian Labour Party" label="Norwegian Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="39052" end="39070" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475163" start="39180" end="39193" title="2005 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="2005 election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39200" end="39219" title="Red–Green Coalition" label="Red–Green Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q488418" start="39229" end="39249" title="Socialist Left Party (Norway)" label="Socialist Left Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q493685" start="39258" end="39270" title="Centre Party (Norway)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q485665" start="39320" end="39334" title="Progress Party (Norway)" label="Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="39443" end="39448" title="Høyre" label="Høyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q485665" start="39453" end="39471" title="Progress Party (Norway)" label="Fremskrittspartiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q291644" start="39630" end="39642" title="Erna Solberg" label="Erna Solberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q133009" start="39705" end="39726" title="Gro Harlem Brundtland" label="Gro Harlem Brundtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q311421" start="39775" end="39786" title="Jan P. Syse" label="Jan P. Syse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018433" start="39932" end="39969" title="2017 Norwegian parliamentary election" label="2017 Norwegian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q467948" start="40030" end="40046" title="Jonas Gahr Støre" label="Jonas Gahr Støre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="40154" end="40167" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="40220" end="40228" title="county" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177805" start="40305" end="40320" title="County municipality (Norway)" label="county councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998914" start="40335" end="40347" title="County mayor" label="County Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418613" start="40367" end="40371" title="Norwegian Royal Family" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748888" start="40424" end="40439" title="County governor (Norway)" label="County Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="40570" end="40587" title="Municipal council (Norway)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="40653" end="40657" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="40768" end="40777" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="40782" end="40790" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188640" start="40944" end="40953" title="List of towns and cities in Norway" label="town/city"/>
<link wikidata="Q493472" start="41519" end="41530" title="Honningsvåg" label="Honningsvåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156125" start="41696" end="41715" title="Larvik Municipality" label="Larvik Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284798" start="41730" end="41744" title="Larvik (town)" label="town of Larvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541556" start="41761" end="41768" title="Stavern" label="Stavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="41820" end="41829" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141556" start="41834" end="41846" title="Subantarctic" label="Subantarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="41847" end="41859" title="dependent territory" label="dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23408" start="41861" end="41874" title="Bouvet Island" label="Bouvet Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q202780" start="41876" end="41890" title="Peter I Island" label="Peter I Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q189999" start="41896" end="41911" title="Queen Maud Land" label="Queen Maud Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="41987" end="41997" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="42149" end="42165" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770853" start="42252" end="42279" title="Courts of justice of Norway" label="Courts of justice of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574420" start="42300" end="42313" title="Supreme Court of Norway" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772291" start="42343" end="42356" title="Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Norway" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="42358" end="42373" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42385" end="42400" title="Courts of justice of Norway#District courts" label="district courts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42406" end="42427" title="conciliation councils" label="conciliation councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180315" start="43080" end="43105" title="Law enforcement in Norway" label="law is enforced in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180315" start="43113" end="43137" title="Norwegian Police Service" label="Norwegian Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q308084" start="43251" end="43353" title="Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime" label="Norwegian National Authority for the Investigation and Prosecution of Economic and Environmental Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972007" start="43393" end="43432" title="National Criminal Investigation Service (Norway)" label="National Criminal Investigation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652145" start="43533" end="43560" title="National Police Directorate" label="National Police Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175066" start="43713" end="43745" title="Norwegian Police Security Service" label="Norwegian Police Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="44098" end="44123" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="44137" end="44162" title="World Press Freedom Index" label="World Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010437" start="44591" end="44602" title="LGBT rights in Norway" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49260" start="44698" end="44743" title="Norwegian Association for Women&amp;#x27;s Rights" label="Norwegian Association for Women&amp;#x27;s Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q69370" start="44791" end="44809" title="right to education" label="right to education"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="44811" end="44832" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q514404" start="44838" end="44851" title="right to work" label="right to work"/>
<link wikidata="Q13385666" start="45048" end="45093" title="Gender Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud" label="Gender Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679942" start="45225" end="45253" title="Norwegian Women&amp;#x27;s Lobby" label="Norwegian Women&amp;#x27;s Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="45335" end="45357" title="absolute primogeniture" label="absolute primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770125" start="45873" end="45889" title="Norwegianization" label="Norwegianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q331590" start="46028" end="46046" title="Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989" label="ILO-convention 169"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="46050" end="46067" title="indigenous people" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="46271" end="46282" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17464" start="46341" end="46372" title="Same-sex marriage in Norway" label="Norway became the sixth country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="46385" end="46402" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683527" start="46462" end="46480" title="Oslo Freedom Forum" label="Oslo Freedom Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="46524" end="46537" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="46823" end="46837" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="46848" end="46882" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="46895" end="46912" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="46921" end="46952" title="European Free Trade Association" label="European Free Trade Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780683" start="47221" end="47225" title="1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774974" start="47230" end="47234" title="1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="47304" end="47326" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="47369" end="47384" title="Single market of the European Union" label="internal market"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="47758" end="47792" title="Common Security and Defence Policy" label="Common Security and Defence Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="47798" end="47816" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134173" start="47826" end="47849" title="European Defence Agency" label="European Defence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013132" start="47937" end="47949" title="Oslo Accords" label="Oslo Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q151622" start="47990" end="48018" title="Israeli–Palestinian conflict" label="Israeli–Palestinian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="48245" end="48257" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="48434" end="48442" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982684" start="48536" end="48565" title="Norwegian Ministry of Defence" label="Norwegian Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="48593" end="48606" title="Harald V of Norway" label="King Harald V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384177" start="48651" end="48665" title="Norwegian Army" label="Norwegian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083573" start="48671" end="48691" title="Royal Norwegian Navy" label="Royal Norwegian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137453" start="48697" end="48722" title="Royal Norwegian Air Force" label="Royal Norwegian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061074" start="48728" end="48757" title="Norwegian Cyber Defence Force" label="Norwegian Cyber Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q287184" start="48766" end="48776" title="Home Guard (Norway)" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="48830" end="48864" title="NATO" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="48915" end="48954" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="International Security Assistance Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="48965" end="48976" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q511733" start="49084" end="49118" title="Common Security and Defence Policy" label="Common Security and Defence Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108977" start="49195" end="49209" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="49242" end="49252" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="49277" end="49297" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="GDP (PPP) per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="49565" end="49569" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="49570" end="49593" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="49683" end="49697" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379182" start="49738" end="49757" title="List of countries by Failed States Index" label="Failed States Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="49861" end="49865" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900182" start="49908" end="49925" title="OECD Better Life Index" label="Better Life Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="50046" end="50059" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="50085" end="50098" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="50129" end="50140" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="50279" end="50296" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691293" start="50329" end="50356" title="Healthcare in Norway" label="Public healthcare in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q132643" start="50404" end="50410" title="Norwegian krone" label="kroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="50892" end="50896" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="51014" end="51025" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q683667" start="51220" end="51254" title="List of countries by income equality" label="Norway&amp;#x27;s low Gini coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681145" start="51407" end="51416" title="Statkraft" label="Statkraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q511031" start="51441" end="51452" title="Norsk Hydro" label="Norsk Hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q80788" start="51483" end="51486" title="DNB ASA" label="DNB"/>
<link wikidata="Q845632" start="51521" end="51528" title="Telenor" label="Telenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="51852" end="51866" title="Ship transport" label="merchant fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780683" start="51932" end="51936" title="1972 Norwegian European Communities membership referendum" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774974" start="51941" end="51945" title="1994 Norwegian European Union membership referendum" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="52041" end="52048" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="52053" end="52066" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="52136" end="52158" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="52612" end="52630" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="52781" end="52791" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="52799" end="52806" title="forestry" label="forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="53650" end="53654" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196231" start="53729" end="53773" title="The Government Pension Fund of Norway" label="&amp;quot;Government Pension Fund – Global&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770138" start="54014" end="54020" title="Petoro" label="Petoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602979" start="54075" end="54079" title="State&amp;#x27;s Direct Financial Interest" label="SDFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="54540" end="54549" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54603" end="54618" title="Wisting Central" label="Wisting Central"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54722" end="54740" title="Castberg Oil Field" label="Castberg Oil Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="54889" end="54900" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="55180" end="55185" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="55188" end="55208" title="hydroelectricity" label="Hydroelectric plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="55507" end="55516" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281844" start="55535" end="55552" title="nepheline syenite" label="nepheline syenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="55554" end="55561" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="55569" end="55577" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="55583" end="55589" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="55772" end="55793" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371297" start="56006" end="56024" title="Socially responsible investing" label="ethical guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q568753" start="56147" end="56158" title="transparency (market)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769674" start="56492" end="56542" title="Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications" label="Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="56838" end="56852" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q962977" start="56872" end="56884" title="double track" label="double track"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="56889" end="56904" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434630" start="57008" end="57028" title="Units of transportation measurement" label="passenger-kilometres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434630" start="57079" end="57095" title="Units of transportation measurement" label="tonne-kilometres"/>
<link wikidata="Q23979144" start="57128" end="57136" title="Bane NOR" label="Bane NOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q83825" start="57209" end="57211" title="Vy" label="Vy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57213" end="57215" title="SJ AB#SJ Norge" label="SJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q58041853" start="57217" end="57225" title="Go-Ahead Nordic" label="Go-Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167417" start="57230" end="57238" title="Flytoget" label="Flytoget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036035" start="57277" end="57285" title="CargoNet" label="CargoNet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57290" end="57296" title="OnRail" label="OnRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102847" start="57486" end="57498" title="NSB Night Train" label="night trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="57527" end="57541" title="commuter rail" label="commuter train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790279" start="57558" end="57562" title="Oslo Commuter Rail" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771275" start="57564" end="57573" title="Trøndelag Commuter Rail" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57575" end="57581" title="Bergen Commuter Rail" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165305" start="57586" end="57595" title="Jæren Line" label="Stavanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q106123" start="57861" end="57875" title="International E-road network" label="European route"/>
<link wikidata="Q921422" start="57915" end="57932" title="European route E6" label="European route E6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375888" start="57987" end="57990" title="European route E39" label="E39"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468793" start="58067" end="58104" title="Norwegian Public Roads Administration" label="Norwegian Public Roads Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022098" start="58163" end="58199" title="plug-in electric vehicles in Norway" label="plug-in electric vehicles per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q828814" start="58354" end="58366" title="market share" label="market share"/>
<link wikidata="Q791050" start="58636" end="58642" title="Avinor" label="Avinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129316" start="58644" end="58658" title="List of the largest airports in the Nordic countries" label="Seven airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q210559" start="58863" end="58887" title="Oslo Airport, Gardermoen" label="Oslo Airport, Gardermoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="58928" end="58931" title="airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="58970" end="58991" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q215392" start="58996" end="59017" title="Norwegian Air Shuttle" label="Norwegian Air Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q124115" start="59435" end="59452" title="Niels Henrik Abel" label="Niels Henrik Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30769" start="59457" end="59467" title="Sophus Lie" label="Sophus Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="59518" end="59530" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q372017" start="59532" end="59545" title="Caspar Wessel" label="Caspar Wessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="59572" end="59579" title="Vector space" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="59584" end="59599" title="Complex number" label="complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="59607" end="59620" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q548080" start="59684" end="59698" title="Thoralf Skolem" label="Thoralf Skolem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="59735" end="59753" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q329846" start="59761" end="59772" title="Øystein Ore" label="Øystein Ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q320298" start="59777" end="59789" title="Ludvig Sylow" label="Ludwig Sylow"/>
<link wikidata="Q211041" start="59813" end="59825" title="Atle Selberg" label="Atle Selberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="59892" end="59904" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q915604" start="59906" end="59916" title="Wolf Prize in Mathematics" label="Wolf Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q188184" start="59922" end="59932" title="Abel Prize" label="Abel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576229" start="59934" end="59949" title="Ernst Sejersted Selmer" label="Ernst S. Selmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="59994" end="60018" title="Cryptographic algorithm" label="cryptographic algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q461624" start="60057" end="60075" title="Kristian Birkeland" label="Kristian Birkeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="60103" end="60118" title="Aurora" label="aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192688" start="60124" end="60136" title="Ivar Giaever" label="Ivar Giaever"/>
<link wikidata="Q694077" start="60167" end="60186" title="Carl Anton Bjerknes" label="Carl Anton Bjerknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q705048" start="60191" end="60211" title="Christopher Hansteen" label="Christopher Hansteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="60234" end="60247" title="hydrodynamics" label="hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="60252" end="60264" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="geomagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164389" start="60299" end="60315" title="Vilhelm Bjerknes" label="Vilhelm Bjerknes"/>
<link wikidata="Q984566" start="60320" end="60335" title="Ragnar Fjørtoft" label="Ragnar Fjørtoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q837552" start="60376" end="60404" title="numerical weather prediction" label="numerical weather prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q107405" start="60431" end="60443" title="Lars Onsager" label="Lars Onsager"/>
<link wikidata="Q157212" start="60467" end="60477" title="Odd Hassel" label="Odd Hassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186011" start="60506" end="60521" title="stereochemistry" label="stereochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q540113" start="60551" end="60562" title="Peter Waage" label="Peter Waage"/>
<link wikidata="Q712979" start="60567" end="60591" title="Cato Maximilian Guldberg" label="Cato Maximilian Guldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q899494" start="60607" end="60625" title="law of mass action" label="law of mass action"/>
<link wikidata="Q213668" start="60684" end="60702" title="Victor Goldschmidt" label="Victor Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="60738" end="60750" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q92651" start="60752" end="60766" title="Håkon Wium Lie" label="Håkon Wium Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="60777" end="60799" title="CSS" label="Cascading Style Sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264637" start="60836" end="60848" title="Pål Spilling" label="Pål Spilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="60887" end="60904" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q92745" start="60959" end="60973" title="Ole-Johan Dahl" label="Ole-Johan Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q92744" start="60978" end="60993" title="Kristen Nygaard" label="Kristen Nygaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="61004" end="61010" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="61022" end="61058" title="Object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="61089" end="61101" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q335152" start="61160" end="61169" title="Arne Næss" label="Arne Næss"/>
<link wikidata="Q216279" start="61178" end="61190" title="deep ecology" label="deep ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q326830" start="61198" end="61211" title="Johan Galtung" label="Johan Galtung"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820293" start="61237" end="61250" title="Peace and conflict studies" label="peace studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356426" start="61267" end="61280" title="Nils Christie" label="Nils Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q283948" start="61285" end="61301" title="Thomas Mathiesen" label="Thomas Mathiesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q710431" start="61316" end="61330" title="Vilhelm Aubert" label="Vilhelm Aubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664169" start="61332" end="61346" title="Harriet Holter" label="Harriet Holter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388603" start="61352" end="61365" title="Erik Grønseth" label="Erik Grønseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q319704" start="61391" end="61403" title="Stein Rokkan" label="Stein Rokkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187988" start="61462" end="61475" title="Ragnar Frisch" label="Ragnar Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208124" start="61477" end="61492" title="Trygve Haavelmo" label="Trygve Haavelmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q211097" start="61498" end="61513" title="Finn E. Kydland" label="Finn E. Kydland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160039" start="61563" end="61575" title="econometrics" label="econometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="61580" end="61594" title="macroeconomics" label="macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="61638" end="61661" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="61801" end="61821" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835951" start="61829" end="61870" title="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report" label="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="62238" end="62251" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="62380" end="62384" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42900680" start="62386" end="62393" title="Ålesund (town)" label="Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="62395" end="62401" title="Bergen (city)" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416" start="62403" end="62412" title="Stavanger (city)" label="Stavanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="62414" end="62423" title="Trondheim (city)" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415" start="62425" end="62437" title="Kristiansand (town)" label="Kristiansand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699921" start="62439" end="62446" title="Arendal (town)" label="Arendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42328401" start="62448" end="62454" title="Tromsø (city)" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q107135" start="62456" end="62467" title="Fredrikstad (town)" label="Fredrikstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853792" start="62473" end="62481" title="Tønsberg" label="Tønsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q127598" start="62617" end="62631" title="Western Norway" label="Western Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214041" start="62636" end="62651" title="Northern Norway" label="Northern Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q33572" start="62764" end="62785" title="Holmenkollen ski jump" label="Holmenkollen ski jump"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62798" end="62810" title=":no:«Saga Oseberg»" label="Saga Oseberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153430" start="62870" end="62877" title="Bryggen" label="Bryggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126911" start="62889" end="62910" title="Vigeland installation" label="Vigeland installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126911" start="62914" end="62926" title="Frogner Park" label="Frogner Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="62936" end="62953" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499573" start="62968" end="62988" title="Fredrikstad Fortress" label="Fredrikstad Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267240" start="63033" end="63067" title="Tønsberg Fortress" label="the ruin park of Tønsberg Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="63196" end="63206" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="63227" end="63235" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="63248" end="63268" title="total fertility rate" label="total fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329823" start="63457" end="63467" title="median age" label="median age"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="63517" end="63528" title="Sámi people" label="Sámi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="63701" end="63715" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q610315" start="63751" end="63762" title="Kven people" label="Kven people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770125" start="64078" end="64094" title="Norwegianization" label="Norwegianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="64229" end="64233" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280107" start="64235" end="64247" title="Forest Finns" label="Forest Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="64253" end="64266" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090395" start="64323" end="64345" title="World Happiness Report" label="World Happiness Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="64707" end="64726" title="Norwegian Americans" label="Norwegian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441289" start="64880" end="64898" title="Norwegian Canadians" label="Norwegian ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="65047" end="65054" title="Western culture" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="65347" end="65353" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="65355" end="65364" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="65366" end="65372" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="65377" end="65382" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="65395" end="65402" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="65413" end="65440" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="65570" end="65574" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26525" start="65585" end="65592" title="Drammen (town)" label="Drammen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="65613" end="65620" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65845" end="65875" title="Separation of church and state#Norway" label="Separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="66016" end="66032" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="66884" end="66891" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="66893" end="66905" title="confirmation" label="confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214802" start="67099" end="67108" title="Confirmation (Lutheran Church)" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="67695" end="67719" title="Irreligion" label="religiously unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="67900" end="67921" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="68230" end="68242" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q283228" start="68257" end="68299" title="Evangelical Lutheran Free Church of Norway" label="Evangelical Lutheran Free Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23042648" start="68314" end="68347" title="United Methodist Church in Norway" label="United Methodist Church in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="68358" end="68366" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="68376" end="68392" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q820257" start="68402" end="68427" title="Brunstad Christian Church" label="Brunstad Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="68437" end="68459" title="Seventh-day Adventists" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="68469" end="68478" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="68486" end="68490" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="ACOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="68499" end="68523" title="Chaldean Catholic Church" label="Chaldean Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="68726" end="68773" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="68785" end="68809" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q143902" start="68842" end="68847" title="Islam in Norway" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q259447" start="69018" end="69025" title="History of the Jews in Norway" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="69164" end="69171" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="69247" end="69255" title="gurdwara" label="gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q488607" start="69357" end="69361" title="Lier, Norway" label="Lier"/>
<link wikidata="Q426395" start="69422" end="69439" title="Buddhist Federation of Norway" label="Buddhistforbundet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="69531" end="69543" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569318" start="69650" end="69680" title="Norwegian Humanist Association" label="Norwegian Humanist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560674" start="69759" end="69788" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in Norway" label="Eastern Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220508" start="69793" end="69823" title="Oriental Orthodoxy in Norway" label="Oriental Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="70020" end="70027" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341115" start="70113" end="70130" title="Roman Catholicism in Norway" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766661" start="70140" end="70148" title="Hinduism in Norway" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q143902" start="70158" end="70163" title="Islam in Norway" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000876" start="70177" end="70185" title="Buddhism in Norway" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="70300" end="70317" title="Germanic paganism" label="Germanic paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="70327" end="70341" title="Norse paganism" label="Norse paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965826" start="70396" end="70409" title="Christianization of Scandinavia" label="Christianised"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="70753" end="70759" title="Germanic Neopaganism" label="Åsatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772436" start="70787" end="70813" title="Åsatrufellesskapet Bifrost" label="Åsatrufellesskapet Bifrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q735329" start="71021" end="71041" title="Sámi shamanism" label="shamanistic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="71153" end="71165" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71279" end="71291" title="Noaidevuohta" label="Noaidevuohta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="71357" end="71364" title="shamans" label="shamans"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="71453" end="71476" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636875" start="71611" end="71627" title="living condition" label="living condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="71752" end="71763" title="Vaccination" label="Vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="72090" end="72112" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984087" start="72432" end="72458" title="Higher education in Norway" label="Higher education in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708511" start="72490" end="72502" title="List of universities in Norway" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407956" start="72534" end="72552" title="university college" label="university college"/>
<link wikidata="Q187073" start="72616" end="72631" title="Bologna Process" label="Bologna Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="72642" end="72650" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="72662" end="72668" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740462" start="72744" end="72766" title="Education in Norway" label="upper secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269240" start="73132" end="73141" title="Academic term" label="semesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769657" start="73253" end="73297" title="Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research" label="Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q25167" start="73347" end="73353" title="Bokmål" label="Bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="73358" end="73365" title="Nynorsk" label="Nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q165795" start="73702" end="73706" title="Kven language" label="Kven"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="73860" end="73874" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="73899" end="73908" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="74102" end="74113" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="74143" end="74159" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q25167" start="74202" end="74208" title="Bokmål" label="Bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q25164" start="74225" end="74232" title="Nynorsk" label="Nynorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="74803" end="74825" title="North Germanic languages" label="Scandinavian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="74827" end="74833" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="74838" end="74845" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="74906" end="74923" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q146165" start="75139" end="75153" title="Nordic Council" label="Nordic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331996" start="75382" end="75425" title="Norwegian language conflict" label="strong political and cultural controversies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="75593" end="75599" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q610315" start="76567" end="76571" title="Kven people" label="Kven"/>
<link wikidata="Q165795" start="76611" end="76624" title="Kven language" label="Kven language"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="76832" end="76883" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="76924" end="76930" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q36641" start="76935" end="76956" title="Scandoromani language" label="Scandoromani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781613" start="77078" end="77101" title="Norwegian Sign Language" label="Norwegian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="77424" end="77429" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="77442" end="77460" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Chinese (Mandarin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288849" start="77652" end="77670" title="Norwegian passport" label="Norwegian passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q523363" start="77973" end="77995" title="Norwegian romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="78036" end="78054" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian language"/>
<link wikidata="" start="78059" end="78064" title=":Category:Mass media in Norway" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758118" start="78427" end="78435" title="Kon-Tiki (1950 film)" label="Kon-Tiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="78456" end="78469" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q570651" start="78501" end="78527" title="The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix" label="The Pinchcliffe Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712084" start="78572" end="78583" title="Ivo Caprino" label="Ivo Caprino"/>
<link wikidata="Q175498" start="78671" end="78680" title="Nils Gaup" label="Nils Gaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q795680" start="78694" end="78704" title="Pathfinder (1987 film)" label="Pathfinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="78736" end="78740" title="Sámi people" label="Sámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q456238" start="78770" end="78783" title="Berit Nesheim" label="Berit Nesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678326" start="78797" end="78821" title="The Other Side of Sunday" label="The Other Side of Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755757" start="78990" end="79011" title="Kristin Lavransdatter" label="Kristin Lavransdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767262" start="79067" end="79083" title="The Telegraphist" label="The Telegraphist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15046905" start="79100" end="79122" title="Gurin with the Foxtail" label="Gurin with the Foxtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423882" start="79130" end="79146" title="Knut Erik Jensen" label="Knut Erik Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056581" start="79206" end="79222" title="Erik Skjoldbjærg" label="Erik Skjoldbjærg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759328" start="79252" end="79260" title="Insomnia (1997 film)" label="Insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q303312" start="79274" end="79280" title="Elling" label="Elling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759619" start="79312" end="79332" title="Kon-Tiki (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;Kon-Tiki&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23770993" start="79410" end="79426" title="Skam (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Skam&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28061486" start="79438" end="79449" title="Julie Andem" label="Julie Andem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782299" start="79586" end="79601" title="Joachim Rønning" label="Joachim Rønning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779128" start="79603" end="79614" title="Anja Breien" label="Anja Breien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368851" start="79616" end="79630" title="Espen Sandberg" label="Espen Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q191064" start="79632" end="79643" title="Liv Ullmann" label="Liv Ullmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425142" start="79648" end="79661" title="Morten Tyldum" label="Morten Tyldum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918344" start="79720" end="79738" title="The Imitation Game" label="The Imitation Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962283" start="79746" end="79768" title="Passengers (2016 film)" label="&amp;quot;Passengers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="79770" end="79830" title="Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales" label="&amp;quot;Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar&amp;#x27;s Revenge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q27062250" start="79874" end="79895" title="Jack Ryan (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Jack Ryan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757674" start="79900" end="79922" title="Marco Polo (2014 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Marco Polo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071956" start="79942" end="79958" title="Thomas Bergersen" label="Thomas Bergersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="79977" end="79995" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Avatar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q163872" start="80003" end="80018" title="The Dark Knight" label="The Dark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="80026" end="80050" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211909" start="80055" end="80073" title="The Chronicles of Narnia (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Narnia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347995" start="80075" end="80092" title="Egil Monn-Iversen" label="Egil Monn-Iversen"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="80328" end="80337" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="80344" end="80367" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="80443" end="80458" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q21534241" start="80472" end="80486" title="No Time to Die" label="No Time to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q637021" start="80500" end="80518" title="The Golden Compass (film)" label="The Golden Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474279" start="80532" end="80545" title="Spies Like Us" label="Spies Like Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q23894626" start="80584" end="80607" title="Black Widow (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Black Widow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q63985561" start="80609" end="80626" title="Tenet (film)" label="&amp;quot;Tenet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q161687" start="80634" end="80672" title="Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q693747" start="80689" end="80707" title="The Heroes of Telemark" label="Heroes of Telemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758072" start="80746" end="80756" title="Lilyhammer" label="Lilyhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579463" start="80773" end="80780" title="Vikings (2013 TV series)" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="80832" end="80840" title="romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="80851" end="80863" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q366629" start="80865" end="80880" title="Rikard Nordraak" label="Rikard Nordraak"/>
<link wikidata="Q336668" start="80885" end="80899" title="Johan Svendsen" label="Johan Svendsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q692690" start="80952" end="80965" title="Arne Nordheim" label="Arne Nordheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q453617" start="81010" end="81026" title="Leif Ove Andsnes" label="Leif Ove Andsnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q527351" start="81039" end="81049" title="Truls Mørk" label="Truls Mørk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="81066" end="81073" title="cellist" label="cellist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="81083" end="81092" title="Wagnerian" label="Wagnerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q234380" start="81101" end="81117" title="Kirsten Flagstad" label="Kirsten Flagstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q104086680" start="81124" end="81150" title="Scandinavian ballad tradition" label="Norwegian ballad tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580910" start="81359" end="81373" title="Olle Adolphson" label="Olle Adolphson"/>
<link wikidata="Q982319" start="81378" end="81396" title="Cornelis Vreeswijk" label="Cornelis Vreeswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771939" start="81440" end="81448" title="Ole Paus" label="Ole Paus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825205" start="81450" end="81467" title="Lillebjørn Nilsen" label="Lillebjørn Nilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001491" start="81472" end="81483" title="Finn Kalvik" label="Finn Kalvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q290083" start="81514" end="81526" title="Jan Garbarek" label="Jan Garbarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q615123" start="81528" end="81540" title="Terje Rypdal" label="Terje Rypdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464191" start="81542" end="81552" title="Mari Boine" label="Mari Boine"/>
<link wikidata="Q641035" start="81554" end="81568" title="Arild Andersen" label="Arild Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q897564" start="81573" end="81589" title="Bugge Wesseltoft" label="Bugge Wesseltoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q442953" start="81627" end="81644" title="Paal Nilssen-Love" label="Paal Nilssen-Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777788" start="81646" end="81657" title="Supersilent" label="Supersilent"/>
<link wikidata="Q607285" start="81659" end="81671" title="Jaga Jazzist" label="Jaga Jazzist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567905" start="81676" end="81683" title="Wibutee" label="Wibutee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="81739" end="81749" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q178933" start="81827" end="81843" title="Hardanger fiddle" label="Hardanger fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755060" start="81846" end="81856" title="Andrea Een" label="Andrea Een"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083184" start="81858" end="81875" title="Olav Jørgen Hegge" label="Olav Jørgen Hegge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850741" start="81880" end="81893" title="Annbjørg Lien" label="Annbjørg Lien"/>
<link wikidata="Q394485" start="81913" end="81930" title="Agnes Buen Garnås" label="Agnes Buen Garnås"/>
<link wikidata="Q446426" start="81932" end="81951" title="Kirsten Bråten Berg" label="Kirsten Bråten Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q719745" start="81956" end="81969" title="Odd Nordstoga" label="Odd Nordstoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296521" start="81972" end="81993" title="Early Norwegian black metal scene" label="Norwegian black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437862" start="82005" end="82025" title="rock music in Norway" label="rock music in Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q132438" start="82134" end="82145" title="black metal" label="black metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264029" start="82182" end="82189" title="Emperor (band)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160119" start="82191" end="82201" title="Darkthrone" label="Darkthrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q152761" start="82203" end="82212" title="Gorgoroth" label="Gorgoroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q485116" start="82214" end="82220" title="Mayhem (band)" label="Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193172" start="82222" end="82228" title="Burzum" label="Burzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208417" start="82233" end="82241" title="Immortal (band)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q916688" start="82257" end="82265" title="Enslaved (band)" label="Enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794838" start="82267" end="82276" title="Kvelertak" label="Kvelertak"/>
<link wikidata="Q58207" start="82278" end="82290" title="Dimmu Borgir" label="Dimmu Borgir"/>
<link wikidata="Q335352" start="82295" end="82304" title="Satyricon (band)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q455147" start="82415" end="82430" title="Susanne Sundfør" label="Susanne Sundfør"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864768" start="82432" end="82438" title="Sigrid (singer)" label="Sigrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107619" start="82440" end="82448" title="Astrid S" label="Astrid S"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045556" start="82450" end="82456" title="Adelén" label="Adelén"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632457" start="82458" end="82470" title="Julie Bergan" label="Julie Bergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q288258" start="82472" end="82482" title="Maria Mena" label="Maria Mena"/>
<link wikidata="Q293167" start="82484" end="82494" title="Tone Damli" label="Tone Damli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167768" start="82496" end="82511" title="Margaret Berger" label="Margaret Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q233977" start="82513" end="82524" title="Lene Marlin" label="Lene Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580993" start="82526" end="82540" title="Christel Alsos" label="Christel Alsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714730" start="82542" end="82557" title="Maria Arredondo" label="Maria Arredondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q233393" start="82559" end="82571" title="Marion Raven" label="Marion Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q234428" start="82576" end="82588" title="Marit Larsen" label="Marit Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352006" start="82639" end="82642" title="M2M (band)" label="M2M"/>
<link wikidata="Q287329" start="82645" end="82657" title="Lene Nystrøm" label="Lene Nystrøm"/>
<link wikidata="Q213388" start="82698" end="82702" title="Aqua (band)" label="Aqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q201908" start="82705" end="82723" title="Anni-Frid Lyngstad" label="Anni-Frid Lyngstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="82759" end="82763" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19329827" start="82770" end="82783" title="Aurora (singer)" label="Aurora Aksnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417412" start="82855" end="82863" title="Stargate (production team)" label="Stargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q523517" start="82865" end="82875" title="Espen Lind" label="Espen Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q233977" start="82877" end="82888" title="Lene Marlin" label="Lene Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403917" start="82893" end="82905" title="Ina Wroldsen" label="Ina Wroldsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="82953" end="82976" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q832760" start="83085" end="83095" title="Bobbysocks" label="Bobbysocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q187576" start="83112" end="83125" title="Secret Garden (duo)" label="Secret Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131259" start="83144" end="83159" title="Alexander Rybak" label="Alexander Rybak"/>
<link wikidata="Q215787" start="83225" end="83234" title="Fairytale (Alexander Rybak song)" label="Fairytale"/>
<link wikidata="Q309162" start="83541" end="83554" title="extreme sport" label="extreme sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350597" start="83577" end="83593" title="Ekstremsportveko" label="Ekstremsportveko"/>
<link wikidata="Q109031" start="83622" end="83626" title="Voss" label="Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438166" start="83672" end="83685" title="Øyafestivalen" label="Øyafestivalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153998" start="83748" end="83759" title="Love Parade" label="Love Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499447" start="83861" end="83881" title="Fredrik Carl Størmer" label="Fredrik Carl Størmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="84164" end="84169" title="Norse paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="84170" end="84182" title="Poetic Edda" label="Eddaic poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="84187" end="84192" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367169" start="84254" end="84268" title="Bragi Boddason" label="Bragi Boddason"/>
<link wikidata="Q741327" start="84273" end="84294" title="Eyvindr skáldaspillir" label="Eyvindr skáldaspillir"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="84406" end="84417" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q631342" start="84621" end="84638" title="Historia Norwegiæ" label="Historia Norwegiæ"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="84652" end="84663" title="Þiðrekssaga" label="Þiðrekssaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394199" start="84680" end="84696" title="Konungs skuggsjá" label="Konungs skuggsjá"/>
<link wikidata="Q558590" start="84872" end="84883" title="Petter Dass" label="Petter Dass"/>
<link wikidata="Q216692" start="84888" end="84902" title="Ludvig Holberg" label="Ludvig Holberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="85163" end="85174" title="Oslo" label="Christiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="85223" end="85235" title="Constitution of Norway" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q351705" start="85339" end="85355" title="Henrik Wergeland" label="Henrik Wergeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q355485" start="85357" end="85382" title="Peter Christen Asbjørnsen" label="Peter Christen Asbjørnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q470002" start="85384" end="85394" title="Jørgen Moe" label="Jørgen Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q243045" start="85399" end="85414" title="Camilla Collett" label="Camilla Collett"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="85450" end="85460" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="85532" end="85544" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="85546" end="85567" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q318358" start="85569" end="85587" title="Alexander Kielland" label="Alexander Kielland"/>
<link wikidata="Q469681" start="85593" end="85602" title="Jonas Lie (writer)" label="Jonas Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q523363" start="85749" end="85779" title="Norwegian romantic nationalism" label="Norwegian romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208094" start="85943" end="85952" title="Peer Gynt" label="Peer Gynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="85961" end="85973" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217608" start="86040" end="86053" title="The Wild Duck" label="The Wild Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q669694" start="86070" end="86089" title="A Doll&amp;#x27;s House" label="A Doll&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="86162" end="86187" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q46405" start="86189" end="86210" title="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson" label="Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40826" start="86220" end="86231" title="Knut Hamsun" label="Knut Hamsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266122" start="86278" end="86296" title="Growth of the Soil" label="Growth of the Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q80889" start="86317" end="86330" title="Sigrid Undset" label="Sigrid Undset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755757" start="86348" end="86369" title="Kristin Lavransdatter" label="Kristin Lavransdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="86850" end="86867" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="86871" end="86880" title="Trondheim (city)" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="86895" end="86906" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q746310" start="86915" end="86927" title="stave church" label="stave church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210678" start="87075" end="87093" title="Urnes Stave Church" label="Urnes Stave Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q208495" start="87103" end="87113" title="Sognefjord" label="Sognefjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="87120" end="87126" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="87134" end="87153" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q153430" start="87222" end="87229" title="Bryggen" label="Bryggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108988" start="87450" end="87459" title="Kongsberg (town)" label="Kongsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428572" start="87464" end="87469" title="Røros (town)" label="Røros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080215" start="87725" end="87744" title="Christian Heinrich Grosch" label="Christian H. Grosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="87780" end="87798" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q909158" start="87804" end="87823" title="Oslo Stock Exchange" label="Oslo Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q42900680" start="87957" end="87964" title="Ålesund (town)" label="Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="87984" end="87995" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q64203" start="88287" end="88302" title="Sámi Parliament of Norway" label="Sámi Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377085" start="88306" end="88316" title="Karasjok (village)" label="Kárášjohka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88330" end="88345" title="Stein Halvorson" label="Stein Halvorson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88350" end="88366" title="Christian Sundby" label="Christian Sundby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147131" start="88435" end="88440" title="Lavvu" label="lavvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="88489" end="88500" title="Sámi people" label="Sámi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q164735" start="88774" end="88794" title="Johan Christian Dahl" label="Johan Christian Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596759" start="89113" end="89127" title="Kitty Lange Kielland" label="Kitty Kielland"/>
<link wikidata="Q701669" start="89164" end="89173" title="Hans Gude" label="Hans Gude"/>
<link wikidata="Q263025" start="89179" end="89193" title="Harriet Backer" label="Harriet Backer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="89247" end="89260" title="impressionism" label="impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q445891" start="89262" end="89275" title="Frits Thaulow" label="Frits Thaulow"/>
<link wikidata="Q334200" start="89343" end="89358" title="Christian Krohg" label="Christian Krohg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41406" start="89443" end="89455" title="Edvard Munch" label="Edvard Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q471379" start="89525" end="89535" title="The Scream" label="The Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267579" start="89636" end="89650" title="The Sick Child (Munch)" label="The Sick Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989780" start="89652" end="89659" title="Madonna (Munch)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432673" start="89664" end="89671" title="Puberty (Munch)" label="Puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367020" start="89704" end="89719" title="Harald Sohlberg" label="Harald Sohlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428572" start="89776" end="89781" title="Røros (town)" label="Røros"/>
<link wikidata="Q434374" start="89787" end="89798" title="Odd Nerdrum" label="Odd Nerdrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="89865" end="89871" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="89990" end="89996" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="90016" end="90023" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="90048" end="90053" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="90055" end="90058" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q629718" start="90112" end="90119" title="brunost" label="brunost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329765" start="90121" end="90137" title="Jarlsberg cheese" label="Jarlsberg cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q176017" start="90143" end="90151" title="gamalost" label="gamalost"/>
<link wikidata="Q888720" start="90211" end="90216" title="Lefse" label="Lefse"/>
<link wikidata="Q890197" start="90380" end="90388" title="lutefisk" label="lutefisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097276" start="90390" end="90399" title="smalahove" label="smalahove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703574" start="90401" end="90411" title="pinnekjøtt" label="pinnekjøtt"/>
<link wikidata="Q261830" start="90413" end="90422" title="raspeball" label="raspeball"/>
<link wikidata="Q890360" start="90428" end="90435" title="fårikål" label="fårikål"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="90671" end="90691" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="90693" end="90704" title="ski jumping" label="ski jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="90706" end="90720" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="90722" end="90728" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="90752" end="90760" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="90762" end="90770" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165362" start="90772" end="90785" title="Long track speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="90812" end="90822" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="90986" end="91000" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006660" start="91033" end="91055" title="William Cecil Slingsby" label="William Cecil Slingsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q121008972" start="91069" end="91100" title="Norway, the Northern Playground" label="Norway, the Northern Playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="91322" end="91330" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179687" start="91335" end="91355" title="cross-country skiing (sport)" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="91400" end="91410" title="Ice hockey" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q831911" start="91444" end="91479" title="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national handball team" label="women&amp;#x27;s handball national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="91518" end="91533" title="Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q203194" start="91549" end="91553" title="Handball at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q209129" start="91555" end="91559" title="Handball at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q725909" start="91568" end="91587" title="World Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q911337" start="91589" end="91593" title="1999 World Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q746924" start="91595" end="91599" title="2011 World Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727913" start="91601" end="91605" title="2015 World Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q309168" start="91616" end="91637" title="European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q401123" start="91639" end="91643" title="1998 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q482577" start="91645" end="91649" title="2004 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q482588" start="91651" end="91655" title="2006 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q482563" start="91657" end="91661" title="2008 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q482592" start="91663" end="91667" title="2010 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030143" start="91669" end="91673" title="2014 European Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q751994" start="91706" end="91732" title="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="women&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323" start="91745" end="91772" title="FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q642445" start="91776" end="91780" title="1995 FIFA Women&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q188317" start="91789" end="91816" title="Football at the Olympics" label="Olympic Football Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q795004" start="91820" end="91824" title="Football at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q459459" start="91861" end="91900" title="UEFA European Women&amp;#x27;s Championship" label="UEFA European Women&amp;#x27;s Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q599864" start="91909" end="91913" title="1987 European Competition for Women&amp;#x27;s Football" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q938277" start="91915" end="91919" title="UEFA Women&amp;#x27;s Euro 1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="91926" end="91959" title="Norway national football team" label="men&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="91996" end="92010" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131591" start="92012" end="92016" title="1938 FIFA World Cup" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="92018" end="92022" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="92028" end="92032" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="92051" end="92072" title="UEFA European Football Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="92074" end="92078" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="92214" end="92238" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643761" start="92247" end="92259" title="Halvor Hagen" label="Halvor Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q98380410" start="92261" end="92272" title="Bill Irgens" label="Bill Irgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568017" start="92274" end="92298" title="Leif Olve Dolonen Larsen" label="Leif Olve Dolonen Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q87089426" start="92300" end="92309" title="Mike Mock" label="Mike Mock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80404" start="92315" end="92327" title="Jan Stenerud" label="Jan Stenerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="92330" end="92335" title="Bandy" label="Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400298" start="92416" end="92449" title="Federation of International Bandy" label="Federation of International Bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986854" start="92554" end="92582" title="Norway national bandy team" label="the men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614747" start="92629" end="92659" title="Norway women&amp;#x27;s national bandy team" label="the women&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92688" end="92711" title="Bandy#Overview of international competitions" label="the World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="92747" end="92760" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8098" start="92863" end="92873" title="1904 Summer Olympics" label="1904 Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="92882" end="92902" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="92943" end="92963" title="1980 Summer Olympics boycott" label="American-led boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q208519" start="92978" end="93002" title="All-time Olympic Games medal table" label="the overall medal tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="93010" end="93030" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9623" start="93106" end="93126" title="1952 Winter Olympics" label="1952 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9663" start="93137" end="93157" title="1994 Winter Olympics" label="1994 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101341" start="93161" end="93172" title="Lillehammer" label="Lillehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q370745" start="93193" end="93219" title="2016 Winter Youth Olympics" label="2016 Winter Youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4543" start="93365" end="93381" title="beach volleyball" label="beach volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073336" start="93403" end="93449" title="2018–2020 CEV Beach Volleyball Continental Cup" label="2018–2020 CEV Beach Volleyball Continental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="93452" end="93457" title="Chess" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q106807" start="93496" end="93510" title="Magnus Carlsen" label="Magnus Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190042" start="93533" end="93553" title="World Chess Championship" label="world chess champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112395" start="93596" end="93613" title="Outline of Norway" label="Outline of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="93874" end="93892" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="93900" end="93927" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="93953" end="93967" title="Britannica.com" label="Britannica.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="94051" end="94059" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982622" start="94107" end="94144" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Norway)" label="Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="94275" end="94296" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21242" wikidata="Q1418" url="?curid=21242" title="Nokia">
<text>Nokia Corporation is a Finnish multinational telecommunications, information technology, and consumer electronics corporation, originally established as a pulp mill in 1865. Nokia&#x27;s main headquarters are in Espoo, Finland, in the Helsinki metropolitan area, but the company&#x27;s actual roots are in the Tampere region of Pirkanmaa. In 2020, Nokia employed approximately 92,000 people across over 100 countries, did business in more than 130 countries, and reported annual revenues of around €23 billion. Nokia is a public limited company listed on the Nasdaq Helsinki and New York Stock Exchange. It was the world&#x27;s 415th-largest company measured by 2016 revenues, according to the &quot;Fortune&quot; Global 500&quot;,&quot; having peaked at 85th place in 2009. It is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index.

The company has operated in various industries over the past 150 years. It was founded as a pulp mill and had long been associated with rubber and cables, but since the 1990s has focused on large-scale telecommunications infrastructure, technology development, and licensing. Nokia made significant contributions to the mobile telephony industry, assisting in the development of the GSM, 3G, and LTE standards. For a decade beginning in 1998, Nokia was the largest worldwide vendor of mobile phones and smartphones. In the later 2000s, however, Nokia suffered from a series of poor management decisions and soon saw its share of the mobile phone market drop sharply.

After a partnership with Microsoft and Nokia&#x27;s subsequent market struggles, in 2014, Microsoft bought Nokia&#x27;s mobile phone business, incorporating it as Microsoft Mobile. After the sale, Nokia began to focus more on its telecommunications infrastructure business and on Internet of things technologies, marked by the divestiture of its Here mapping division and the acquisition of Alcatel-Lucent, including its Bell Labs research organization. The company then also experimented with virtual reality and digital health, the latter through the purchase of Withings. The Nokia brand returned to the mobile and smartphone market in 2016 through a licensing arrangement with HMD. Nokia continues to be a major patent licensor for most large mobile phone vendors. Nokia is the world&#x27;s third-largest network equipment manufacturer.

The company was viewed with national pride by Finns, as its mobile phone business made it by far the largest worldwide company and brand from Finland. At its peak in 2000, Nokia accounted for 4% of the country&#x27;s GDP, 21% of total exports, and 70% of the Nasdaq Helsinki market capital.

== History ==

=== 1865–1967 ===

Nokia&#x27;s history dates from 1865, when mining engineer Fredrik Idestam established a pulp mill on the shores of the Tammerkoski rapids near the town of Tampere, Finland (then a Grand Duchy under Russian Empire&#x27;s rule). A second pulp mill was opened in 1868 near the neighboring town of Nokia, where there were better hydropower resources. In 1871, Idestam, together with a friend Leo Mechelin, formed a shared company and called it &quot;Nokia Ab&quot; (in Swedish, &quot;Nokia Company&quot; being the English equivalent), after the site of the second pulp mill.

Idestam retired in 1896, making Mechelin the company&#x27;s chairman; he expanded into electricity generation by 1902, which Idestam had opposed. In 1904, Suomen Gummitehdas (&quot;Finnish Rubber Works&quot;), a rubber business founded by Eduard Polón, established a factory near the town of Nokia and used its name.

In 1922, in the now independent Finland, Nokia Ab entered into a partnership with the Finnish Rubber Works and Kaapelitehdas (&quot;the Cable Factory&quot;), all now jointly under the leadership of Polón. The rubber company grew rapidly when it moved to the Nokia region in the 1930s to take advantage of the electricity supply, and the cable company soon did too.

Nokia at the time also made respirators for both civilian and military use, from the 1930s well into the early 1990s.

=== 1967–1990 ===
In 1967, the three companies – Nokia, Kaapelitehdas, and Finnish Rubber Works – merged to create a new Nokia Corporation, restructured into four major businesses: forestry, cable, rubber, and electronics. In the early 1970s, it entered the networking and radio industries. Nokia started making military equipment for Finland&#x27;s defence forces (&quot;Puolustusvoimat&quot;), such as the Sanomalaite M/90 communicator in 1983, and the M61 gas mask first developed in the 1960s. Nokia was now also making professional mobile radios, telephone switches, capacitors and chemicals.

After Finland&#x27;s trade agreement with the Soviet Union in the 1960s, Nokia expanded into the Soviet market. It soon widened trade, ranging from automatic telephone exchanges to robotics among others; by the late 1970s, the Soviet Union became a major market for Nokia, yielding high profits. The U.S. government became increasingly concerned of the possible export of items it deemed as high technology, such as digital telephone exchanges, to the Soviet Union in the 1980s. This led to Finland entering the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls in 1987. This was a demonstration of Finland balancing between both sides, as it was neutral during the Cold War.

In 1977, Kari Kairamo became CEO and transformed the company&#x27;s businesses. By this time, Finland was becoming what has been called &quot;Nordic Japan&quot;. Under his leadership, Nokia acquired many companies, including television maker Salora in 1984, followed by Swedish electronics and computer maker Luxor AB in 1985, and French television maker Oceanic in 1987. This made Nokia the third-largest television manufacturer of Europe (behind Philips and Thomson). The existing brands continued to be used until the end of the television business in 1996.

In 1987, Nokia acquired Schaub-Lorenz, the consumer operations of Germany&#x27;s Standard Elektrik Lorenz (SEL), which included its &quot;Schaub-Lorenz&quot; and &quot;Graetz&quot; brands. It was originally part of American conglomerate International Telephone &amp; Telegraph (ITT), and after the acquisition products were sold under the &quot;ITT Nokia&quot; brand, despite SEL&#x27;s sale to Compagnie Générale d&#x27;Electricité (CGE), the predecessor of Alcatel, in 1986.

In 1987, Kaapelitehdas discontinued production of cables at its Helsinki factory after 44 years, effectively shutting down the sub-company.

On 1 April 1988, Nokia bought the Information Systems division of Ericsson, which had originated as the Datasaab computer division of Swedish aircraft and car manufacturer Saab. Ericsson Information Systems made Alfaskop terminals, typewriters, minicomputers and Ericsson-branded IBM compatible PCs. The merger with Nokia&#x27;s Information Systems division—which since 1981 had a line of personal computers called MikroMikko—resulted in the name Nokia Data.

Nokia also acquired Mobira, a mobile radio telephone manufacturer that had been established in a joint venture with Salora Oy in 1979, which became the foundation of its future mobile phone business. In 1981, Mobira launched the Nordic Mobile Telephone (NMT) service, the world&#x27;s first international cellular network and the first to allow international roaming. In 1982, Mobira launched the Mobira Senator car phone, Nokia&#x27;s first mobile phone. At that time, the company had no interest in producing mobile phones, which the executive board regarded as akin to James Bond&#x27;s gadgets: improbably futuristic and niche devices. After all these acquisitions, Nokia&#x27;s revenue base became US$2.7 billion.

CEO Kairamo killed himself on 11 December 1988.

=== 1990–2010 ===
Following Simo Vuorilehto&#x27;s appointment as CEO, a major restructuring was planned. With 11 groups within the company, Vuorilehto divested industrial units he deemed as un-strategic. Nokian Tyres (&quot;Nokian Renkaat&quot;), a tyre producer originally formed as a division of Finnish Rubber Works in 1932, split away from Nokia Corporation in 1988. Two years later, in 1990, Finnish Rubber Works followed suit. In 1991, Nokia sold its computer division, Nokia Data, to UK-based International Computers Limited (ICL), the precursor of Fujitsu Siemens. Investors thought of this as financial trouble and Nokia&#x27;s stock price sank as a result. Finland was now also experiencing its worst recession in living memory, and the collapse of the Soviet Union, a major customer, made matters worse.

Vuorilehto quit in January 1992 and was replaced by Jorma Ollila, who had been the head of the mobile phone business from 1990 and advised against selling that division. Ollila decided to turn Nokia into a &quot;telecom-oriented&quot; company, and he eventually got rid of divisions like the power business. This strategy proved to be very successful, and the company grew rapidly in the following years. Nokia&#x27;s operating profit went from negative in 1991 to $1 billion in 1995 and almost $4 billion by 1999.

Nokia&#x27;s first fully portable mobile phone after the Mobira Senator was the Mobira Cityman 900 in 1987. Nokia assisted in the development of the GSM mobile standard in the 1980s and developed the first GSM network with Siemens, the predecessor to Nokia Siemens Network. The world&#x27;s first GSM call was made by Finnish prime minister Harri Holkeri on 1 July 1991, using Nokia equipment on the 900 MHz band network built by Nokia and operated by Radiolinja. In November 1992, the Nokia 1011 launched, making it the first commercially available GSM mobile phone.

Salora Oy as a Nokia subsidiary ended in 1989 when the division was merged into Nokia-Mobira Oy. The brand continued to be used for televisions until 1995.

On 12 June 1996, Nokia announced the sale of its television business to Canada/Hong Kong-based Semi-Tech Corporation. The television manufacturing plant in Germany closed down in September 1996. The sale included a factory in Turku and the rights to use the Nokia, Finlux, Luxor, Salora, Schaub-Lorenz, and Oceanic brands until the end of 1999. Some of these brands were later sold to other companies.

Nokia was the first to launch digital satellite receivers in the UK, announced in March 1997. In August 1997, Nokia introduced the first digital satellite receiver with Common Interface (CI) support. In 1998, Nokia became the chosen supplier to produce the world&#x27;s first digital terrestrial television set-top boxes by British Digital Broadcasting (BDB), which was eventually launched as ONdigital.
In October 1998, Nokia overtook Motorola to become the best-selling mobile phone brand and in December, manufactured its 100 millionth mobile phone. A major reason why Nokia grew against its main competitors Motorola and Ericsson was that it managed to cater to the consumer youth market and fashion-oriented consumers, most significantly with the Nokia 5110 and 3210 handsets, which featured a large range of colourful and replaceable back covers called Xpress-on. One of the earliest fashion phones in 1992, from Swiss watchmaker Swatch, was based on Nokia&#x27;s 101 handset. The company would also form the Vertu division, creating luxury mobile handsets.

In April 1996, Nokia claimed its 447Xav and 447K monitors to be the first with stereo speakers and a subwoofer. In May 1999, Nokia introduced their first wireless LAN products. In January 2000, ViewSonic acquired Nokia Display Products, the division making displays for personal computers. On 26 April 2001, Nokia partnered with Telefónica to supply DSL modems and routers in Spain.

In 1997, Nokia established a joint venture with Brazilian electronics firm Gradient where they were granted the license to manufacture variants of Nokia mobile phones locally under the Nokia and Gradient brand names.

In 1998, Nokia cofounded Symbian Ltd., led by Psion, to create a new operating system for PDAs and smart mobile phones as a successor of EPOC32. They released the Nokia 9210 Communicator running Symbian OS in 2001 and later that year created the Symbian Series 60 platform, later introducing it with their first camera phone, the Nokia 7650. Both Nokia and Symbian eventually became the largest smartphone hardware and software maker, respectively, and in February 2004, Nokia became the largest shareholder of Symbian Ltd. Nokia acquired the entire company in June 2008 and then formed the Symbian Foundation as its successor.

In 1998 alone, the company had sales revenue of $20 billion, making $2.6 billion profit. By 2000, Nokia employed over 55,000 people and had a market share of 30% in the mobile phone market, almost twice as large as its nearest competitor, Motorola. The company was operating in 140 countries as of 1999. It was reported at the time that some people believed Nokia to be a Japanese company. Between 1996 and 2001, Nokia&#x27;s turnover increased fivefold, from €6.5 billion to €31 billion. Meanwhile, a &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot; survey held near end 2000 showed that Nokia was the &quot;most trusted brand in Europe&quot;, ranking better than Sony, Canon, and Nivea.


The company would then be known as a successful and innovative maker of camera phones. The Nokia 3600/3650 was the first camera phone on sale in North America in 2003. In April 2005, Nokia partnered with German camera optics maker Carl Zeiss AG. That same month, Nokia introduced the Nseries, which would become its flagship line of smartphones for the next six years. The Nokia N95 was introduced in September 2006, became highly successful, and was also awarded &quot;best mobile imaging device&quot; in Europe in 2007. Its successor the N82 featured a xenon flash, which helped it win the award of &quot;best mobile imaging&quot; device in Europe in 2008. The N93 in 2006 was known for its specialized camcorder and the twistable design that switches between clamshell and a camcorder-like position. They were also well known for the N8 with a high-resolution 12-megapixel sensor, in 2010; the 808 PureView with a 41-megapixel sensor, in 2012; and the Lumia 920 flagship, which implemented advanced PureView technologies, in 2012.

Nokia was one of the pioneers of mobile gaming due to the popularity of &quot;Snake&quot;, which came preloaded on many products. In 2002, Nokia attempted to break into the handheld gaming market with the N-Gage. Nokia&#x27;s head of entertainment and media, Ilkka Raiskinen, once said, &quot;Game Boy is for 10-year-olds&quot;, stating that N-Gage is more suited to a mature audience. However, the device was a failure, unable to challenge the dominant market leader, Nintendo. Nokia attempted to revive N-Gage as a platform for their S60 smartphones, which eventually launched in 2008.

In Q1 2004, Nokia&#x27;s mobile phone handset market share steeply dropped to 28.9%, down from 34.6% a year earlier. However, by 2006, the company was steadily gaining again and in Q4 2007 reached its all-time high figure of 40.4%. Its smartphone market share in that quarter was 51%. Nokia was the largest vendor at the time in all regions bar North America.

Nokia launched mobile TV trials in 2005 in Finland with content provided by public broadcaster Yle. The services are based on the DVB-H standard. It could be viewed with the widescreen Nokia 7710 smartphone with a special accessory enabling it to receive DVB-H signals. Nokia partnered with Arqiva and O2 to launch trials in the UK in September 2005.

In 2005, Nokia developed a Linux-based operating system called Maemo, which shipped that year on the Nokia 770 Internet Tablet.

On 1 June 2006, Jorma Ollila became the company&#x27;s chairman and retired as CEO, replaced by Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo.
In August 2007, Nokia introduced Ovi, an umbrella name for the company&#x27;s new Internet services, which included the N-Gage platform and the Nokia Music Store. The Ovi Store faced stiff competition from Apple&#x27;s App Store when it was introduced in 2008.
In October 2008, Nokia announced the Nokia 5800 XpressMusic, the first device to ship with the new touch-centric S60 5th Edition, also known as Symbian^1, the first iteration of the platform since the creation of the Symbian Foundation. In November 2008, Nokia announced it would end mobile phone sales in Japan because of low market share. Nokia&#x27;s global mobile phone market share peaked in 2008 at 38.6 percent. The same year, Nokia announced the acquisition of Trolltech and its Qt software development. Qt was a central part of Nokia&#x27;s strategy until 2011, and it was eventually sold in 2012.

Nokia briefly returned to the computer market with the Booklet 3G netbook in August 2009.

=== 2010–2014 ===

In late 2009 and in 2010, the music-focused Xseries and consumer-focused Cseries were introduced respectively. In April 2010 Nokia introduced its next flagship mobile device, the Nokia N8, which would be the first to run on Symbian. However it was delayed for many months which tarnished the company&#x27;s image, especially after the failure of its previous flagship N97 and tougher competition from Apple and the rising Google. On 10 September 2010, Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo was fired as CEO and it was announced that Stephen Elop from Microsoft would take Nokia&#x27;s CEO position, becoming the first non-Finnish director in Nokia&#x27;s history. It was claimed that investors pressed Nokia&#x27;s board to recruit an outsider to shake up management and break from the traditional &quot;Nokia way&quot;. Ollila had also announced that he would step down as Nokia chairman by 2012. On 11 March 2011 Nokia announced that it had paid Elop a $6 million signing bonus as &quot;compensation for lost income from his prior employer&quot;, on top of his $1.4 million annual salary.
The old Symbian OS became completely open-source in February 2010. However, in November 2010 it was announced that the Symbian Foundation was closing and that Nokia would take back control of the Symbian operating system under closed licensing. By now Nokia was the only remaining company using the platform, along with carrier NTT Docomo in Japan, after both Samsung and Sony Ericsson moved to Android. Meanwhile, in 2010 for Nokia&#x27;s Linux ambitions, Nokia collaborated with Intel to form the MeeGo project, after the merger of Nokia&#x27;s own Maemo and Intel&#x27;s Moblin.

Nokia&#x27;s Symbian platform that had been the leading smartphone platform in Europe and Asia for many years was quickly becoming outdated and difficult for developers after the advent of iOS and Android. To counter this, Nokia planned to make their MeeGo Linux operating system, under development, the company&#x27;s flagship on smartphones. Shortly after Elop&#x27;s CEO tenure began, the Nokia board green-lit him the ability to change the company&#x27;s mobile phones strategy, including changing operating systems. Veteran Anssi Vanjoki, head of the smartphones division, left the company around this time. His final appearance was at Nokia World 2010 when the Nokia E7-00 and other Symbian^3 devices were introduced.

On 11 February 2011, Nokia announced a &quot;strategic partnership&quot; with Microsoft, under which it would adopt Windows Phone 7 as its primary operating system on smartphones, and integrate its services and platforms with its own, including Bing as search engine, and integration of Nokia Maps data into Bing Maps. Elop stated that Nokia chose not to use Android because of an apparent inability to &quot;differentiate&quot; its offerings, with critics also noting that his past ties to Microsoft may have also influenced the decision. Although the MeeGo &quot;Harmattan&quot;-based N9 was met with a highly positive reception in 2011, Nokia had already decided to end development on MeeGo and solely focus on its Microsoft partnership, although the CEO said that the N9&#x27;s &quot;innovations&quot; will live on in the future, which eventually made their way on the Asha platform in 2013. After the announcement of the Microsoft partnership, Nokia&#x27;s market share deteriorated; this was due to demand for Symbian dropping when consumers realized Nokia&#x27;s focus and attention would be elsewhere.

The company posted a large loss for the second quarter of 2011 – only their second quarterly loss in 19 years. Nokia&#x27;s first Windows Phone flagship was the Lumia 800, which arrived in November 2011. Falling sales in 2011, which were not being improved significantly with the Lumia line in 2012, led to consecutive quarters of huge losses. By mid-2012 the company&#x27;s stock price fell below $2. CEO Elop announced cost-cutting measures in June by shedding 10,000 employees by the end of the year and the closure of the Salo manufacturing plant. The Finnish prime minister also announced that the government wouldn&#x27;t subsidize the company from an emergency state fund. Around this time Nokia started a new project codenamed &quot;Meltemi&quot;, a platform for low-end smartphones. With the Microsoft alliance and under Elop&#x27;s management, Nokia also had a renewed focus on the North American market where Nokia phones were, in stark contrast to the rest of the world, almost irrelevant for many years. This strategy began in January 2012 with the introduction of the Nokia Lumia 900 smartphone in partnership with U.S. carrier AT&amp;T.

In March 2011, Nokia introduced a new corporate typeface called &quot;Pure&quot;. On 1 August 2011, Nokia announced that it would adopt a new three-digit naming system for mobile phone products and stop using letters, effectively ending the Nseries, Eseries, and short-lived Cseries. That same day the Nokia 500 was introduced with the new system. Nokia last used three-digit names on analogue phones in the 1990s.

When the Lumia 920 was announced in September 2012, it was seen by the press as the first high-end Windows Phone that could challenge rivals due to its advanced feature set. Elop said that the positive reaction to it had created a sense of hope and optimism in the company. The company was also making gains in developing countries with its Asha series, which were selling strongly. Although Nokia&#x27;s smartphone sales and market share greatly increased throughout 2013, including in the North American market, it was still not enough to avoid financial losses. Ollila stepped down as chairman on 4 May 2012 and was replaced by Risto Siilasmaa.
In September 2013, Nokia announced the sale of its mobile and devices division to Microsoft. The sale was positive for Nokia to avoid further negative financial figures, as well as for Microsoft&#x27;s CEO Steve Ballmer, who wanted Microsoft to produce more hardware and turn it into a devices and services company. The Nokia chairperson, Risto Siilasmaa, described the deal as rationally correct (in the best interests of Nokia shareholders), but emotionally difficult – experts agree that Nokia would have been in a cash crisis had it not sold the division to Microsoft. Analysts believe that Ballmer pushed for the buyout because of fears that Nokia was close to adopting Android and abandoning their alliance with Microsoft. Indeed, in January 2014 the Nokia X was introduced which ran on a customised version of Android. It was a surprising and somewhat odd launch coming just weeks away from the finalization of the Microsoft buyout. Others, including Ballmer&#x27;s successor Satya Nadella, felt that Microsoft thought merging their software teams with Nokia&#x27;s hardware engineering and designs would &quot;accelerate&quot; growth of Windows Phone. The sale was completed in April 2014, with Microsoft Mobile becoming the successor to Nokia&#x27;s mobile devices division. Nokia also moved from its headquarters to another building complex located at Karaportti. At the time, Ballmer himself was retiring as Microsoft CEO and was replaced by Satya Nadella, who opposed the Nokia mobile phones purchase, along with chairman Bill Gates. The purchased assets from Nokia were eventually written-off by Microsoft in 2015.

By 2014, Nokia&#x27;s global brand value according to Interbrand fell to 98th place, a sharp slide from the 5th place it was in 2009. Nokia&#x27;s downfall in the mobile phone market has had different explanations from analysts, with many split about the CEO&#x27;s decision to abandon its in-house operating system and adopting Windows Phone in 2011. Many researchers have concluded that Nokia suffered from deep internal rivalries within the management. Former employees claimed that the management became so swollen by the early success that they grew complacent over time. Some from the Symbian developing team have claimed that the company&#x27;s upper management rejected hundreds of potential innovations during the 2000s that they proposed, including entirely rewriting Symbian&#x27;s code. One former Nokia employee claimed that the company was run as a &quot;Soviet-style bureaucracy&quot;.

In July 2013, Nokia bought Siemens&#x27; stake in the Nokia Siemens Networks joint venture for $2.2 billion, turning it into a wholly owned subsidiary called Nokia Solutions and Networks, until being rebranded as Nokia Networks soon after. During Nokia&#x27;s financial struggles, its profitable networking division with Siemens provided much of its income; thus, the purchase proved to be positive, particularly after the sale of its mobile devices unit.

=== 2014–2016 ===
After the sale of its mobile devices division, Nokia focused on network equipment through Nokia Networks.

In October 2014, Nokia and China Mobile signed a US$970 million framework deal for delivery between 2014 and 2015.

On 17 November 2014, Nokia Technologies head Ramzi Haidamus disclosed that the company planned to re-enter the consumer electronics business as an original design manufacturer, licensing in-house hardware designs and technologies to third-party manufacturers. Haidamus stated that the Nokia brand was &quot;valuable&quot; but &quot;is diminishing in value, and that&#x27;s why it is important that we reverse that trend very quickly, imminently&quot;. The next day, Nokia unveiled the N1, an Android tablet manufactured by Foxconn, as its first product following the Microsoft sale. Haidamus emphasized that devices released under these licensing agreements would be held to high standards in production quality, and would &quot;look and feel just like Nokia built it&quot;. Nokia CEO Rajeev Suri stated that the company planned to re-enter the mobile phone business in this manner in 2016, following the expiration of its non-compete clause with Microsoft.

According to Robert Morlino, the spokesman of Nokia Technologies, Nokia planned to follow the brand-licensing model rather than direct marketing of mobile devices due to the sale of its mobile devices division to Microsoft. The company took aggressive steps to revitalize itself, evident through its hiring of software experts, testing of new products and seeking of sales partners. On 14 July 2015, CEO Rajeev Suri confirmed that the company would make a return to the mobile phones market in 2016.

On 28 July 2015, Nokia announced OZO, a 360-degrees virtual reality camera, with eight 2K optical image sensors. The division behind the product, Nokia Technologies, claimed that OZO would be the most advanced VR film-making platform. Nokia&#x27;s press release stated that OZO would be &quot;the first in a planned portfolio of digital media solutions,&quot; with more technological products expected in the future. OZO was fully unveiled on 30 November in Los Angeles. The OZO, designed for professional use, was intended for retail for US$60,000; however, its price was decreased by $15,000 prior to release, and is listed on its official website as $40,000.

On 14 April 2015, Nokia confirmed that it was in talks with the French telecommunications equipment company Alcatel-Lucent regarding a potential merger. The next day, Nokia announced that it had agreed to purchase Alcatel-Lucent for €15.6 billion in an all-stock deal. CEO Rajeev Suri felt that the purchase would give Nokia a strategic advantage in the development of 5G wireless technologies. The acquisition created a stronger competitor to the rival firms Ericsson and Huawei, whom Nokia and Alcatel-Lucent had surpassed in terms of total combined revenue in 2014. Nokia shareholders hold 66.5% of the new combined company, while Alcatel-Lucent shareholders hold 33.5%. The Bell Labs division was to be maintained, but the Alcatel-Lucent brand would be replaced by Nokia. In October 2015, following approval of the deal by China&#x27;s Ministry of Commerce, the merger awaited approval by French regulators. Despite the initial intent of selling the submarine cable division separately, Alcatel-Lucent later declared that it would not. The merger closed on 14 January 2016, but was not complete until 3 November 2016. From the acquisition, Nokia is now also the owner of the Alcatel Mobile phone brand, which continues to be licensed to TCL.

On 3 August 2015, Nokia announced that it had reached a deal to sell its Here digital maps division to a consortium of BMW, Daimler AG and Volkswagen Group for €2.8 billion. The deal closed on 3 December 2015.

=== 2016–2019 ===
On 26 April 2016, Nokia announced its intent to acquire French connected health device maker Withings for US$191 million. The company was integrated into a new Digital Health unit of Nokia Technologies. Nokia later wrote off the cost of the acquisition and in May 2018 the health unit was sold back to Éric Carreel, a Withings co-founder and former CEO.
On 18 May 2016, Microsoft Mobile sold its Nokia-branded feature phone business to HMD Global, a new company founded by former Nokia executive Jean-Francois Baril, and an associated factory in Vietnam to Foxconn&#x27;s FIH Mobile subsidiary. Nokia subsequently entered into a long-term licensing deal to make HMD the exclusive manufacturer of Nokia-branded phones and tablets outside Japan, operating in conjunction with Foxconn. The deal also granted HMD the right to essential patents and featurephone software. HMD subsequently announced the Android-based Nokia 6 smartphone in January 2017. At Mobile World Congress, HMD additionally unveiled the Nokia 3 and Nokia 5 smartphones, as well as a re-imagining of Nokia&#x27;s classic 3310 feature phone. Nokia has direct investments in the company, and they do have some input in the new devices.

On 28 June 2016, Nokia demonstrated for the first time a 5G-ready network. In February 2017 Nokia carried out a 5G connection in Oulu, Finland using the 5GTF standard, backed by Verizon, on Intel architecture-based equipment.

In July 2017, Nokia and Xiaomi announced that they have signed a business collaboration agreement and a multi-year patent agreement, including a cross-license to each company&#x27;s cellular standard-essential patents. In that year, Nokia&#x27;s brand value was ranked 188th by Brand Finance, a jump of 147 places from 2016. Its rise was attributed to its health portfolio and new mobile phones developed by HMD Global.

In January 2018, Nokia signed a deal with NTT Docomo, Japan&#x27;s largest mobile operator, to provide 5G wireless radio base stations in the country by 2020. Later that month, Nokia announced the ReefShark line of 5G chipsets, claiming that it triples bandwidth to 84 Gbit/s. In March, Solidium, the investment arm of the Finnish Government, purchased a 3.3% stake in Nokia valued at €844 million. In May, Nokia announced that it had acquired a California-based IoT startup, SpaceTime Insight.

In January 2019, the Canadian government announced that it would provide $40 million to support Nokia&#x27;s research on 5G technology. A 2019 study revealed that Nokia phones performed far better than rivals Samsung, LG, Xiaomi, and Huawei in updating to the latest version of Android. The study, made by Counterpoint Research, found that 96 percent of Nokia phones were either sent with or updated to the latest Android version since Pie was released in 2018. Nokia&#x27;s competitors were found to be all around roughly the 80 percent range.

=== 2020–present ===
On 2 March 2020, Nokia announced Pekka Lundmark as its new CEO. Later that month, Nokia completed the acquisition of Elenion Technologies, a U.S.-based company focusing on silicon photonics technology to improve economics of advanced optical connectivity products.

On 27 May 2020, Sari Baldauf succeeded Risto Siilasmaa as chairwoman of the board of directors, and Kari Stadigh was appointed vice chair. In June, Nokia won a 5G contract worth approximately $450 million from Taiwan Mobile to build out the telecom operator&#x27;s next-generation network as the sole supplier. In October, Nokia announced a contract with NASA to build a 4G mobile network for astronaut usage on the moon. The $14.1 million contract, through subsidiary Bell Labs, was expected to begin in 2022.

In 2020, Flipkart collaborated with Nokia to market Nokia-branded consumer products in India. These included televisions, a laptop and a range of air conditioners.

In April 2022, Nokia announced that it would exit the Russian market following the country&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine. The company stated that the decision would not affect its financial outlook as Russia accounted for less than 2% of Nokia&#x27;s net sales in 2021.

In February 2023, Nokia introduced a new logo for the first time in nearly 60 years to change its brand identity as people still associated the previous logo with mobile phones. The new logo was designed by Lippincott.

In December 2023, Nokia acquired Fenix Group to strengthen its wireless offering in the defense segment for an undisclosed amount. In the same month, Nokia announced a €185million deal with Lumine Group to carve out its device management business (inherited from Alcatel-Lucent&#x27;s purchase of Motive, Inc.) and its service management business (formerly Mformation). The deal completed in April 2024 and involved the transfer of around 500 Nokia employees.

In February 2024, the company announced that it was accelerating its carbon neutrality target by 10 years to 2040 after having previously committed to cutting its carbon footprint across emissions scopes in half by 2030 from a 2019 baseline.

In June 2024, Nokia acquired Infinera for $2.3 billion.

On February 10, 2025, Nokia announced Justin Hotard as its new CEO.

== Current operations ==
Nokia is a julkinen osakeyhtiö (public joint-stock company) listed on the Nasdaq Nordic/Helsinki and New York stock exchanges. Nokia has played a very large role in the economy of Finland, and it is an important employer in the country, working with multiple local partners and subcontractors. Nokia contributed 1.6% to Finland&#x27;s GDP and accounted for about 16% of the country&#x27;s exports in 2006.

Nokia comprises two business groups along with further subsidiaries and affiliated firms.

=== Nokia Networks ===
Nokia Networks is Nokia Corporation&#x27;s largest division. It is a multinational data networking and telecommunications equipment company headquartered in Espoo, Finland, and is the world&#x27;s third-largest telecoms equipment manufacturer, measured by 2017 revenues (after Huawei and Cisco). In the USA it competes with Ericsson on building 5G networks for operators, while Huawei Technologies and ZTE Corporation were effectively banned.

It has operations in around 150 countries.

Nokia Networks provides wireless and fixed network infrastructure, communications and networks service platforms and professional services to operators and service providers. It focuses on GSM, EDGE, 3G/W-CDMA, LTE and WiMAX radio access networks, supporting core networks with increasing IP and multiaccess capabilities and services.

The Nokia Siemens Networks (NSN) brand identity was launched at the 3GSM World Congress in Barcelona in February 2007 as a joint venture between Nokia (50.1%) and Siemens (49.9%), although it is now wholly owned by Nokia. In July 2013, Nokia bought back all shares in Nokia Siemens Networks for a sum of US$2.21 billion and renamed it to Nokia Solutions and Networks, shortly thereafter changed to simply Nokia Networks.

=== Nokia Technologies ===

Nokia Technologies is a division of Nokia that develops consumer products and licenses technology including the &quot;Nokia&quot; brand. Its focuses are imaging, sensing, wireless connectivity, power management and materials, and other areas such as the IP licensing program. It consists of three labs: Radio Systems Lab, in areas of radio access, wireless local connectivity and radio implementation; Media Technologies Lab, in areas of multimedia and interaction; and Sensor and Material Technologies Lab, in areas of advanced sensing solutions, interaction methods, nanotechnologies and quantum technologies. Nokia Technologies also provides public participation in its development through the &quot;Invent with Nokia&quot; program. It was created in 2014 following a restructuring of Nokia Corporation.

In November 2014, Nokia Technologies launched its first product, the Nokia N1 tablet computer. In July 2015, Nokia Technologies introduced a VR camera called OZO, designed for professional content creators and developed in Tampere, Finland. With its 8 synchronized shutter sensors and 8 microphones, the product can capture stereoscopic 3D video and spatial audio. Production of the OZO camera was discontinued in 2017, but the immersive audio software technologies continue under the Nokia OZO brand, still keeping Nokia in the virtual reality market.

On 31 August 2016, Ramzi Haidamus announced he would be stepping down from his position as president of Nokia Technologies. Brad Rodrigues, previously head of strategy and business development, assumed the role of interim president. On 30 June 2017, Gregory Lee, previously CEO of Samsung Electronics in North America, was appointed Nokia Technologies CEO and president.

=== Nokia Bell Labs ===

Nokia Bell Labs is a research and scientific development company that was once the R&amp;D arm of the American Bell System. It became a subsidiary of Nokia Corporation after the takeover of Alcatel-Lucent in 2016.

In December 2023, Nokia announced plans for a new research facility in New Brunswick, New Jersey. The relocation from the 80-year-old Bell Labs facility at Murray Hill, New Jersey is expected to occur before 2028. The Murray Hill laboratories produced important innovations for AT&amp;T Corp., Lucent Technologies, Alcatel-Lucent, and Nokia.

=== NGP Capital ===
NGP Capital (formerly Nokia Growth Partners) is a global venture capital firm, focusing on investments in the growth stage &quot;Internet of things&quot; (IoT) and mobile technology companies. NGP holds investments throughout the U.S., Europe, China and India. Their portfolio consists of companies in mobile technology including the sectors Connected Enterprise, Digital Health, Consumer IoT, and Connected Car. Following a $350 million funding for IoT companies in 2016, NGP manages $1 billion worth of assets.

Nokia had previously promoted innovation through venture sponsorships dating back to 1998 with Nokia Venture Partners, which was renamed BlueRun Ventures and spun off in 2005. The China arm of BlueRun Ventures became independent in 2010 and would be rebranded to Lanchi Ventures. Nokia Growth Partners (NGP) was founded in 2005 as a growth stage venture fund as a continuation of the early successes of Nokia Venture Partners. In 2017, the company was renamed to NGP Capital.

NGP&#x27;s largest exits include GanJi, UCWeb, Whistle, Rocket Fuel, Swype, Summit Microelectronics and Netmagic.

=== Nuage Networks ===
Nuage Networks is a venture providing software-defined networking solutions. It was formed by Alcatel-Lucent in 2013 to develop a software overlay for automating and orchestrating hybrid clouds. It has been part of Nokia following their acquisition of Alcatel-Lucent in 2016. Throughout 2017 Nuage sealed deals with Vodafone and Telefónica to provide its SD-WAN architecture to their servers. BT had already been a client since 2016. A deal with China Mobile in January 2017 also used Nuage&#x27;s software-defined networking technology for 2,000 public cloud servers at existing data centers in China, and another in October 2017 with China Pacific Insurance Company.

The company is based in Mountain View, California and the CEO is Sunil Khandekar.

=== Alcatel Mobile ===

Alcatel Mobile is a mobile phone brand owned by Nokia since 2016. It has been licensed since 2005 to Chinese company TCL when it was under the ownership of Alcatel (later Alcatel-Lucent) in a contract until 2024.

=== HMD Global ===

HMD Global is a mobile phone company based in Espoo, Finland. The Nokia brand has been licensed by former Nokia employees who founded HMD Global and introduced Nokia-branded Android-based devices to the market in 2017. Initially, Nokia had no investment in the company but retained some input in the development of its devices.

Nokia has 10.10% ownership in HMD Global after investing alongside Qualcomm and Google in 2020. In the 2020 financial report, FIH Mobile disclosed they have a 14.38% ownership in HMD Global. Finnish Nokia owns 10.10% of HMD Global, while other investors include Google, Qualcomm, and others with an undisclosed share in HMD.

=== Alcatel Submarine Networks ===
Alcatel Submarine Networks (ASN) is a provider of turnkey undersea network solutions. The business unit develops technology and offers installation services for optical submarine cable network links across the world&#x27;s oceans.

Previously, Alcatel-Lucent Submarine Networks, also became part of Nokia in 2016. Nokia and ASN had added another cable ship to the fleet called, &quot;CS Ile d&#x27;Ouessant&quot;. The &quot;CS Ile d’Ouessant&quot; was purchased in 2019 and was originally built in 2011 as the &quot;CS Toisa Warrior&quot;. Additionally, in 2021, Nokia and ASN requested two cable ships for the fleet, the &quot;CS Ile d&#x27;Yeu&quot; and &quot;CS Ile de Molène&quot;.
Here is a list of the cable-laying fleet from Alcatel (6), to Alcatel-Lucent (6 and 7), though Nokia (8):
* CS &quot;Ile d&#x27;Yeu&quot; (2001, 2021–Present) Built in 2001. Purchased in 2021 by Nokia ASN as two additional ships for a fleet of eight cable ships. (IMO 9230414)
*CS &quot;Ile d&#x27;Molène&quot; (2006, 2021–Present) Built in 2006. Purchased in 2021 by Nokia ASN two additional ships for a fleet of eight cable ships. (IMO 9329928)
* CS &quot;Ile d’Ouessant&quot; (2011, 2019–Present) Built in 2011 as the &quot;CS Toisa Warrior.&quot; Purchased by Nokia ASN in 2019. (IMO 9427108)
* CS &quot;Ile d&#x27;Aix&quot; (1992, 2011–Present) Built in 1992, as the cable ship, &quot;CS Gulmar Badaro.&quot; Purchased by Alcatel-Lucent in 2011, renaming the ship as CS Ile de AIX.
* CS &quot;ile d&#x27; Brehat&quot; (2002–Present) Built in 2002. North route main lay of 4400 km for 2003 APOLLO route. Route clearance in 2015 for GTT Express.
* CS &quot;ile d&#x27; Sein&quot; (2001–Present) Built in 2001, Length: 140.36 m, Cable work in 2003 of routes Azores to Madeira and Madeira to Porto Santo.
* CS &quot;ile d&#x27; Batz&quot; (2001–Present) Built in 2001, 2003 APOLLO: Widemouth Bay, Bude, England to Brookhaven, USA and Lannion, France to Manasquan, USA, 2008 worked on TPE (Trans Pacific Express)
* CS &quot;ile d&#x27; Re&quot; (1983–Present) Built in 1983, in 2006 worked on the APNG 2 cable route from Sydney, Australia to Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. (OMS Group in August 2023 used MakaiLay software on ship, indication not part of ASN fleet.)
* CS &quot;Stanelco 2&quot; (1975, 2000-Unknown) Built in 1975, Constructed by Brattvag Skips. in Brattvag. Named coaster &quot;Siraholm.&quot; Renamed in 1982 by Standard Telefon og Kabelfabrik when converted to cable repair ship. Sold to Alcatel Contracting Norway A/S, Oslo in 2000. (IMO 7382469, MMSI 341082000) (NOT IN NOKIA FLEET COUNT AS OF 2021) (OMS Group in August 2023 used MakaiLay software on ship, indication not part of ASN fleet.)
* CS &quot;Peter Faber 3&quot; (1981) Built in 1981, 2003, provided old cable recovery in the Atlantic with ile de Sein. Optic Marine Services acquisition on 24 September 2019 of vessel continued ASN chartering the ship. (NOT IN NOKIA FLEET COUNT AS OF 2021) (Optic Marine Services Group in August 2023 used MakaiLay software on ship, indication not part of ASN fleet.)
* CS &quot;Lodbrog&quot; (1985, 2000-Unknown) Built in 1985 as &quot;Spiegelberg&quot; and &quot;Tuzla&quot;. Later renamed in 1996 as &quot;Bolero.&quot;(IMO 8027808, MMSI: 354400000) Registered to Alcatel in 2000. (NOT IN NOKIA FLEET COUNT AS OF 2021) (OMS Group in August 2023 used MakaiLay software on ship, indication not part of ASN fleet.)
* CS &quot;Heimdal&quot; (1983, 2000–2004) Built in 1983, 1988: Renamed FERRYMAR I. and reverted to MERCANDIAN ADMIRAL II. 2000: Converted to a repair and cable laying vessel and sold to Alcatel Submarine Networks Marine AS. 2003 performed repair of optical fiber in the Pacific Ocean, route between Japan and the United States, at almost 9,400 km deep. 2004: Sold to SEACOR Smit Offshore (Worldwide) Ltd, (SEACOR Marine (Asia) Pte Ltd (IMO 8207393, MMSI: 538002126) (SOLD IN 2004, NOT IN ALCATEL-LUCENT FLEET AS OF 2015)

== Corporate affairs ==

=== Business trends ===
The key trends for Nokia are (as of the financial year ending 31 December):
=== Corporate governance ===
The control and management of Nokia is divided among the shareholders at a general meeting and the Nokia Group Leadership Team (left), under the direction of the board of directors (right). The chairman and the rest of the Nokia Leadership Team members are appointed by the board of directors. Only the chairman of the Nokia Leadership Team can belong to both the board of directors and the Nokia Group Leadership Team. The Board of Directors&#x27; committees consist of the Audit Committee, the Personnel Committee, and the Corporate Governance and Nomination Committee.

The operations of the company are managed within the framework set by the Finnish Companies Act, Nokia&#x27;s Articles of Association, and Corporate Governance Guidelines, supplemented by the board of directors&#x27; adopted charters. On 25 November 2019, Nokia announced that it would discontinue the role of Chief Operating Officer (COO) and distribute its functions to other company leaders. As a result, Chief Operating Officer Joerg Erlemeier decided to step down, effective 1 January 2020.

==== Former corporate officers ====

=== Stock ===
Nokia is a public limited liability company and is the oldest company listed under the same name on the Helsinki Stock Exchange, beginning in 1915. Nokia has had a secondary listing on the New York Stock Exchange since 1994. Nokia shares were delisted from the London Stock Exchange in 2003, the Paris Stock Exchange in 2004, the Stockholm Stock Exchange in 2007 and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in 2012. Due to the acquisition of Alcatel-Lucent in 2015, Nokia listed its shares again on the Paris Stock Exchange and was included in the CAC 40 index on 6 January 2016 but later removed on 18 September 2017.

In 2007, Nokia had a market capitalization of €110 billion; by 17 July 2012 this had fallen to €6.28 billion, before increasing to €26.0 billion by 23 February 2015. Nokia&#x27;s market cap at 2020 was 21.76 billion.

=== Corporate culture ===
Nokia&#x27;s official corporate culture manifesto since the 1990s is called &quot;The Nokia Way&quot;. It emphasizes the speed and flexibility of decision-making in a flat, networked organization.

The official business language of Nokia is English. All documentation is written in English, and is used in official intra-company communication.

In 1992, Nokia adopted values that were defined with the key words &quot;respect&quot;, &quot;achievement&quot;, &quot;renewal&quot; and &quot;challenge&quot;. In May 2007, the company redefined its values after initiating a series of discussion across its worldwide branches regarding what the new values of the company should be. Based on the employee suggestions, the new values were defined as: &quot;Engaging You&quot;, &quot;Achieving Together&quot;, &quot;Passion for Innovation&quot; and &quot;Very Human&quot;. In August 2014, Nokia redefined its values again after the sale of its Devices business, using the original 1992 values again.

=== Headquarters ===
Nokia are based at Karaportti in Espoo, Finland, just outside capital Helsinki. It has been their head office since 2014 after moving from the purpose-built Nokia House in Espoo as part of the sale of the mobile phone business to Microsoft. The building in Karaportti was previously the headquarters of NSN (now Nokia Networks).

== Awards and recognition ==
In 2018, Nokia received the Leading Lights award for most innovative cable/video product and was named to Ethisphere&#x27;s 2018 world&#x27;s most ethical companies list.

== Logo history ==
== Controversies ==
=== NSN&#x27;s provision of intercept capability to Iran ===
In 2008, Nokia Siemens Networks, a joint venture between Nokia and Siemens AG, reportedly provided Iran&#x27;s monopoly telecom company with technology that allowed it to intercept the Internet communications of its citizens. The technology reportedly allowed Iran to use deep packet inspection to read and change the content of emails, social media, and online phone calls. The technology &quot;enables authorities to not only block communication but to monitor it to gather information about individuals, as well as alter it for disinformation purposes&quot;.

During the post-election protests in Iran in June 2009, Iran&#x27;s Internet access was reported to have slowed to less than a tenth of its normal speeds, which experts suspected was due to using of deep packet inspection.

In July 2009, Nokia began to experience a boycott of their products and services in Iran. The boycott was led by consumers sympathetic to the post-election protest movement and targeted companies deemed to be collaborating with the regime. Demand for handsets fell and users began shunning SMS messaging.

Nokia Siemens Networks asserted in a press release that it provided Iran only with a &quot;lawful intercept capability solely for monitoring of local voice calls&quot; and that it &quot;has not provided any deep packet inspection, web censorship, or Internet filtering capability to Iran&quot;.

=== Nokia–Apple patent dispute ===
In October 2009, Nokia filed a lawsuit against Apple Inc. in the U.S. District Court of Delaware claiming that Apple infringed on 10 of its patents related to wireless communication including data transfer. Apple was quick to respond with a countersuit filed in December 2009 accusing Nokia of 11 patent infringements. Apple&#x27;s general counsel, Bruce Sewell went a step further by stating, &quot;Other companies must compete with us by inventing their own technologies, not just by stealing ours.&quot; This resulted in a legal battle between the two telecom majors with Nokia filing another suit, this time with the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC), alleging Apple had infringed its patents in &quot;virtually all of its mobile phones, portable music players and computers&quot;. Nokia went on to ask the court to ban all U.S. imports of the Apple products, including the iPhone, Macintosh and iPod. Apple countersued by filing a complaint with the ITC in January 2010.

In June 2011, Apple settled with Nokia and agreed to an estimated one time payment of $600 million and royalties to Nokia. The two companies also agreed on a cross-licensing patents for some of their patented technologies.

=== Alleged tax evasion in India ===
Nokia&#x27;s Indian subsidiary was charged in January 2013 with non-payment of Indian Tax Deducted at Source and transgressing transfer pricing norms in India. The unpaid TDS of 30 billion, accrued during a course of six years, was due to royalty paid by the Indian subsidiary to its parent company.

=== Nokia 7 Plus data breach ===
In March 2019, news broke that the company&#x27;s Nokia 7 Plus phones were allegedly sending personal user data to China over several months. According to investigators, the gadget sent unencrypted data packages including geographical location, SIM card number, and the phone&#x27;s serial number to an unidentified Chinese server every time that &quot;the phone was turned on, the screen activated or unlocked.&quot; The data was sufficient to follow the movements and actions of the phone in real time.

Nokia brand owner HMD Global denied any such transfers had taken place, stating that it was instead the result of an error in the packing process of the phone&#x27;s software. The Finnish Office of the Data Protection Ombudsman launched an investigation into the matter on the assumption &quot;that personal data has been transferred.&quot;

=== Xinjiang region ===
In 2020, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute accused at least 82 major brands, including Nokia, of being connected to forced Uyghur labor in Xinjiang.

== See also ==

* Nokia Networks

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Lamberg, Juha-Antti, et al. &quot;The curse of agility: The Nokia Corporation and the loss of market dominance in mobile phones, 2003–2013.&quot; &quot;Business History&quot; 63.4 (2021): 574–605. online
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="0" end="17" title="Nokia" label="Nokia Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="31" end="44" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401742" start="45" end="63" title="telecommunications industry" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388277" start="65" end="87" title="technology company" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="93" end="113" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410766" start="155" end="164" title="pulp mill" label="pulp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="212" end="217" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q673425" start="235" end="261" title="Helsinki metropolitan area" label="Helsinki metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="310" end="317" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701" start="328" end="337" title="Pirkanmaa" label="Pirkanmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="522" end="544" title="public limited company" label="public limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q581755" start="559" end="574" title="Nasdaq Helsinki" label="Nasdaq Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="579" end="602" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="694" end="724" title="Fortune Global 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q981010" start="800" end="813" title="Euro Stoxx 50" label="Euro Stoxx 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="814" end="832" title="stock market index" label="stock market index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410766" start="927" end="936" title="pulp mill" label="pulp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="971" end="977" title="Natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188447" start="982" end="988" title="Electrical cable" label="cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780509" start="1037" end="1070" title="Telecommunications equipment" label="telecommunications infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q992968" start="1155" end="1171" title="mobile telephony" label="mobile telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="1218" end="1221" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="1223" end="1225" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="1231" end="1234" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="1320" end="1332" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1338" end="1348" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1528" end="1537" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538568" start="1666" end="1682" title="Microsoft Mobile" label="Microsoft Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="1783" end="1801" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q129911" start="1849" end="1853" title="Here Technologies" label="Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="1894" end="1908" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="1924" end="1933" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="1997" end="2012" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276090" start="2017" end="2031" title="digital health" label="digital health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569499" start="2068" end="2076" title="Withings" label="Withings"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090301" start="2184" end="2187" title="HMD Global" label="HMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="2219" end="2225" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="2373" end="2387" title="Patriotism" label="national pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="2391" end="2396" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="2562" end="2565" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q581755" start="2604" end="2619" title="Nasdaq Helsinki" label="Nasdaq Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="2627" end="2634" title="Financial capital" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271104" start="2730" end="2745" title="Fredrik Idestam" label="Fredrik Idestam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410766" start="2760" end="2769" title="pulp mill" label="pulp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q222028" start="2791" end="2802" title="Tammerkoski" label="Tammerkoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="2827" end="2834" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q165116" start="2852" end="2863" title="Grand Duchy" label="Grand Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2870" end="2884" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192870" start="2958" end="2971" title="Nokia, Finland" label="town of Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="2997" end="3007" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668824" start="3060" end="3072" title="Leo Mechelin" label="Leo Mechelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422007" start="3124" end="3126" title="Aktiebolag" label="Ab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="3137" end="3144" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="3331" end="3353" title="electricity generation" label="electricity generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356525" start="3399" end="3417" title="Nokian Footwear" label="Suomen Gummitehdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="3456" end="3462" title="Natural rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11856578" start="3483" end="3495" title="Eduard Polón" label="Eduard Polón"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410909" start="3673" end="3686" title="Kaapelitehdas" label="Kaapelitehdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q271779" start="3956" end="3966" title="respirator" label="respirator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356525" start="4122" end="4142" title="Nokian Footwear" label="Finnish Rubber Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="4382" end="4411" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="Finland&amp;#x27;s defence forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418890" start="4455" end="4471" title="Sanomalaite M/90" label="Sanomalaite M/90"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713889" start="4502" end="4514" title="M61 gas mask" label="M61 gas mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q831882" start="4571" end="4596" title="professional mobile radio" label="professional mobile radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="4599" end="4617" title="Telephone switchboard" label="telephone switches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="4619" end="4628" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="4634" end="4643" title="Chemical substance" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4692" end="4704" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="4804" end="4822" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="4827" end="4835" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q856371" start="5158" end="5213" title="Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls" label="Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897386" start="5338" end="5350" title="Kari Kairamo" label="Kari Kairamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282175" start="5571" end="5577" title="Salora Oy" label="Salora"/>
<link wikidata="Q48505" start="5638" end="5646" title="Luxor AB" label="Luxor AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="5777" end="5784" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365773" start="5789" end="5796" title="Vantiva" label="Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q911958" start="5972" end="5996" title="C. Lorenz AG" label="Standard Elektrik Lorenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q582418" start="6128" end="6167" title="ITT Inc." label="International Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="6350" end="6357" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410909" start="6378" end="6391" title="Kaapelitehdas" label="Kaapelitehdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="6433" end="6441" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="6576" end="6584" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346791" start="6614" end="6622" title="Datasaab" label="Datasaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q219501" start="6682" end="6686" title="Saab AB" label="Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721886" start="6722" end="6730" title="Alfaskop" label="Alfaskop"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="6742" end="6752" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="6755" end="6767" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="6790" end="6808" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM compatible PCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413222" start="6925" end="6935" title="MikroMikko" label="MikroMikko"/>
<link wikidata="Q789202" start="7000" end="7022" title="mobile radio telephone" label="mobile radio telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="7067" end="7080" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q282175" start="7086" end="7095" title="Salora Oy" label="Salora Oy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854862" start="7199" end="7222" title="Nordic Mobile Telephone" label="Nordic Mobile Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q680016" start="7329" end="7336" title="roaming" label="roaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141405" start="7367" end="7381" title="List of Nokia products" label="Mobira Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009573" start="7542" end="7552" title="James Bond (literary character)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518082" start="7767" end="7782" title="Simo Vuorilehto" label="Simo Vuorilehto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481634" start="7944" end="7956" title="Nokian Tyres" label="Nokian Tyres"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8231" end="8233" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413338" start="8240" end="8271" title="International Computers Limited" label="International Computers Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q312590" start="8296" end="8311" title="Fujitsu Siemens Computers" label="Fujitsu Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118044" start="8445" end="8477" title="Early 1990s depression in Finland" label="worst recession in living memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="8487" end="8495" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q550660" start="8608" end="8620" title="Jorma Ollila" label="Jorma Ollila"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="8768" end="8775" title="Telecommunications" label="telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887345" start="9152" end="9170" title="Mobira Cityman 900" label="Mobira Cityman 900"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="9221" end="9224" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="9295" end="9302" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="9323" end="9344" title="Nokia Networks" label="Nokia Siemens Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q273324" start="9413" end="9426" title="Harri Holkeri" label="Harri Holkeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112253" start="9524" end="9534" title="Radiolinja" label="Radiolinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q840441" start="9558" end="9568" title="Nokia 1011" label="Nokia 1011"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="9847" end="9857" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849310" start="9893" end="9914" title="International Semi-Tech Microsystems" label="Semi-Tech Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="10024" end="10029" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413656" start="10063" end="10069" title="Finlux" label="Finlux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48505" start="10071" end="10076" title="Luxor AB" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q282175" start="10078" end="10084" title="Salora Oy" label="Salora"/>
<link wikidata="Q911958" start="10086" end="10099" title="C. Lorenz AG" label="Schaub-Lorenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275983" start="10231" end="10248" title="Digital Satellite Service" label="digital satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116154" start="10370" end="10386" title="Common Interface" label="Common Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="10477" end="10507" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975060" start="10594" end="10603" title="ITV Digital" label="ONdigital"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="10637" end="10645" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="10826" end="10834" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016083" start="10953" end="10963" title="Nokia 5110" label="Nokia 5110"/>
<link wikidata="Q913421" start="10968" end="10972" title="Nokia 3210" label="3210"/>
<link wikidata="Q573422" start="11137" end="11143" title="Swatch" label="Swatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753389" start="11171" end="11174" title="Nokia 101 (1992)" label="101"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130409" start="11216" end="11221" title="Vertu" label="Vertu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="11345" end="11351" title="Stereophonic sound" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q770289" start="11367" end="11376" title="subwoofer" label="subwoofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="11420" end="11432" title="wireless LAN" label="wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q776039" start="11460" end="11469" title="ViewSonic" label="ViewSonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021804" start="11523" end="11531" title="Electronic visual display" label="displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="11595" end="11605" title="Telefónica" label="Telefónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="11616" end="11619" title="Digital subscriber line" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="11679" end="11692" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530796" start="11725" end="11733" title="IGB Eletrônica" label="Gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q888456" start="11893" end="11905" title="Symbian Software" label="Symbian Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q1756771" start="11914" end="11919" title="Psion (company)" label="Psion"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="11958" end="11962" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q200647" start="12005" end="12011" title="EPOC (operating system)" label="EPOC32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451295" start="12031" end="12054" title="Nokia 9210 Communicator" label="Nokia 9210 Communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="12063" end="12073" title="Symbian" label="Symbian OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q941283" start="12122" end="12131" title="S60 (software platform)" label="Series 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q210820" start="12180" end="12192" title="camera phone" label="camera phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429789" start="12198" end="12208" title="Nokia 7650" label="Nokia 7650"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="12263" end="12273" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319216" start="12459" end="12477" title="Symbian Foundation" label="Symbian Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="12736" end="12744" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12869" end="12874" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="12923" end="12931" title="Revenue" label="turnover"/>
<link wikidata="Q371820" start="13005" end="13025" title="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest" label="Reader&amp;#x27;s Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q210820" start="13244" end="13256" title="camera phone" label="camera phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761879" start="13263" end="13278" title="Nokia 3650" label="Nokia 3600/3650"/>
<link wikidata="Q282186" start="13403" end="13416" title="Carl Zeiss AG" label="Carl Zeiss AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q755904" start="13456" end="13463" title="Nokia Nseries" label="Nseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q223895" start="13545" end="13554" title="Nokia N95" label="Nokia N95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065197" start="13712" end="13715" title="Nokia N82" label="N82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="13727" end="13732" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651194" start="13835" end="13838" title="Nokia N93" label="N93"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="13877" end="13886" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532758" start="13934" end="13943" title="Clamshell design" label="clamshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q727286" start="14009" end="14011" title="Nokia N8" label="N8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341483" start="14069" end="14081" title="Nokia 808 PureView" label="808 PureView"/>
<link wikidata="Q235642" start="14127" end="14136" title="Nokia Lumia 920" label="Lumia 920"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261040" start="14174" end="14182" title="PureView" label="PureView"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121542" start="14240" end="14253" title="Mobile game" label="mobile gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q124517854" start="14285" end="14290" title="Snake (1998 video game)" label="Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="14380" end="14395" title="Handheld game console" label="handheld gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q336434" start="14412" end="14418" title="N-Gage (device)" label="N-Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="14500" end="14508" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="14676" end="14684" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="15141" end="15154" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887020" start="15172" end="15181" title="Mobile TV format" label="mobile TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q54718" start="15252" end="15255" title="Yle" label="Yle"/>
<link wikidata="Q778054" start="15287" end="15292" title="DVB-H" label="DVB-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761248" start="15342" end="15352" title="Nokia 7710" label="Nokia 7710"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795774" start="15448" end="15454" title="Arqiva" label="Arqiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="15459" end="15461" title="O2 (UK)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="15536" end="15541" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q239749" start="15572" end="15577" title="Maemo" label="Maemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q636488" start="15610" end="15635" title="Nokia 770 Internet Tablet" label="Nokia 770 Internet Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q550660" start="15654" end="15666" title="Jorma Ollila" label="Jorma Ollila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374132" start="15734" end="15754" title="Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo" label="Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461441" start="15789" end="15792" title="Ovi (Nokia)" label="Ovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164682" start="15900" end="15917" title="MixRadio" label="Nokia Music Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="15962" end="15967" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="15975" end="15984" title="App Store (Apple)" label="App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q842330" start="16054" end="16076" title="Nokia 5800 XpressMusic" label="Nokia 5800 XpressMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16323" end="16328" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="16504" end="16506" title="Qt (software)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849411" start="16680" end="16690" title="Nokia Booklet 3G" label="Booklet 3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602856" start="16779" end="16786" title="Nokia Xseries" label="Xseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844853" start="16808" end="16815" title="Nokia C series (Cricket Wireless)" label="Cseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q727286" start="16914" end="16922" title="Nokia N8" label="Nokia N8"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="16959" end="16966" title="Symbian" label="Symbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407539" start="17103" end="17106" title="Nokia N97" label="N97"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="17136" end="17141" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="17157" end="17163" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374132" start="17187" end="17207" title="Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo" label="Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q983111" start="17251" end="17263" title="Stephen Elop" label="Stephen Elop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="17269" end="17278" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="17846" end="17857" title="Open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319216" start="17928" end="17946" title="Symbian Foundation" label="Symbian Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q853958" start="18137" end="18147" title="NTT Docomo" label="NTT Docomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="18169" end="18176" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="18181" end="18194" title="Sony Mobile" label="Sony Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="18204" end="18211" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="18249" end="18254" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="18290" end="18295" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q241874" start="18308" end="18313" title="MeeGo" label="MeeGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q239749" start="18360" end="18365" title="Maemo" label="Maemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q862025" start="18383" end="18389" title="Moblin" label="Moblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="18581" end="18584" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11851879" start="18921" end="18934" title="Anssi Vanjoki" label="Anssi Vanjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q127449" start="19059" end="19070" title="Nokia E7-00" label="Nokia E7-00"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="19195" end="19204" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854343" start="19233" end="19248" title="Windows Phone 7" label="Windows Phone 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q182496" start="19362" end="19366" title="Bing (search engine)" label="Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q129911" start="19404" end="19414" title="Here Technologies" label="Nokia Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q863756" start="19425" end="19434" title="Bing Maps" label="Bing Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q830534" start="19704" end="19706" title="Nokia N9" label="N9"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623435" start="19990" end="20003" title="Nokia Asha platform" label="Asha platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q923699" start="20389" end="20398" title="Nokia Lumia 800" label="Lumia 800"/>
<link wikidata="Q210987" start="20754" end="20758" title="Salo, Finland" label="Salo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428263" start="20969" end="20976" title="Etesian" label="Meltemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q280885" start="21310" end="21325" title="Nokia Lumia 900" label="Nokia Lumia 900"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="21370" end="21378" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q755904" start="21622" end="21629" title="Nokia Nseries" label="Nseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993584" start="21631" end="21638" title="Nokia Eseries" label="Eseries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21656" end="21663" title="Nokia phone series#List of Cseries devices" label="Cseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699065" start="21683" end="21692" title="Nokia 500" label="Nokia 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q235642" start="21806" end="21815" title="Nokia Lumia 920" label="Lumia 920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645716" start="22138" end="22142" title="Nokia Asha series" label="Asha"/>
<link wikidata="Q181162" start="22651" end="22664" title="Steve Ballmer" label="Steve Ballmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15299648" start="23202" end="23209" title="Nokia X" label="Nokia X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426870" start="23428" end="23441" title="Satya Nadella" label="Satya Nadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538568" start="23648" end="23664" title="Microsoft Mobile" label="Microsoft Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048051" start="23755" end="23767" title="Tieto Keilalahti Campus" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426870" start="23898" end="23911" title="Satya Nadella" label="Satya Nadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="23979" end="23989" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551716" start="24039" end="24050" title="Write-off" label="written-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956591" start="24103" end="24114" title="brand valuation" label="brand value"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24943" end="24949" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="24956" end="24967" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="25003" end="25010" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="25189" end="25203" title="Nokia Networks" label="Nokia Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="25541" end="25555" title="Nokia Networks" label="Nokia Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="25585" end="25597" title="China Mobile" label="China Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q761977" start="25821" end="25849" title="original design manufacturer" label="original design manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18551951" start="26159" end="26161" title="Nokia N1" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="26174" end="26180" title="tablet computer" label="tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q463094" start="26197" end="26204" title="Foxconn" label="Foxconn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956578" start="26727" end="26742" title="Brand licensing" label="brand-licensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q684116" start="27174" end="27185" title="Omnidirectional (360-degree) camera" label="360-degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="27186" end="27201" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633137" start="27221" end="27223" title="2K resolution" label="2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931145" start="27344" end="27358" title="VR photography" label="VR film-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="27592" end="27603" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="27905" end="27919" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="28166" end="28168" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="28257" end="28265" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="28270" end="28276" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="28475" end="28484" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712953" start="28976" end="28990" title="Alcatel Mobile" label="Alcatel Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q733958" start="29038" end="29041" title="TCL Technology" label="TCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q129911" start="29117" end="29121" title="Here Technologies" label="Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="29163" end="29166" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="29168" end="29178" title="Mercedes-Benz Group" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q156578" start="29183" end="29199" title="Volkswagen Group" label="Volkswagen Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569499" start="29366" end="29374" title="Withings" label="Withings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056235" start="29575" end="29587" title="Éric Carreel" label="Éric Carreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090301" start="29709" end="29719" title="HMD Global" label="HMD Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q463094" start="29830" end="29837" title="Foxconn" label="Foxconn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29845" end="29855" title="Foxconn#FIH Mobile" label="FIH Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28150977" start="30185" end="30192" title="Nokia 6" label="Nokia 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q795924" start="30224" end="30245" title="Mobile World Congress" label="Mobile World Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q28845516" start="30277" end="30284" title="Nokia 3" label="Nokia 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q28843594" start="30289" end="30296" title="Nokia 5" label="Nokia 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q28845574" start="30321" end="30335" title="Nokia 3310 (2017)" label="a re-imagining"/>
<link wikidata="Q219691" start="30360" end="30364" title="Nokia 3310" label="3310"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="30531" end="30533" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="30603" end="30607" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="30652" end="30659" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="30664" end="30669" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636958" start="30725" end="30731" title="Xiaomi" label="Xiaomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q853958" start="31164" end="31174" title="NTT Docomo" label="NTT Docomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182656" start="31340" end="31347" title="chipset" label="chipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558031" start="31409" end="31417" title="Solidium" label="Solidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366737" start="31445" end="31463" title="Finnish Government" label="Finnish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="31568" end="31578" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="31739" end="31741" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="31827" end="31834" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q136778" start="31836" end="31838" title="LG" label="LG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636958" start="31840" end="31846" title="Xiaomi" label="Xiaomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="31852" end="31858" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="31896" end="31903" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q50364330" start="32054" end="32057" title="Android Pie" label="Pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14090205" start="32218" end="32232" title="Pekka Lundmark" label="Pekka Lundmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118053" start="32467" end="32479" title="Sari Baldauf" label="Sari Baldauf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5943259" start="32661" end="32674" title="Taiwan Mobile" label="Taiwan Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32806" end="32810" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381966" start="32972" end="32980" title="Flipkart" label="Flipkart"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="33211" end="33245" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="country&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827515" start="33603" end="33613" title="Lippincott (brand consultancy)" label="Lippincott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917884" start="33913" end="33924" title="Motive, Inc" label="Motive, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q355945" start="33973" end="33983" title="Mformation" label="Mformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="34146" end="34163" title="Net zero emissions" label="carbon neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="34240" end="34256" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q140182" start="34264" end="34280" title="Carbon accounting" label="emissions scopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029685" start="34349" end="34357" title="Infinera" label="Infinera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34415" end="34428" title="Justin Hotard" label="Justin Hotard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34482" end="34501" title="osakeyhtiö#Julkinen osakeyhtiö" label="julkinen osakeyhtiö"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="34510" end="34529" title="joint-stock company" label="joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q104668131" start="34545" end="34558" title="Nasdaq Nordic" label="Nasdaq Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581755" start="34559" end="34567" title="Nasdaq Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="34572" end="34580" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404632" start="34640" end="34658" title="economy of Finland" label="economy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366101" start="34736" end="34744" title="Business partner" label="partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144423" start="34749" end="34762" title="subcontractor" label="subcontractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="34992" end="35006" title="Nokia Networks" label="Nokia Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="35269" end="35275" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="35280" end="35285" title="Cisco" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="35370" end="35389" title="Huawei" label="Huawei Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="35394" end="35409" title="ZTE" label="ZTE Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="35669" end="35672" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="35674" end="35678" title="Enhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="35680" end="35682" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="35691" end="35694" title="LTE (telecommunication)" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="35699" end="35704" title="WiMAX" label="WiMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="35907" end="35916" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="35979" end="35986" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18551951" start="37143" end="37151" title="Nokia N1" label="Nokia N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="37152" end="37167" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931145" start="37215" end="37224" title="VR photography" label="VR camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154515" start="37232" end="37235" title="Nokia OZO" label="OZO"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="37297" end="37304" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="37398" end="37419" title="3D film" label="stereoscopic 3D video"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="37424" end="37437" title="Surround sound" label="spatial audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154515" start="37559" end="37568" title="Nokia OZO" label="Nokia OZO"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="37909" end="37928" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="38025" end="38040" title="Bell Labs" label="Nokia Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="38136" end="38147" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="38215" end="38229" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="38311" end="38336" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q984466" start="38396" end="38419" title="Murray Hill, New Jersey" label="Murray Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="38732" end="38750" title="Internet of things" label="Internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887246" start="38767" end="38784" title="mobile technology" label="mobile technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378408" start="39380" end="39395" title="Lanchi Ventures" label="Lanchi Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17727179" start="39634" end="39639" title="UCWeb" label="UCWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968655" start="39650" end="39661" title="Rocket Fuel Inc." label="Rocket Fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q765564" start="39663" end="39668" title="Swype" label="Swype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955512" start="39698" end="39706" title="NTT Communications" label="Netmagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655198" start="39770" end="39797" title="software-defined networking" label="software-defined networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="40048" end="40056" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="40061" end="40071" title="Telefónica" label="Telefónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349770" start="40087" end="40093" title="SD-WAN" label="SD-WAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="40125" end="40127" title="BT Group" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q741618" start="40178" end="40190" title="China Mobile" label="China Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003813" start="40368" end="40399" title="China Pacific Insurance Company" label="China Pacific Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q486860" start="40426" end="40439" title="Mountain View, California" label="Mountain View"/>
<link wikidata="Q733958" start="40626" end="40629" title="TCL Technology" label="TCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="40680" end="40694" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel-Lucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090301" start="40877" end="40887" title="HMD Global" label="HMD Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="40917" end="40924" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q60852051" start="41433" end="41459" title="Alcatel Submarine Networks" label="Alcatel Submarine Networks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42227" end="42256" title="CS Ile d&amp;#x27;Yeu" label="CS &amp;quot;Ile d&amp;#x27;Yeu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42397" end="42429" title="CS Ile d&amp;#x27;Molène" label="CS &amp;quot;Ile d&amp;#x27;Molène&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42568" end="42597" title="CS Ile d’Ouessant" label="CS &amp;quot;Ile d’Ouessant&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42718" end="42747" title="CS Ile d&amp;#x27;Aix" label="CS &amp;quot;Ile d&amp;#x27;Aix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42908" end="42941" title="CS Ile de Brehat" label="CS &amp;quot;ile d&amp;#x27; Brehat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43070" end="43101" title="CS Ile de Sein" label="CS &amp;quot;ile d&amp;#x27; Sein&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43227" end="43258" title="CS Ile de Batz" label="CS &amp;quot;ile d&amp;#x27; Batz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43434" end="43463" title="CS Ile de Re" label="CS &amp;quot;ile d&amp;#x27; Re&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43688" end="43713" title="CS Stanelco" label="CS &amp;quot;Stanelco 2&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719905" start="44135" end="44163" title="MV Peter Faber" label="CS &amp;quot;Peter Faber 3&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718099" start="44505" end="44527" title="MS Lodbrog" label="CS &amp;quot;Lodbrog&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44852" end="44874" title="CS Heimdal" label="CS &amp;quot;Heimdal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="46659" end="46691" title="Public limited company" label="public limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q581755" start="46752" end="46775" title="Nasdaq Helsinki" label="Helsinki Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="46837" end="46860" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="46909" end="46930" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q691375" start="46944" end="46964" title="Bourse de commerce (Paris)" label="Paris Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019992" start="46978" end="47002" title="Nasdaq Stockholm" label="Stockholm Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q151139" start="47019" end="47043" title="Frankfurt Stock Exchange" label="Frankfurt Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q648828" start="47185" end="47191" title="CAC 40" label="CAC 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q730573" start="47523" end="47540" title="Organizational culture" label="corporate culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205789" start="47668" end="47672" title="Flat organization" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380749" start="47674" end="47696" title="Entrepreneurial network" label="networked organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="48548" end="48553" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="48585" end="48593" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530704" start="48613" end="48624" title="corporate headquarters" label="head office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048051" start="48672" end="48683" title="Tieto Keilalahti Campus" label="Nokia House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837348" start="48980" end="48990" title="Ethisphere Institute" label="Ethisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="49155" end="49177" title="Nokia Networks" label="Nokia Siemens Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="49213" end="49220" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="49245" end="49249" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q734252" start="49418" end="49440" title="deep packet inspection" label="deep packet inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q854206" start="49720" end="49763" title="2009 Iranian presidential election protests" label="post-election protests in Iran in June 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="49975" end="49982" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="50017" end="50021" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="50223" end="50226" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="50617" end="50627" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7889771" start="50635" end="50666" title="United States District Court for the District of Delaware" label="U.S. District Court of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720243" start="50919" end="50931" title="Bruce Sewell" label="Bruce Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q839560" start="51191" end="51226" title="United States International Trade Commission" label="U.S. International Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="51456" end="51462" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="51464" end="51473" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="51478" end="51482" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q15924654" start="51902" end="51924" title="Tax deduction at source" label="Tax Deducted at Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384130" start="51943" end="51959" title="transfer pricing" label="transfer pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q53233711" start="52200" end="52212" title="Nokia 7 Plus" label="Nokia 7 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="52265" end="52270" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="52395" end="52403" title="SIM card" label="SIM card"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090301" start="52674" end="52684" title="HMD Global" label="HMD Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151840" start="53035" end="53072" title="Australian Strategic Policy Institute" label="Australian Strategic Policy Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="53153" end="53159" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="53169" end="53177" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="53198" end="53212" title="Nokia Networks" label="Nokia Networks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21243" wikidata="Q464996" url="?curid=21243" title="Nortel">
<text>Nortel Networks Corporation (Nortel), formerly Northern Telecom Limited, was a Canadian multinational telecommunications and data networking equipment manufacturer headquartered in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. It was founded in Montreal, Quebec in 1895 as the Northern Electric and Manufacturing Company, or simply Northern Electric. Until an antitrust settlement in 1949, Northern Electric was owned mostly by Bell Canada and the Western Electric Company of the Bell System, producing large volumes of telecommunications equipment based on licensed Western Electric designs.

At its height, Nortel accounted for more than a third of the total valuation of all companies listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX), employing 94,500 people worldwide. In 2009, Nortel filed for bankruptcy protection in Canada and the United States, triggering a 79% decline in its corporate stock price. The bankruptcy case was the largest in Canadian history and left pensioners, shareholders, and former employees with enormous losses. By 2016, Nortel had sold billions of dollars in assets. Courts in the U.S. and Canada approved a negotiated settlement of bankruptcy proceedings in 2017.

== History ==
=== Origins ===
Alexander Graham Bell conceived the technical aspects of the telephone in July 1874, while residing with his parents at their farm in Tutela Heights, on the outskirts of Brantford, Ontario. He later refined its design at Brantford after producing his first working prototype in Boston. Canada&#x27;s first telephone factory, created by James Cowherd of Brantford, was a three-storey brick building that soon started manufacturing telephones for the Bell System, leading to the city&#x27;s style as &quot;The Telephone City&quot;.

After Cowherd&#x27;s death in 1881 which resulted in the closure of his Brantford factory, a mechanical production department was created within the Bell Telephone Company of Canada and production of Canadian telephone equipment was transferred to Montreal in 1882 to compensate for the restrictions on importing telephone equipment from the United States. In addition to telephones, four years later, the department started manufacturing switchboards, at first the 50-line Standard Magneto Switchboard. The small manufacturing department expanded yearly with the growth and popularity of the telephone to 50 employees in 1888. By 1890 it had been transformed into its own branch of operations with 200 employees, and a new factory was under construction.

As the manufacturing branch expanded, its production ability increased beyond the demand for telephones, and it faced closure for several months a year without manufacturing other products. The Bell Telephone Company of Canada&#x27;s (later renamed to Bell Canada) charter prohibited the company to build other products. In 1895, the Bell Telephone of Canada spun off its manufacturing arm to build telephones for sale to other companies, as well as other products, such as fire alarm boxes, police street call boxes, and fire department call equipment. This company was incorporated as the Northern Electric and Manufacturing Company Limited.

=== Northern Electric and Manufacturing Company ===
Northern Electric and Manufacturing Company Limited was incorporated on December 7, 1895. The initial stock capital was $50,000 at $100 per share, with 93% held by the Bell Telephone Company of Canada and the remainder held by seven corporate directors. The first general stockholders meeting was held on March 24, 1896.

In December 1899, The Bell Telephone Company of Canada bought a cabling company for $500,000; a Canadian charter named it &quot;The Wire and Cable Company&quot;. Northern Electric and Manufacturing further expanded its product line in 1900, manufacturing the first Canadian wind-up gramophones that played flat discs. In 1911 the Wire and Cable Company changed its name to the &quot;Imperial Wire and Cable Company&quot;.

=== Northern Electric Company ===
The construction of a new manufacturing plant started in 1913 at Shearer Street in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, as preparations began for the two manufacturing companies&#x27; integration. Then, in January 1914, the Northern Electric and Manufacturing Company and the Imperial Wire and Cable Company merged into the &quot;Northern Electric Company&quot;, commonly known simply as Northern Electric. The new company opened the doors on a new manufacturing plant in January 1915. This facility, located on Shearer Street, was the primary manufacturing centre until the mid-1950s. Edward Fleetford Sise was the president and his brother Paul Fleetford Sise was the vice-president and general manager.
During the First World War Northern Electric manufactured the Portable Commutator, a one-wire telegraphic switchboard for military operations in the field. In 1922, Northern started to produce, for $5, the &quot;Peanut&quot; vacuum tube, which required only a single dry-cell battery. The use of alternating current was still under development during this time. The &quot;Northern Electric Peanut tube was the smallest tube made, and drew only one-tenth of an ampere and was the most remarkable radio frequency amplifier ever made.&quot; During the 1920s Northern Electric made kettles, toasters, cigar lighters, electric stoves, and washing machines. In January 1923, Northern Electric started to operate an AM radio station with call letters CHYC, in the Shearer Street plant, and much of the programming was religious services for the Northern Electric employees and families in the community. In July 1923, CHYC-AM was the first radio station to provide entertainment to the riders of the transcontinental train, in a parlor car fitted with a radio set to receive the broadcast as it left Montreal and traveled west. Later in the 1920s, Northern created the first talking movie sound system in the British Empire for a theater in Montreal.

During the Great Depression in the 1930s, Northern Electric was affected, like most other companies. From the beginning of 1930 through the end of 1933, sales dropped from $34 million to $8.2 million, with employees dropping from 6,100 to 2,400.

=== Independence from Western Electric ===
In 1949, an antitrust suit in the U.S. forced AT&amp;T/Western Electric to sell its stake in Northern Electric to Bell Canada. AT&amp;T spun off Northern Electric in 1956. Deprived of its Western Electric tie, Northern began developing its own products. In 1953, Northern Electric produced its first television sets using tubes made by RCA.
Bell Canada acquired 100 percent of Northern Electric in 1964; through public stock offerings starting in 1973, Bell&#x27;s ownership of Northern Electric and its successors would be reduced, though it continued to have majority control.

In 1966, the Northern Electric research lab, Northern Electric Laboratories (the predecessor to Bell-Northern Research), started looking into the possibilities of fiber optic cable, and in 1969, began work on digitizing telephone communications. Also in 1969, Northern began making inroads into the U.S. market with its switching systems. In 1972, it opened its first factory in the U.S. in Michigan. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Northern began shipping its first digital switching systems, one of the earliest such systems to be sold.

Northern Telecom was, with Bell-Northern Research, in the early 1970s a part owner of MicroSystems International, a semiconductor manufacturer based in Nepean, outside Ottawa.

=== Northern Telecom and &quot;Digital World&quot; ===

In March 1976, the company name was changed to Northern Telecom Limited, and management announced its intention to concentrate the company&#x27;s efforts on digital technology. Northern Telecom was the first company in its industry to announce and deliver a complete line of fully digital telecommunications products. The product line was branded &quot;Digital World&quot; and included the DMS-100, a fully digital central office switch serving as many as 100,000 lines, which was a key contributor to the company&#x27;s revenue for close to 15 years.

Starting in 1977, Nortel grew rapidly after the introduction of its DMS line of digital central office telephone switches, especially after the AT&amp;T breakup in 1984. Northern Telecom became a significant supplier in Europe and China and was the first non-Japanese supplier to Nippon Telegraph and Telephone.

=== Deregulation ===
In 1983, due to deregulation, Bell Canada Enterprises (later shortened to BCE) was formed as the parent company to Bell Canada and Northern Telecom. Bell-Northern Research was jointly owned 50–50 by Bell Canada and Northern Telecom. The combined three companies were referred to as the tricorporate.

As Nortel, the streamlined identity it adopted for its 100th anniversary in 1995, the company set out to dominate the burgeoning global market for public and private networks.

=== Optical boom and bust ===

In 1998, with the acquisition of Bay Networks, the company&#x27;s name was changed to Nortel Networks to emphasize its ability to provide complete solutions for multiprotocol, multiservice, global networking over the Internet and other communications networks. As a consequence of the stock transaction used to purchase Bay Networks, BCE ceased to be the majority shareholder of Nortel.

In 1999, Nortel outsourced several of its manufacturing operations to North American contractors.

In 2000, BCE spun out Nortel, distributing its holdings of Nortel to its shareholders. Bell-Northern Research was gradually absorbed into Nortel, as it first acquired a majority share in BNR, and eventually acquired the entire company.

In the late 1990s, stock market speculators, hoping that Nortel would reap increasingly lucrative profits from the sale of fibre optic network gear, began pushing up the company&#x27;s share price to unheard-of levels despite the company&#x27;s repeated failure to turn a profit. Under the leadership of chief executive officer (CEO) John Roth, sales of optical equipment had been robust in the late 1990s, but the market was soon saturated. When the speculative telecom bubble of the late 1990s reached its pinnacle late in the year 2000, Nortel was to become one of the most major casualties. Nortel&#x27;s revenues would be dented by a saturated market and the failure of WorldCom, which was a major customer.

At its height, Nortel accounted for more than a third of the total valuation of all the companies listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX), employing 94,500 worldwide, with 25,900 in Canada alone. Nortel&#x27;s market capitalization fell from C$398 billion in September 2000 to less than C$5 billion in August 2002, as Nortel&#x27;s stock price plunged from C$124 to C$0.47. When Nortel&#x27;s stock crashed, it took with it a wide swath of Canadian investors and pension funds and left 60,000 Nortel employees unemployed. Roth was criticized after it was revealed that he cashed in his own stock options for a personal gain of C$135 million in 2000 alone.

CEO John Roth retired in 2001. His planned successor and chief operating officer (COO), Clarence Chandran, already on sick leave due to complications following his 1997 stabbing in Singapore,
decided to quit, however. Chief financial officer (CFO) Frank Dunn was eventually chosen as Roth&#x27;s permanent replacement.

=== After the Internet bubble ===

==== Accounting restatements ====

Frank Dunn presided over a dramatic restructuring of Nortel, which included laying off two-thirds of its workforce (60,000 staff) and writedowns of nearly US$16 billion in 2001 alone.This had some initial perceived success in turning the company around, with an unexpected return to profitability reported in the first quarter of 2003. The black ink triggered a total of $70 million in bonuses to the top 43 managers, with $7.8 million going to Dunn alone, $3 million to chief financial officer Douglas Beatty, and $2 million to controller Michael Gollogly. Independent auditor Deloitte &amp; Touche advised audit committee chairman John Cleghorn and board chairman &quot;Red&quot; Wilson to look into the suspicious results, who promptly hired the law firm WilmerHale to vet the financial statements. In late October 2003, Nortel announced that it intended to restate approximately $900 million of liabilities carried on its previously reported balance sheet as of June 30, 2003, following a comprehensive internal review of these liabilities. The company stated that the restatement&#x27;s principal effects would be a reduction in previously reported net losses for 2000, 2001, and 2002 and an increase in shareholders&#x27; equity and net assets previously reported on its balance sheet. A dozen of the company&#x27;s most senior executives returned $8.6 million of bonuses they were paid based on the erroneous accounting. Investigators ultimately found about $3 billion in revenue had been booked improperly in 1998, 1999, and 2000. More than $2 billion was moved into later years, about $750 million was pushed forward beyond 2003 and about $250 million was wiped away completely. The accounting scandal hurt both Nortel&#x27;s reputation and finances, as Nortel spent an estimated US$400 million on outside auditors and management consultants to retrain staff.

To improve its liquidity, in 2003 Nortel arranged a US$750 million credit support facility with Export Development Canada. Walter Robinson of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation denounced the line of credit, calling it &quot;corporate welfare at its worst.&quot;

On April 28, 2004 amidst the accounting scandal, three of Nortel&#x27;s top lieutenants—Douglas Beatty, CEO Frank Dunn and Michael Gollogly—were fired for financial mismanagement. They were later charged with fraud by the RCMP. The trial began on January 16, 2012, ending with acquittals for all three.

The United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) also filed charges against them and four vice-presidents for civil fraud. On December 19, 2014, remaining civil charges from the Ontario Securities Commission and SEC were simultaneously dropped.

==== Owens and Zafirovski ====

After Dunn&#x27;s firing, retired United States Admiral Bill Owens – at the time a member of the board of directors – was appointed interim CEO. Nortel Networks subsequently returned to using the Nortel name for branding purposes only (the official company name was not changed). Nortel acquired PEC Solutions, a provider of information technology and telecommunications services to various government agencies and departments, in June 2005 and renamed it Nortel Government Solutions Incorporated (NGS). LG Electronics and Nortel formed a joint venture in August 2005, with Nortel owning 51%, to offer telecom and networking solutions in the wireline, optical, wireless and enterprise areas for South Korean and global customers.

Peter W. Currie, previously the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of the Royal Bank of Canada, was named CFO of Nortel in 2005, having previously served as Northern Telecom&#x27;s CFO in the 1990s. Gary Daichendt, the former Chief Operating Officer of Cisco Systems, was hired as president and COO, and was expected to succeed Owens as CEO. Shortly afterward, Daichendt appointed ex-Cisco Chief Science Officer Gary Kunis as chief technology officer (CTO). Both Garys were concerned about the overall direction of Nortel, especially when compared to Cisco, their previous employer. Just three months later, Daichendt resigned after both his restructuring plan and his suggestion that Owens and Currie leave the company immediately were rejected by the board of directors. Kunis quit shortly thereafter. At the year&#x27;s end, directors Lynton &quot;Red&quot; Wilson and John Cleghorn retired from the board.

Mike S. Zafirovski, who had served as president and CEO of GE Lighting and then as Motorola President and COO, succeeded Owens as president and CEO on November 15, 2005. Motorola filed a suit against Zafirovski&#x27;s hiring, alleging that his new position would break the terms of the non-disclosure agreement he had signed. Nortel agreed to pay $11.5 million on his behalf to settle the lawsuit. Nortel also paid out US$575 million and 629 million common shares in 2006 to settle a class-action lawsuit that accused the company of misleading investors about the company&#x27;s health.

Currie stepped down as Executive Vice President and CFO in early 2007. In February 2007, Nortel announced its plans to reduce its workforce by 2,000 employees, and to transfer an additional 1,000 jobs to lower-cost job sites. The Securities and Exchange Commission filed civil fraud charges against Nortel for accounting fraud from 2000 to 2003; the fraud was allegedly to close gaps between its true performance, its internal targets and Wall Street expectations. Nortel settled the case, paying $35 million, which the Commission distributed to affected shareholders, and reported periodically to the commission on remedial measures to improve its financial accounting.

Nortel announced plans in February 2008 to eliminate 2,100 jobs, and to transfer another 1,000 jobs to lower-cost centres. As part of the reductions, Nortel shut down its Calgary campus in 2009.

During its reporting of third quarter 2008 results, Nortel announced it would restructure into three vertically-integrated business units: Enterprise, Carrier Networks, and Metro Ethernet Networks. As part of the decentralization of its organization, four executive positions were eliminated, effective January 1, 2009: Chief Marketing Officer – Lauren Flaherty; Chief Technology Officer – John Roese; Global Services President – Dietmar Wendt; and Executive Vice President Global Sales – Bill Nelson. A net reduction of 1,300 jobs was also announced. As its stock price dropped below $1, the New York Stock Exchange notified Nortel that it would be delisted if its common shares failed to rise above $1 per share within 6 months. Rumours continued to persist of Nortel&#x27;s poor financial health, amid the late 2000s recession, and its bids for government funds were turned down.

There is suspicion that industrial espionage and knockoff Asian products brought down Nortel or at least accelerated its demise. An extensive analysis by University of Ottawa professor Jonathan Calof and recollections of former Nortel executive Tim Dempsey have placed the blame mostly on strategic mistakes and poor management at the company.

=== Liquidation ===

==== Protection from creditors ====

On January 14, 2009, Nortel filed for protection from creditors, in the United States under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code, in Canada under the Companies&#x27; Creditors Arrangement Act, and in the United Kingdom under the Insolvency Act 1986. Nortel was the first major technology company to seek bankruptcy protection during the 2007–2008 financial crisis. Nortel had an interest payment of $107 million due the next day, approximately 4.6% of its cash reserves of approximately $2.3 billion. After the announcement, the share price fell more than 79% on the Toronto Stock Exchange. Export Development Canada agreed to provide up to C$30 million in short-term financing through its existing credit support facility with Nortel. The Canadian government resisted characterizing its position on Nortel as a bailout.

Nortel initially hoped to re-emerge from bankruptcy, implementing a retention bonus plan in an effort to retain its top executives during the restructuring period. These bonuses, totaling US$45 million, were targeted at 1,000 executive positions. At the end of January 2009, Nortel announced that it would be discontinuing its WiMAX business and its agreement with Alvarion. Nortel subsequently sold its Layer 4–7 application delivery business to Israeli technology firm Radware for $18 million, after Radware had initially placed a stalking horse bid. Nortel had acquired the application switch product line in October 2000 when it purchased Alteon WebSystems.

==== Wind-up ====
With the worsening recession and stock market decline deterring potential companies from bidding for Nortel&#x27;s assets, and many of Nortel&#x27;s major customers reconsidering their relationships with the restructuring company, in June Nortel announced that it no longer planned to emerge from bankruptcy protection, and would seek buyers for all of its business units. After announcing it planned to sell off all of its assets, Nortel shares were delisted from the Toronto Stock Exchange on June 26, 2009 at a price of $0.185 per share, down from its high in 2000 when it comprised a third of the S&amp;P/TSX composite index. Mike Zafirovski subsequently resigned in August, and Nortel&#x27;s board of directors was reorganized with three members instead of nine. Nortel handed out $14.2 million in cash compensation to seven executives in 2009. Nortel also paid out $1.4 million to 10 former and current directors, and paid $140 million to lawyers, pension, human resources and financial experts helping to oversee the company&#x27;s bankruptcy proceedings.

Nokia Siemens Networks made a stalking horse bid to purchase Nortel&#x27;s CDMA and LTE assets for $650 million. By the July 21 deadline for additional bids, MatlinPatterson and Ericsson had made offers, and Ericsson emerged as the victor in the following auction, with a purchase price of $1.13 billion. Avaya won an auction for Nortel&#x27;s Enterprise Solutions business, including Nortel&#x27;s stake in Nortel Government Solutions and DiamondWare, for $900 million, after having placed a stalking horse bid of $475 million. In November, Nortel sold its MEN (Metro Ethernet Networks) unit to Ciena Corporation for US$530 million in cash and US$239 million in convertible notes,
and its GSM business at auction to Ericsson and Kapsch for US$103 million. Hitachi purchased the Next Generation Packet Core assets. As insurance against judgments in class action lawsuits filed by former employees, John Roth filed in December 2009 for a US$1 billion indemnification from Nortel, joining the list of U.S. creditors.

In February 2010, Ernst &amp; Young, the court-appointed monitor of Nortel&#x27;s Canadian bankruptcy proceedings, reported that the assets of Nortel&#x27;s Health and Welfare Trust had a shortfall of $37 million in its net assets as of December 31, 2008. The trust supports pensioners&#x27; medical, dental and life insurance benefits, as well as income support for some groups such as long-term disability recipients. Also in February, Nortel negotiated a $57 million deal to wind up the health care and other benefits provided to former Canadian employees. Shortly afterwards, Nortel proposed spending $92.3M on retention bonuses for 1,475 employees in its Nortel Business Services and Corporate groups, with $2.5 million in incentives going to Christopher Ricaute, president of Nortel Business Services; $27 million allocated for Canadian employees; and $55 million allocated for U.S. employees. The proposed plan was later extended by an additional $27 million. Claiming that the retention bonuses proposal was extraordinary, acting US trustee Roberta DeAngelis objected to the payment of $55.6 million to 866 employees. However, court-appointed representatives for Nortel&#x27;s former employees, who are creditors in the Ontario bankruptcy court, have signed an agreement to not oppose any employee incentive program.

GENBAND purchased the Carrier VoIP and Application Solutions (CVAS) unit in May 2010, as Nortel accepted its stalking horse bid of $282 million, with adjustments that decreased the net sale price to about $100 million, without a formal bidding process. Ericsson purchased Nortel&#x27;s share in its joint venture with LG Electronics for US$242 million, forming LG-Ericsson, in June 2010. Ericsson also purchased Nortel&#x27;s final operating unit, the Multi-Service Switch division, in September 2010 for US$65 million. Nortel&#x27;s Ottawa campus on Carling Avenue was purchased by Public Works and Government Services Canada (PWGSC) in October 2010 for a cash purchase price of CDN$208 million, to serve as the new home of Canada&#x27;s National Defence Headquarters.

Nortel&#x27;s 53.13% stake in Turkish company Nortel Netaş was acquired by One Equity Partners (OEP) and Rhea Investments for $68 million in December 2010.

The last major asset of Nortel, approximately 6,000 patents and patent applications encompassing technologies such as wireless, wireless 4G, data networking, optical, voice, Internet, and semiconductors, was sold for $4.5 billion to a consortium including Apple, EMC, Ericsson, Microsoft, BlackBerry Limited, and Sony, pending American and Canadian court approval. (Google had placed the initial stalking horse bid of $900 million and later upped the bid to $1,902,160,540, then $2,614,972,128, and eventually $3.14159 billion, which are references to Brun&#x27;s constant, Meissel–Mertens constant, and pi.) Bankruptcy filings state that Nortel owed former Canadian engineers $285,000 for patent awards that were not paid.

In October 2011, the administrators of Nortel&#x27;s British subsidiary lost their appeal to overturn a court order requiring them to pay £2.1 billion into Nortel&#x27;s underfunded pension plan. Nortel&#x27;s U.S. retirement income plan is now managed by PBGC Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.

In January 2014, a pact between the U.S. and European divisions of Nortel was approved by a U.S. court. However, litigation continued. In April 2016, Nortel went back to court for a fresh round of legal arguments in a seven-year-old bankruptcy which cost creditors about $2 billion including attorney fees. Courts in the U.S. and Canada approved a negotiated settlement among competing creditors in January 2017.

== Products ==


Nortel made telecommunications, computer network equipment and software. It served both general businesses and communications carriers (landline telephone, mobile phone, and cable TV carriers). Technologies included telephonic (voice) equipment, fiber optics, local wireless, and multimedia.

Past products included:
== Criticism and controversy ==

=== Payments to lawyers and accountants ===
In 2016, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported that lawyers and accountants received billion from Nortel&#x27;s estate.

=== Kathleen Peterson Case ===
In 2001 Nortel&#x27;s director of information services Kathleen Peterson was found dead at the bottom of a staircase in her home in Durham, NC. Nortel had been enduring heavy layoffs during this time, and family members report that Kathleen was worried she may too be laid off at Nortel. This was used by the prosecution as motive for Kathleen&#x27;s husband, Michael Peterson, to murder Kathleen due to her 1.3 million-dollar life insurance policy (partly provided by Nortel) and the couple&#x27;s $143,000 in credit card debt.

=== Environmental damage ===
After bankruptcy, Nortel&#x27;s estate faced million in claims to pay for environmental damage at various sites, including Belleville, Brockville, Kingston and London.

=== Hacks ===
In September 1991, Julian Assange was discovered in the act of hacking into the Melbourne master terminal of Nortel.

In 2001 Nortel identified knockoff products circulating in the Chinese market, where they did not compete. The management chose not to press the issue. Brian Shields, former chief security officer at Nortel, said his company was compromised in 2004 by China-based hackers; executive credentials were accessed remotely, and entire computers were taken over. Nortel&#x27;s own specialist did not find any abnormality. In 2008, Shields decided to approach an outside expert, who reported finding sophisticated malware in the company&#x27;s machines and activities traced to Chinese IP addresses and discussions on a Mandarin Internet forum. Shields had tried to escalate the issue within the company, but senior staff members did not take any action. Mike Zafirovski, one of Nortel&#x27;s top executives at the time, was skeptical, citing Shields&#x27; reputation for exaggeration.

Nortel sought for but failed to receive help from the RCMP. A former CSIS official said the agency approached the company but was rebuffed.

Nortel allegedly failed to disclose the problem to potential buyers of its business, a &quot;despicable&quot; omission according to Shields. Avaya and Genband both acquired parts of Nortel, and some employees used old Nortel machines connected to the new companies&#x27; networks. Avaya says it has dealt with the issue after Shields informed the new companies of his investigation.

Cybersecurity experts have some doubts about a hack of such magnitude as described by Shields, calling it &quot;unlikely&quot;. Shields does not think Huawei was directly involved, but industry insiders, including him, believe that Huawei and ZTE were beneficiaries of the hack.

=== Government bailouts ===

==== 2003 ====

On February 16, 2003, the Winnipeg Sun published an article criticising the Canadian Federal government for propping up &quot;mega-loser Nortel&quot; through Export Development Canada (EDC). The article interviewed Walter Robinson of the Canadian Taxpayers Federation who termed this EDC support as &quot;corporate welfare at its worst&quot;. Mr. Robinson was appalled that Canadians who already lost billions on Nortel on the stock market would be asked for even more money through their taxes to support Nortel.

==== 2009 ====

The EDC had agreed to provide up to million in short-term financing through an existing bonding facility. This money was previously available to Nortel, and no special funding was made available. The Canadian government resisted characterizing its position on Nortel as a bailout.

=== Illegal breach of trust in Nortel&#x27;s Health and Welfare Trust ===

There have been reports of financial irregularities at Nortel&#x27;s Health and Welfare Trust. Diane Urquhart, a financial analyst, testified before a parliamentary committee that $100 million is missing from the HWT and that a $37 million loan to the corporation has not been paid back. The HWT was an unregistered trust maintained by Nortel to provide medical, dental, life insurance, long-term disability and survivor income and pension transition benefits.
Until 2005 Nortel fully funded the disability insurance in its HWT. However, it is alleged that since then, the HWT Governance Committees and third party trustee, Northern Trust, breached their fiduciary duties to protect Nortel&#x27;s disabled employees and survivors of deceased employees by allowing Nortel to misdirect over million from the HWT for purposes inconsistent with the terms of the HWT.
As of March 1, 2012, Northern Trust continues to act as the paying agent for Canadian Nortel pensioners.

=== Bookkeeping irregularities ===
In 2007, both the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the Ontario Securities Commission laid charges against former senior financial officials from Nortel including Frank Dunn who was fired from Nortel in 2004. Frank Dunn was promoted from chief financial officer to replace John A. Roth as CEO in November 2001. According to the SEC, Dunn and three other financial officers began to fudge revenue by misusing &quot;bill and hold&quot; transactions starting &quot;no later than September, 2000&quot;. The SEC said that at least a year&#x27;s worth of the alleged misconduct took place while John Roth was still CEO of Nortel, though no charges were laid against him.

=== Treatment of Nortel pensioners ===

On June 23, 2010, the News and Observer published a story criticizing treatment pensioners have been receiving from their former employer, Nortel. According to the article, Nortel has asked a federal court to terminate medical coverage, prescription drug coverage, long-term disability, and life insurance of 4,000 retirees and dependents, claiming the benefits are costing the company $2 million per month. Nortel blamed the company&#x27;s creditors for this decision.

=== Ex-CEO as creditor ===

In the middle of the decade several class-action lawsuits were filed against John Roth and others, by former employees who felt that their 401K company plans were depleted due to misrepresentation by the defendants. They claimed they were duped into investing in Nortel stock, when those who encouraged them to do so allegedly knew that the company was ailing. John Roth left Nortel in 2001 with more than million.

In 2009, Roth filed a claim for billion, aiming to become a creditor to the assets of Nortel along with all other Nortel employees, in case the class action lawsuits against him succeeded.

=== Conflicts of interest ===

During Nortel&#x27;s 2002 annual shareholders&#x27; meeting held in Halifax, Nova Scotia, several shareholders (including Robert Verdun) complained about non-arms-length relationships with service providers such as director Yves Fortier, who provided legal services to Nortel while sitting on its board, and Nortel&#x27;s auditors, Deloitte &amp; Touche LLP, who were paid $15 million for non-auditing services.

=== Headquarters bugging ===
In 2013 workers preparing the former Nortel headquarters for the Department of National Defence discovered electronic eavesdropping devices. The bugs found were older and non-operational leading Canadian intelligence to draw the conclusion that the former tenant Nortel and not the future tenant MND was the target.

== Corporate information ==

=== Headquarters ===
During Nortel&#x27;s dissolution the headquarters was relocated to 5945 Airport Road in Mississauga, Ontario. Previous locations of its head offices included 60 Moodie Drive in Ottawa (now headquarters of Department of National Defence), 8200 Dixie Road in Brampton, Ontario (sold to Rogers Communications in 2006 and now known as Rogers Park, Brampton) and 195 The West Mall in Toronto (now used by SNC-Lavalin).

=== Global worksites, partners, and customers ===
Nortel expanded into the U.S. in 1971. The company eventually had employees in over 100 locations in the U.S. with R&amp;D, software engineering, and sales centres in many states including California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, North Carolina, Texas, and Virginia. Nortel&#x27;s full-service R&amp;D centres were located in Ottawa (its R&amp;D headquarters), Beijing, and Guangzhou. In Canada, Nortel also had R&amp;D sites in Montreal, Belleville, and Calgary. In the United States, Nortel&#x27;s major R&amp;D sites were in Research Triangle Park (North Carolina), Richardson (Texas), Billerica (Massachusetts), and Santa Clara.

Nortel had a significant presence in Europe, Middle East, Africa, the Caribbean, and Latin America. Nortel delivered network infrastructure and communication services to customers across Asia in (mainland) China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Australia, New Zealand, and Turkey (Nortel owned 53.17% of Nortel Netaş, originally established as a joint venture with Turkish PTT in 1967).
In addition, the company had three joint ventures in the People&#x27;s Republic of China, including Guangdong Nortel Telecommunications Equipment (GDNT), which operated Nortel&#x27;s full service R&amp;D centres in China.

=== Business structure ===

At the start of 2010, based on membership in Nortel&#x27;s benefit plan, there were 1,637 employees working for Nortel Networks and 982 working for Nortel Technology in Canada.
In February 2008, Nortel employed approximately 32,550 people worldwide, including 6,800 employees in Canada and 11,900 in the United States. Nortel operations were divided into the following segments:
* Carrier Networks (CN): Mobility networking solutions, including CDMA, GSM, and UMTS, and carrier networking solutions, both circuit and packet based.
* Enterprise Solutions (ES): Enterprise networking solutions, including circuit and packet based voice, data, security, multimedia messaging and conferencing, and call centres.
* Metro Ethernet Networks (MEN): Optical and metropolitan area networking solutions, for carrier and enterprise customers.
* Global Services (GS): Services in four areas: network implementation, network support, network management, and network applications (including web services).

=== Corporate governance ===

Nortel&#x27;s board of directors resigned and the board disbanded effective October 3, 2012. All remaining executive officers also resigned effective this date. As part of the wind-down process, a court order was issued providing Ernst &amp; Young Inc., the court-appointed monitor in Nortel&#x27;s creditor protection proceedings, the ability to exercise any powers which may be properly exercised by a board of directors of Nortel.

==== Former members of the board of directors ====

* Jalynn H. Bennett, CM
* Dr. Manfred Bischoff
* James Blanchard
* Robert Ellis Brown
* Frank C. Carlucci, former chairman of the board
* John Cleghorn
* Frank Dunn
* Yves Fortier
* Hon. James B. Hunt Jr.
* Robert Alexander Ingram
* Kristina M. Johnson
* John Alan MacNaughton
* Hon. John P. Manley

* Richard David McCormick
* Claude Mongeau
* William Owens (Admiral)
* Harry Jonathan Pearce, former chairman of the board
* David Richardson, former chairperson
* John Andrew Roth
* Guylaine Saucier
* Sherwood Smith
* John D. Watson
* Lynton &quot;Red&quot; Wilson, former chairman of the board
* Mike Zafirovski, former president and CEO
==== Past leadership ====

* Edward Fleetford Sise, President of the Northern Electric Company (1914–1919)
* Paul Fleetford Sise, President of the Northern Electric Company (1919–1948)
* Ralph Holley Keefler, President of the Northern Electric Company (1948 –1964)
* Vernon Oswald Marquez, President of the Northern Electric Company (1967–1971)
* John C. Lobb, President (1971–1974)
* David G. Vice, President and COO
* Walter Frederick Light, President of Northern Telecom (1974–1982)
* Edmund B. Fitzgerald, President (1982–1989)
* Paul G. Stern, CEO (1989–1992)
* Jean Monty, President
* Roy Merrills, President
* John Roth, President, CEO and chairman of the Board of Nortel Networks (1997–2001)
* Frank Dunn, President and CEO of Nortel Networks (2001–2004)
* Bill Owens, President and CEO of Nortel Networks (2004–2005)
* Mike Zafirovski, President and CEO of Nortel Networks (2005–2009)

== See also ==
* Accounting scandals
* 1-Meg Modem
* Bay Networks
* Bell labs
* Bell Telephone Memorial
* Bell-Northern Research
* Busy override
* Canadian Industrial Research and Development Organizations
* Data 100
* List of Nortel products
* List of Nortel protocols
* Mitel
* Multiservice Switch
* Nortel Government Solutions
* Nortel Retirees and former employees Protection Canada (NRPC)
* Passport Carrier Release
* Science and technology in Canada
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Bruce, Robert V. &quot;Bell: Alexander Bell and the Conquest of Solitude&quot; . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1990, .
* 
* Reville, F. Douglas. History of the County of Brant: Illustrated With Fifty Half-Tones Taken From Miniatures And Photographs, Brantford, ON: Brant Historical Society, Hurley Printing, 1920. Retrieved from Brantford.Library.on.ca May 4, 2012.
== External links ==
* 
* Nortel Networks Inc., the US subsidiary
* Northern Electric – A Brief History (from Bell System Memorial) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="0" end="27" title="Nortel" label="Nortel Networks Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="29" end="35" title="Nortel" label="Nortel"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="47" end="71" title="Nortel" label="Northern Telecom Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="88" end="101" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="102" end="120" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546066" start="130" end="150" title="networking equipment" label="networking equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="181" end="187" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="189" end="196" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="224" end="232" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="234" end="240" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="339" end="348" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="407" end="418" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="427" end="451" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="459" end="470" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q818723" start="681" end="703" title="Toronto Stock Exchange" label="Toronto Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613692" start="910" end="937" title="List of corporate collapses and scandals" label="largest in Canadian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="1201" end="1222" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q34180" start="1371" end="1389" title="Brantford" label="Brantford, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="1650" end="1661" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="1881" end="1913" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Telephone Company of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q898090" start="2963" end="2973" title="fire alarm" label="fire alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q933402" start="2981" end="3005" title="police box" label="police street call boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="3011" end="3041" title="firefighter" label="fire department call equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="3790" end="3801" title="phonograph" label="gramophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="3814" end="3824" title="gramophone record" label="flat discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342933" start="4540" end="4561" title="Edward Fleetford Sise" label="Edward Fleetford Sise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150664" start="4596" end="4615" title="Paul Fleetford Sise" label="Paul Fleetford Sise"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4671" end="4686" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231335" start="4722" end="4741" title="Portable Commutator" label="Portable Commutator"/>
<link wikidata="Q107444" start="5238" end="5244" title="kettle" label="kettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890" start="5247" end="5254" title="toaster" label="toaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576" start="5257" end="5262" title="cigar" label="cigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203789" start="5282" end="5287" title="stove" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="5294" end="5309" title="washing machine" label="washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011428" start="5404" end="5408" title="CHYC-AM" label="CHYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="5653" end="5675" title="Transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental train"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="5828" end="5854" title="Sound film" label="talking movie sound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5862" end="5876" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5916" end="5932" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="6207" end="6216" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="6241" end="6249" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="6250" end="6266" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="6517" end="6522" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="6531" end="6534" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883081" start="6871" end="6893" title="Bell-Northern Research" label="Bell-Northern Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="6938" end="6955" title="Optical fiber" label="fiber optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="7166" end="7174" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7245" end="7270" title="Telephone switch#Digital switches" label="digital switching systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839135" start="7404" end="7430" title="MicroSystems International" label="MicroSystems International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205637" start="7941" end="7948" title="DMS-100" label="DMS-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="8248" end="8256" title="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054787" start="8384" end="8414" title="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone" label="Nippon Telegraph and Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525746" start="8512" end="8515" title="Bell Canada Enterprises" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="8553" end="8564" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883081" start="8587" end="8609" title="Bell-Northern Research" label="Bell-Northern Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="8868" end="8881" title="globalization" label="global market"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="8886" end="8892" title="Public Switched Telephone Network" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637059" start="8980" end="8992" title="Bay Networks" label="Bay Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="9164" end="9172" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9447" end="9455" title="spin-out#U.S. SEC definition" label="spun out"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="9703" end="9714" title="speculation" label="speculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="9794" end="9813" title="fibre optic network" label="fibre optic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="9975" end="9998" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255737" start="10005" end="10014" title="John Roth (businessman)" label="John Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="10142" end="10166" title="Dot-com bubble" label="bubble of the late 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="10346" end="10354" title="WorldCom" label="WorldCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q818723" start="10497" end="10519" title="Toronto Stock Exchange" label="Toronto Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="10630" end="10632" title="Canadian dollar" label="C$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020018" start="10781" end="10794" title="stock market crash" label="stock crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q182103" start="10851" end="10863" title="pension fund" label="pension fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q187860" start="10978" end="10990" title="stock option" label="stock option"/>
<link wikidata="Q623279" start="11102" end="11125" title="chief operating officer" label="chief operating officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="11263" end="11286" title="Chief financial officer" label="Chief financial officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486341" start="11293" end="11303" title="Frank Dunn" label="Frank Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11569" end="11579" title="Write-off#Write-down" label="writedowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="12013" end="12034" title="Deloitte &amp;amp; Touche" label="Deloitte &amp;amp; Touche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226316" start="12068" end="12081" title="John Cleghorn" label="John Cleghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709519" start="12101" end="12123" title="Lynton Wilson" label="&amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062203" start="13401" end="13426" title="Export Development Canada" label="Export Development Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030612" start="13451" end="13480" title="Canadian Taxpayers Federation" label="Canadian Taxpayers Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172508" start="13528" end="13545" title="corporate welfare" label="corporate welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449730" start="13722" end="13745" title="financial mismanagement" label="financial mismanagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="13789" end="13793" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="RCMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="13875" end="13923" title="United States Securities and Exchange Commission" label="United States Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986586" start="14059" end="14088" title="Ontario Securities Commission" label="Ontario Securities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q525405" start="14215" end="14225" title="William Owens (Admiral)" label="Bill Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="14615" end="14642" title="Nortel Government Solutions" label="Nortel Government Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q162345" start="14663" end="14677" title="LG Electronics" label="LG Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="14698" end="14711" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q735261" start="14959" end="14979" title="Royal Bank of Canada" label="Royal Bank of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="15138" end="15151" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827278" start="15275" end="15296" title="Chief Science Officer" label="Chief Science Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287861" start="15311" end="15335" title="chief technology officer" label="chief technology officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848679" start="15796" end="15814" title="Mike S. Zafirovski" label="Mike S. Zafirovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="15855" end="15866" title="General Electric" label="GE Lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="15879" end="15887" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053818" start="16082" end="16106" title="non-disclosure agreement" label="non-disclosure agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="17845" end="17868" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17902" end="17910" title="Listing (finance)#Delisting" label="delisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="18061" end="18081" title="late 2000s recession" label="late 2000s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="18631" end="18678" title="Chapter 11, Title 11, United States Code" label="Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155381" start="18700" end="18741" title="Companies&amp;#x27; Creditors Arrangement Act" label="Companies&amp;#x27; Creditors Arrangement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109538" start="18779" end="18798" title="Insolvency Act 1986" label="Insolvency Act 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="18887" end="18913" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="19699" end="19704" title="WiMAX" label="WiMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444583" start="19737" end="19745" title="Alvarion" label="Alvarion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907743" start="19843" end="19850" title="Radware" label="Radware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597291" start="19905" end="19923" title="stalking horse bid" label="stalking horse bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q322731" start="21117" end="21139" title="Nokia Siemens Networks" label="Nokia Siemens Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597291" start="21147" end="21165" title="Stalking horse offer" label="stalking horse bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="21192" end="21196" title="Code division multiple access" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79703" start="21201" end="21204" title="3GPP Long Term Evolution" label="LTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787677" start="21275" end="21290" title="MatlinPatterson" label="MatlinPatterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="21295" end="21303" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="21422" end="21427" title="Avaya" label="Avaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="21557" end="21568" title="DiamondWare" label="DiamondWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091783" start="21713" end="21730" title="Ciena Corporation" label="Ciena Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="21807" end="21810" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q52618" start="21834" end="21842" title="Ericsson" label="Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280482" start="21847" end="21853" title="Kapsch" label="Kapsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="21874" end="21881" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q489097" start="22151" end="22168" title="Ernst &amp;amp; Young" label="Ernst &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690803" start="22290" end="22314" title="Health and Welfare Trust" label="Health and Welfare Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23392" end="23411" title="Nortel Retirees and former employees Protection Canada#February 8, 2010, agreement reached with Nortel on behalf of all former employees" label="signed an agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q54871457" start="23459" end="23466" title="GENBAND" label="GENBAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q488915" start="23820" end="23831" title="LG-Ericsson" label="LG-Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602601" start="23993" end="24024" title="Carling Campus" label="Ottawa campus on Carling Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257673" start="24042" end="24085" title="Public Works and Government Services Canada" label="Public Works and Government Services Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769283" start="24198" end="24227" title="National Defence Headquarters (Canada)" label="National Defence Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023975" start="24305" end="24324" title="One Equity Partners" label="One Equity Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="24643" end="24648" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="24665" end="24674" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q502121" start="24676" end="24694" title="BlackBerry Limited" label="BlackBerry Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="24700" end="24704" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q844612" start="24939" end="24959" title="Brun&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Brun&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918289" start="24961" end="24985" title="Meissel–Mertens constant" label="Meissel–Mertens constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="24991" end="24993" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164754" start="25368" end="25372" title="PBGC" label="PBGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164754" start="25373" end="25409" title="Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation" label="Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="25855" end="25873" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="25875" end="25891" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="25906" end="25914" title="computer software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="25979" end="25997" title="telephone company" label="landline telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="25999" end="26011" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="26017" end="26025" title="Cable television" label="cable TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="26059" end="26069" title="telephony" label="telephonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="26089" end="26101" title="fiber-optic communication" label="fiber optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="26103" end="26117" title="wireless LAN" label="local wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="26123" end="26133" title="multimedia" label="multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="26250" end="26283" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927978" start="26453" end="26470" title="Michael Peterson trial" label="Kathleen Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927978" start="26758" end="26774" title="Michael Peterson trial" label="Michael Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q360" start="27159" end="27173" title="Julian Assange" label="Julian Assange"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="27880" end="27894" title="Internet forum" label="Internet forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848679" start="28006" end="28021" title="Mike Zafirovski" label="Mike Zafirovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="28192" end="28196" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="RCMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032405" start="28207" end="28211" title="Canadian Security Intelligence Service" label="CSIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="28420" end="28425" title="Avaya" label="Avaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q54871457" start="28430" end="28437" title="Genband" label="Genband"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="28814" end="28820" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="28906" end="28909" title="ZTE" label="ZTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q531949" start="29014" end="29026" title="Winnipeg Sun" label="Winnipeg Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062203" start="29146" end="29171" title="Export Development Canada" label="Export Development Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030612" start="29226" end="29255" title="Canadian Taxpayers Federation" label="Canadian Taxpayers Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271591" start="29971" end="29985" title="Diane Urquhart" label="Diane Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047357" start="30491" end="30498" title="trustee" label="trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q970695" start="30500" end="30514" title="Northern Trust" label="Northern Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q537098" start="30531" end="30540" title="fiduciary" label="fiduciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053516" start="30825" end="30842" title="Nortel Retirees and former employees Protection Canada" label="Nortel pensioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="30898" end="30937" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986586" start="30946" end="30975" title="Ontario Securities Commission" label="Ontario Securities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="31128" end="31151" title="chief financial officer" label="chief financial officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="31179" end="31182" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911493" start="31304" end="31317" title="bill and hold" label="bill and hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753904" start="31618" end="31635" title="The News &amp;amp; Observer" label="News and Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255737" start="32172" end="32181" title="John Roth (businessman)" label="John Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077012" start="32765" end="32791" title="shareholders&amp;#x27; meeting" label="shareholders&amp;#x27; meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="32800" end="32807" title="Halifax Regional Municipality" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="32809" end="32820" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="32830" end="32841" title="shareholder" label="shareholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029622" start="32854" end="32867" title="J Robert Verdun" label="Robert Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205904" start="32956" end="32968" title="Yves Fortier (lawyer)" label="Yves Fortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q491748" start="33064" end="33089" title="Deloitte &amp;amp; Touche LLP" label="Deloitte &amp;amp; Touche LLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191463" start="33239" end="33269" title="Department of National Defence (Canada)" label="Department of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="33629" end="33649" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="33718" end="33724" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191463" start="33746" end="33776" title="Department of National Defence (Canada)" label="Department of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q44198" start="33798" end="33815" title="Brampton" label="Brampton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="33825" end="33846" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359317" start="33872" end="33893" title="Rogers Park, Brampton" label="Rogers Park, Brampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="33920" end="33927" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q944608" start="33941" end="33952" title="SNC-Lavalin" label="SNC-Lavalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="34121" end="34128" title="Research and development" label="R&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="34130" end="34150" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="34195" end="34205" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="34207" end="34214" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="34216" end="34223" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="34225" end="34233" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="34235" end="34243" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="34245" end="34258" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="34260" end="34274" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="34276" end="34281" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="34287" end="34295" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="34356" end="34362" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602601" start="34368" end="34388" title="Carling Campus" label="R&amp;amp;D headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="34404" end="34413" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q34227" start="34469" end="34479" title="Belleville, Ontario" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="34485" end="34492" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187093" start="34558" end="34580" title="Research Triangle Park" label="Research Triangle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q128375" start="34599" end="34609" title="Richardson, Texas" label="Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="34619" end="34628" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q159260" start="34650" end="34661" title="Santa Clara, California" label="Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="34734" end="34743" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="34749" end="34762" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35023" end="35035" title="Netaş Telekomünikasyon" label="Nortel Netaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079259" start="35092" end="35095" title="PTT (Turkey)" label="PTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="35802" end="35806" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="35808" end="35811" title="Global System for Mobile Communications" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="35817" end="35821" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127019" start="36868" end="36885" title="Jalynn Bennett" label="Jalynn H. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q880085" start="36915" end="36930" title="James Blanchard" label="James Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q518861" start="36954" end="36971" title="Frank C. Carlucci" label="Frank C. Carlucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226316" start="37004" end="37017" title="John Cleghorn" label="John Cleghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486341" start="37020" end="37030" title="Frank Dunn" label="Frank Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205904" start="37033" end="37045" title="Yves Fortier (lawyer)" label="Yves Fortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q41651" start="37099" end="37118" title="Kristina M. Johnson" label="Kristina M. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217806" start="37121" end="37142" title="John Alan MacNaughton" label="John Alan MacNaughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389967" start="37150" end="37164" title="John Manley" label="John P. Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325048" start="37168" end="37191" title="Richard D. McCormick" label="Richard David McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977845" start="37194" end="37208" title="Claude Mongeau" label="Claude Mongeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q525405" start="37211" end="37234" title="William Owens (Admiral)" label="William Owens (Admiral)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255737" start="37330" end="37346" title="John Roth (businessman)" label="John Andrew Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q944022" start="37349" end="37365" title="Guylaine Saucier" label="Guylaine Saucier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709519" start="37402" end="37431" title="Lynton Wilson" label="Lynton &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848679" start="37464" end="37479" title="Mike Zafirovski" label="Mike Zafirovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342933" start="37535" end="37556" title="Edward Fleetford Sise" label="Edward Fleetford Sise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150664" start="37615" end="37634" title="Paul Fleetford Sise" label="Paul Fleetford Sise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287639" start="37693" end="37713" title="Ralph Holley Keefler" label="Ralph Holley Keefler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922203" start="37773" end="37794" title="Vernon Oswald Marquez" label="Vernon Oswald Marquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964879" start="37926" end="37948" title="Walter Frederick Light" label="Walter Frederick Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992972" start="37994" end="38014" title="Edmund B. Fitzgerald" label="Edmund B. Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173593" start="38073" end="38083" title="Jean Monty" label="Jean Monty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255737" start="38123" end="38132" title="John Roth (businessman)" label="John Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486341" start="38208" end="38218" title="Frank Dunn" label="Frank Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q525405" start="38271" end="38281" title="William Owens (Admiral)" label="Bill Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848679" start="38334" end="38349" title="Mike S. Zafirovski" label="Mike Zafirovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215744" start="38418" end="38437" title="Accounting scandals" label="Accounting scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545788" start="38440" end="38451" title="1-Meg Modem" label="1-Meg Modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637059" start="38454" end="38466" title="Bay Networks" label="Bay Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="38469" end="38478" title="Bell labs" label="Bell labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883278" start="38481" end="38504" title="Bell Telephone Memorial" label="Bell Telephone Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883081" start="38507" end="38529" title="Bell-Northern Research" label="Bell-Northern Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002254" start="38532" end="38545" title="Busy override" label="Busy override"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030823" start="38548" end="38606" title="Canadian industrial research and development organizations" label="Canadian Industrial Research and Development Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38609" end="38617" title="Data 100" label="Data 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592351" start="38620" end="38643" title="List of Nortel products" label="List of Nortel products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957521" start="38673" end="38678" title="Mitel" label="Mitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257974" start="38681" end="38700" title="Multiservice Switch" label="Multiservice Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="38703" end="38730" title="Nortel Government Solutions" label="Nortel Government Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053516" start="38733" end="38794" title="Nortel Retirees and former employees Protection Canada (NRPC)" label="Nortel Retirees and former employees Protection Canada (NRPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142842" start="38797" end="38821" title="Passport Carrier Release" label="Passport Carrier Release"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433652" start="38824" end="38856" title="Science and technology in Canada" label="Science and technology in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="39022" end="39046" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21244" wikidata="Q3392" url="?curid=21244" title="Nile">
<text>The Nile (also known as the Nile River or River Nile) is a major north-flowing river in northeastern Africa. It flows into the Mediterranean Sea. The Nile is the longest river in Africa. It has historically been considered the longest river in the world,
though this has been contested by research suggesting that the Amazon River is slightly longer.
Of the world&#x27;s major rivers, the Nile is one of the smallest, as measured by annual flow in cubic metres of water.
About long, its drainage basin covers eleven countries: the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea, South Sudan, Sudan, and Egypt.
In particular, the Nile is the primary water source of Egypt, Sudan and South Sudan.
In these countries it is an important economic factor in agriculture and fishing.

The Nile has two major tributaries: the White Nile and the Blue Nile. The White Nile, being the longer, is traditionally considered to be the headwaters stream, while the Blue Nile actually contributes 80% of the water and silt below the confluence of the two. The White Nile rises in the Great Lakes region. It begins at Lake Victoria and flows through Uganda and South Sudan. The Blue Nile begins at Lake Tana in Ethiopia and flows into Sudan from the southeast. The two rivers meet at the Sudanese capital of Khartoum.

After Khartoum the river flows north, almost entirely through the Nubian Desert, to Cairo and its large delta, joining the Mediterranean Sea at Alexandria. Egyptian civilization and Sudanese kingdoms have depended on the river and its annual flooding since ancient times. Most of the population and cities of Egypt lie along those parts of the Nile valley north of the Aswan Dam. Nearly all the cultural and historical sites of Ancient Egypt developed and are found along river banks. The Nile is, with the Rhône and Po, one of the three Mediterranean rivers with the largest water discharge.

== Etymology ==

The standard English names &quot;White Nile&quot; and &quot;Blue Nile&quot; refer to the river&#x27;s source, derived from Arabic names formerly applied to only the Sudanese stretches that meet at Khartoum.

In the ancient Egyptian language, the Nile is called &quot;Ḥꜥpy&quot; (Hapy) or &quot;Jtrw&quot; (Iteru), meaning &quot;river&quot;. In Coptic, the word , pronounced &quot;piaro&quot; (Sahidic) or &quot;phiaro&quot; (Bohairic), means &quot;the river&quot; (lit. p(h).iar-o &quot;the.canal-great&quot;), and comes from the same ancient name. In Nobiin, the river is called &quot;Áman Dawū&quot;, meaning &quot;the great water&quot;. In Luganda, the river is called &quot;Kiira&quot; or &quot;Kiyira&quot;. In Runyoro, it is called &quot;Kihiira&quot;. In Egyptian Arabic, the Nile is called &quot;en-Nīl&quot;, while in Standard Arabic it is called &quot;an-Nīl&quot;. In Biblical Hebrew, it is , &quot;Ha-Ye&#x27;or&quot; or , &quot;Ha-Shiḥor&quot;.

The English name &quot;Nile&quot; and the Arabic names &quot;en-Nîl&quot; and &quot;an-Nîl&quot; both derive from the Latin &#x27; and the Ancient Greek . Beyond that, however, the etymology is disputed. Homer called the river , &quot;Aiguptos&quot;, but in subsequent periods, Greek authors referred to its lower course as &quot;Neilos&quot;; this term became generalized for the entire river system. Thus, the name may derive from Ancient Egyptian expression &quot;n&quot;ꜣ &quot;r&quot;ꜣ&quot;w-ḥ&quot;ꜣ&quot;w(t)&quot; (lit. &#x27;the mouths of the front parts&#x27;), which referred specifically to the branches of the Nile transversing the Delta, and would have been pronounced &quot;ni-lo-he&quot; in the area around Memphis in the 8th century BCE. Hesiod at his &quot;Theogony&quot; refers to Nilus (Νεῖλος) as one of the river gods, son of Oceanus and Tethys.

Another derivation of &quot;Nile&quot; might be related to the term &quot;Nil&quot; (; ), which refers to &quot;Indigofera tinctoria&quot;, one of the original sources of indigo dye. Another possible etymology derives from the Semitic term &quot;Nahal&quot;, meaning &quot;river&quot;. Old Libyan has the term &quot;lilu&quot;, meaning water (in modern Berber &quot;ilel&quot; ⵉⵍⴻⵍ means &quot;sea&quot;).

== Courses ==
With a total length of about between the region of Lake Victoria and the Mediterranean Sea, the Nile is among the longest rivers on Earth. The drainage basin of the Nile covers , about 10% of the area of Africa. Compared to other major rivers, though, the Nile carries little water (5% of that of the Congo River, for example). The Nile basin is complex, and because of this, the discharge at any given point along the main stem depends on many factors including weather, diversions, evaporation and evapotranspiration, and groundwater flow.

Upstream from Khartoum (to the south), the river is known as the White Nile, a term also used in a limited sense to describe the section between Lake No and Khartoum. At Khartoum, the river is joined by the Blue Nile. The White Nile starts in equatorial East Africa, and the Blue Nile begins in Ethiopia. Both branches are on the western flanks of the East African Rift.

=== Sources ===


The source of the Blue Nile is Lake Tana in the Gish Abay region in the Ethiopian Highlands.

The source of the White Nile, even after centuries of exploration, remains in dispute. The most remote source that is indisputably a source for the White Nile is of the Kagera River; however, the Kagera has multiple tributaries that are in contention for the farthest source of the White Nile. Two start in Burundi: the Ruvyironza River (also known as the Luvironza) and the Rurubu River.&lt;ref name=&quot;core.ac.uk/Aziz&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In addition, in 2010, an exploration party in Rwanda went to a place described as the source of the Rukarara tributary, and by hacking a path up steep jungle-choked mountain slopes in the Nyungwe Forest found (in the dry season) an appreciable incoming surface flow for many kilometres upstream, thence finding a new source, giving the Nile a length of .

=== In Uganda ===
The White Nile leaves Lake Victoria at Ripon Falls near Jinja, Uganda, as the &quot;Victoria Nile.&quot; It flows north for some to Lake Kyoga. The last part of the approximately river section starts from the western shores of the lake and flows at first to the west until just south of Masindi Port, where the river turns north, then makes a great half circle to the east and north to Karuma Falls. For the remaining part, it flows westerly through the Murchison Falls until it reaches the northern shores of Lake Albert where it forms a significant river delta. Lake Albert is on the border of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but the Nile is not a border river at this point. After leaving Lake Albert, the river continues north through Uganda and is known as the Albert Nile.

=== In South Sudan ===
The White Nile flows into South Sudan just south of Nimule, where it is known as the &quot;Bahr al Jabal&quot; (&quot;Mountain River&quot;). Just south of the town is the confluence with the Achwa River. The Bahr al Ghazal, long, joins the Bahr al Jabal at a small lagoon called Lake No, after which the Nile becomes known as the &quot;Bahr al Abyad&quot;, or the White Nile, from the whitish clay suspended in its waters. When the Nile floods it leaves a rich silty deposit which fertilizes the soil. The Nile no longer floods in Egypt since the completion of the Aswan Dam in 1970. An anabranch river, the Bahr el Zeraf, flows out of the Nile&#x27;s Bahr al Jabal section and rejoins the White Nile.

The flow rate of the Bahr al Jabal at Mongalla is almost constant throughout the year and averages . After Mongalla, the Bahr Al Jabal enters the enormous swamps of the Sudd region. More than half of the Nile&#x27;s water is lost in this swamp to evaporation and transpiration. The average flow rate of the White Nile at the tails of the swamps is about . From here it meets with the Sobat River at Malakal. On an annual basis, the White Nile upstream of Malakal contributes about 15% of the total outflow of the Nile.

The average flow of the White Nile at Lake Kawaki Malakal, just below the Sobat River, is ; the peak flow is approximately in October and minimum flow is about in April. This fluctuation is caused by the substantial variation in the flow of the Sobat, which has a minimum flow of about in March and a peak flow of over in October. During the dry season (January to June) the White Nile contributes between 70% and 90% of the total discharge from the Nile.

=== In Sudan ===
Below Renk, the White Nile enters Sudan, it flows north to Khartoum and meets the Blue Nile.

The course of the Nile in Sudan is distinctive. It flows over six groups of cataracts, from the sixth at Sabaloka just north of Khartoum northward to Abu Hamad. The tectonic uplift of the Nubian Swell diverts the river south-west for over 300 km, following the structure of the Central African Shear Zone embracing the Bayuda Desert. At Al Dabbah it resumes its northward course towards the first cataract at Aswan forming the S-shaped Great Bend of the Nile mentioned by Eratosthenes.

In the north of Sudan, the river enters Lake Nasser (known in Sudan as Lake Nubia), the larger part of which is in Egypt.

=== In Egypt ===
Below the Aswan Dam, at the northern limit of Lake Nasser, the Nile resumes its historic course. North of Cairo, the Nile splits into two branches (or distributaries) that feed the Mediterranean: the Rosetta Branch to the west and the Damietta to the east, forming the Nile Delta.

=== Sediment transport ===
The annual sediment transport by the Nile in Egypt has been quantified.
* At Aswan: 0.14 million tonnes of suspended sediment and an additional 28% of bedload
* At Beni Sweif: 0.5 million tonnes of suspended sediment and an additional 20% of bedload
* At Qena: 0.27 million tonnes of suspended sediment and an additional 27% of bedload
* At Sohag: 1.5 million tonnes of suspended sediment and an additional 13% of bedload

== Tributaries ==

=== Red Nile ===
Below the confluence with the Blue Nile the only major tributary is the Atbarah River, also known as the Red Nile. Roughly halfway to the sea, it originates in Ethiopia north of Lake Tana, and is around long. The Atbarah flows only while there is rain in Ethiopia and dries very rapidly. During the dry period of January to June, it typically dries up north of Khartoum.

=== Blue Nile ===

The Blue Nile (, &quot;ʿĀbay&quot;) springs from Lake Tana in the Ethiopian Highlands. The Blue Nile flows about 1,400 kilometres to Khartoum, where the Blue Nile and White Nile join to form the Nile. Ninety percent of the water and ninety-six percent of the transported sediment carried by the Nile come from the Atbarah and Blue Nile, both of which originate in Ethiopia, with fifty-nine percent of the water coming from the Blue Nile. The erosion and transportation of silt only occurs during the Ethiopian rainy season when rainfall is especially high in the Ethiopian Highlands; the rest of the year, the great rivers draining Ethiopia into the Nile have a weaker flow. In harsh and arid seasons and droughts, the Blue Nile dries out completely.

The flow of the Blue Nile varies considerably over its yearly cycle and is the main contribution to the large natural variation of the Nile flow. During the dry season the natural discharge of the Blue Nile can be as low as , although upstream dams regulate the flow of the river. During the wet season, the peak flow of the Blue Nile often exceeds in late August (a difference of a factor of 50).

Before the placement of dams on the river the yearly discharge varied by a factor of 15 at Aswan. Peak flows of over occurred during late August and early September, and minimum flows of about occurred during late April and early May.

=== Bahr el Ghazal and Sobat River ===
The Bahr al Ghazal and the Sobat River are the two most important tributaries of the White Nile in terms of discharge.

The Bahr al Ghazal&#x27;s drainage basin is the largest of any of the Nile&#x27;s sub-basins, measuring in size, but it contributes a relatively small amount of water, about annually, because tremendous volumes of water are lost in the Sudd wetlands.

The Sobat River, which joins the Nile a short distance below Lake No, drains about half as much land, , but contributes annually to the Nile. When in flood the Sobat carries a large amount of sediment, adding greatly to the White Nile&#x27;s color.

=== Yellow Nile ===

The Yellow Nile is a former tributary that connected the Ouaddaï highlands of eastern Chad to the Nile River Valley to . Its remains are known as the Wadi Howar. The wadi passes through Gharb Darfur near the northern border with Chad and meets up with the Nile near the southern point of the Great Bend.

== History ==

The Nile has been the lifeline of civilization in Egypt since the Stone Age, with most of the population and all of the cities of Egypt developing along those parts of the Nile valley lying north of Aswan. However, the Nile used to run much more westerly through what is now Wadi Hamim and Wadi al Maqar in Libya and flow into the Gulf of Sidra. As the sea level rose at the end of the most recent ice age, the stream which is now the northern Nile captured the ancestral Nile near Asyut. This change in climate also led to the current extents of the Sahara desert, around 3400 BCE.

=== Khufu branch ===

The Giza pyramid complex originally overlooked a branch of the Nile that no longer exists. This branch was highest during the African Humid Period.

=== Ancient Niles ===
The existing Nile has five earlier phases:
*i) the Upper Miocenian Eonile, of about 6 million years BP;
*ii) the Upper Pliocenian Paleonile, commencing about 3.32 million years BP, and during the Pleistocene;
*iii) The Nile phases, including the Proto-Nile, commencing about 600,000 years BP;
*iv) Pre-Nile;
*v) transitioning at about 400,000 years BP to the Neo-Nile.&lt;ref name=&quot;Said/chapter/10.1007&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
Flowing north from the Ethiopian Highlands, satellite imagery was used to identify dry watercourses in the desert to the west of the Nile. A canyon, now filled by surface drift, represents the Eonile that flowed during 23–5.3 million years before present. The Eonile transported clastic sediments to the Mediterranean; several natural gas fields have been discovered within these sediments.

During the late-Miocene Messinian salinity crisis, when the Mediterranean Sea was a closed basin and evaporated to the point of being empty or nearly so, the Nile cut its course down to the new base level until it was several hundred metres below world ocean level at Aswan and below Cairo. This created a very long and deep canyon which was filled with sediment after the Mediterranean was recreated. At some point the sediments raised the riverbed sufficiently for the river to overflow westward into a depression to create Lake Moeris.

Lake Tanganyika drained northwards into the Nile until the Virunga Volcanoes blocked its course in Rwanda. The Nile was much longer at that time, with its furthest headwaters in northern Zambia. The currently existing Nile first flowed during the former parts of the Würm glaciation period.

Affad 23 is an archaeological site located in alluvial deposits formed by an ancient channel of the Nile in the Affad region of southern Dongola Reach, Sudan.

=== Integrated Nile ===
There are two theories about the age of the integrated Nile. One is that the integrated drainage of the Nile is of young age and that the Nile basin was formerly broken into series of separate basins, only the most northerly of which fed a river following the present course of the Nile in Egypt and Sudan. Rushdi Said postulates that Egypt supplied most of the waters of the Nile during the early part of its history.

The other theory is that the drainage from Ethiopia via rivers equivalent to the Blue Nile, the Atbara and the Takazze flowed to the Mediterranean via the Egyptian Nile since well back into Tertiary times.

Salama suggests that during the Paleogene and Neogene Periods (66 million to 2.588 million years ago) a series of separate closed continental basins each occupied one of the major parts of the Sudanese Rift System: Mellut rift, White Nile rift, Blue Nile rift, Atbara rift and Sag El Naam rift.
The Mellut Basin is nearly deep at its central part. This rift is possibly still active, with reported tectonic activity in its northern and southern boundaries. The Sudd swamp which forms the central part of the basin may still be subsiding. The White Nile Rift system, although shallower than the Bahr el Arab rift, is about deep. Geophysical exploration of the Blue Nile Rift System estimated the depth of the sediments to be . These basins were not interconnected until their subsidence ceased, and the rate of sediment deposition was enough to fill and connect them.

The Egyptian Nile connected to the Sudanese Nile, which captures the Ethiopian and Equatorial headwaters during the current stages of tectonic activity in the Eastern, Central and Sudanese Rift systems. The connection of the different Niles occurred during cyclic wet periods. The Atbarah overflowed its closed basin during the wet periods that occurred about 100,000 to 120,000 years ago. The Blue Nile connected to the main Nile during the 70,000–80,000 years B.P. wet period. The White Nile system in Bahr El Arab and White Nile Rifts remained a closed lake until the connection of the Victoria Nile to the main system some 12,500 years ago during the African humid period.

=== Role in the founding of Egyptian civilization ===

The Greek historian Herodotus wrote that &quot;Egypt was the gift of the Nile&quot;. An unending source of sustenance, it played a crucial role in the development of Egyptian civilization. Because the river overflowed its banks annually and deposited new layers of silt, the surrounding land was very fertile. The Ancient Egyptians cultivated and traded wheat, flax, papyrus and other crops around the Nile. Wheat was a crucial crop in the famine-plagued Middle East. This trading system secured Egypt&#x27;s diplomatic relationships with other countries and contributed to economic stability. Far-reaching trade has been carried on along the Nile since ancient times. A tune, Hymn to the Nile, was created and sung by the ancient Egyptian peoples about the flooding of the Nile River and all of the miracles it brought to Ancient Egyptian civilization.

Water buffalo were introduced from Asia, and the Assyrians introduced camels in the 7th century BCE. These animals were raised for meat and were domesticated and used for ploughing—or in the camels&#x27; case, carriage. Water was vital to both people and livestock. The Nile was also a convenient and efficient means of transportation for people and goods.

The Nile was also an important part of ancient Egyptian spiritual life. Hapi was the god of the annual floods, and both he and the pharaoh were thought to control the flooding. The Nile was considered to be a causeway from life to death and the afterlife. The east was thought of as a place of birth and growth, and the west was considered the place of death, as the god Ra, the Sun, underwent birth, death, and resurrection each day as he crossed the sky. Thus, all tombs were west of the Nile, because the Egyptians believed that in order to enter the afterlife, they had to be buried on the side that symbolized death.

As the Nile was such an important factor in Egyptian life, the ancient calendar was even based on the three cycles of the Nile. These seasons, each consisting of four months of thirty days each, were called Akhet, Peret, and Shemu. Akhet, which means inundation, was the time of the year when the Nile flooded, leaving several layers of fertile soil behind, aiding in agricultural growth. Peret was the growing season, and Shemu, the last season, was the harvest season when there were no rains.

=== European search for the source ===
To the ancient Greeks and Romans, the upper reaches of the White Nile remained largely unknown, as they failed to penetrate the &quot;Sudd&quot; wetlands of South Sudan. Vitruvius thought that source of the Nile was in Mauritania, on the &quot;other&quot; (south) side of the Atlas Mountains. Various expeditions failed to determine the river&#x27;s source. Agatharchides records that in the time of Ptolemy II Philadelphus, a military expedition had penetrated far enough along the course of the Blue Nile to determine that the summer floods were caused by heavy seasonal rainstorms in the Ethiopian Highlands, but no European of antiquity is known to have reached Lake Tana. The &quot;Tabula Rogeriana&quot; depicted the source as three lakes in 1154.

Europeans began to learn about the origins of the Nile in the 14th century when the Pope sent monks as emissaries to Mongolia who passed India, the Middle East and Africa, and described being told of the source of the Nile in Abyssinia (Ethiopia). Later in the 15th and 16th centuries, travelers to Ethiopia visited Lake Tana and the source of the Blue Nile in the mountains south of the lake. Supposedly, Paolo Trevisani (–1483), a Venetian traveller in Ethiopia, wrote a journal of his travels to the &quot;origin of the Nile&quot; that has since been lost.
James Bruce claimed to be the first European to have visited the headwaters.
Modern writers give the credit to the Jesuit Pedro Páez. Páez&#x27;s account of the source of the Nile is a long and vivid account of Ethiopia. It was published in full only in the early 20th century, but was featured in works of Páez&#x27;s contemporaries, like Baltazar Téllez, Athanasius Kircher and Johann Michael Vansleb.

Europeans had been resident in Ethiopia since the late 15th century, and one of them may have visited the headwaters even earlier without leaving a written trace. The Portuguese João Bermudes published the first description of the Tis Issat Falls in his 1565 memoirs, compared them to the Nile Falls alluded to in Cicero&#x27;s &quot;De Republica&quot;. Jerónimo Lobo describes the source of the Blue Nile, visiting shortly after Pedro Páez. Telles also uses his account.

The White Nile was even less understood. The ancients mistakenly believed that the Niger River represented the upper reaches of the White Nile. For example, Pliny the Elder writes that the Nile had its origins &quot;in a mountain of lower Mauretania&quot;, flowed above ground for &quot;many days&quot; distance, then went underground, reappeared as a large lake in the territories of the Masaesyli, then sank again below the desert to flow underground &quot;for a distance of 20 days&#x27; journey till it reaches the nearest Ethiopians.&quot;

Modern exploration of the Nile basin began with the conquest of the northern and central Sudan by the Ottoman viceroy of Egypt, Muhammad Ali, and his sons from 1821 onward. As a result of this, the Blue Nile was known as far as its exit from the Ethiopian foothills and the White Nile as far as the mouth of the Sobat River. Three expeditions under a Turkish officer, Selim Bimbashi, were made between 1839 and 1842, and two got to the point about beyond the present port of Juba, where the country rises and rapids make navigation very difficult.

Lake Victoria was first sighted by Europeans in 1858 when British explorer John Hanning Speke reached its southern shore while traveling with Richard Francis Burton to explore central Africa and locate the great lakes. Believing he had found the source of the Nile on seeing this &quot;vast expanse of open water&quot; for the first time, Speke named the lake after Queen Victoria. Burton, recovering from illness and resting further south on the shores of Lake Tanganyika, was outraged that Speke claimed to have proven his discovery to be the true source of the Nile when Burton regarded this as still unsettled. A quarrel ensued which sparked intense debate within the scientific community and interest by other explorers keen to either confirm or refute Speke&#x27;s discovery. British explorer and missionary David Livingstone pushed too far west and entered the Congo River system instead. It was ultimately Welsh-American explorer Henry Morton Stanley who confirmed Speke&#x27;s discovery, circumnavigating Lake Victoria and reporting the great outflow at Ripon Falls on the lake&#x27;s northern shore.

=== Since 1950 ===
The Nile has long been used to transport goods along its length. Winter winds blow south, up river, so ships could sail up river using sails and down river using the flow of the river. While most Egyptians still live in the Nile valley, the 1970 completion of the Aswan Dam ended the summer floods and their renewal of the fertile soil, fundamentally changing farming practices. The Nile supports much of the population living along its banks, enabling Egyptians to live in otherwise inhospitable regions of the Sahara. The river&#x27;s flow is disturbed at several points by the Cataracts of the Nile which form an obstacle to navigation by boats. The Sudd also forms a formidable navigation obstacle and impedes water flow, to the extent that Sudan had once attempted to build the Jonglei Canal to bypass the swamp.

Nile cities include Khartoum, Aswan, Luxor (Thebes), and the GizaCairo conurbation. The first cataract, the closest to the mouth of the river, is at Aswan, north of the Aswan Dam. This part of the river is a regular tourist route, with cruise ships and traditional wooden sailing boats known as feluccas. Many cruise ships ply the route between Luxor and Aswan, stopping at Edfu and Kom Ombo along the way. Security concerns have limited cruising on the northernmost portion for many years.

A computer simulation study to plan the economic development of the Nile was directed by H.A.W. Morrice and W.N. Allan, for the Ministry of Hydro-power of Sudan, during 1955–57 Morrice was their hydrological adviser, and Allan his predecessor. The calculations were enabled by accurate monthly inflow data collected for 50 years. The underlying principle was the use of over-year storage, to conserve water from rainy years for use in dry years. Irrigation, navigation and other needs were considered. Each computer run postulated a set of reservoirs and operating equations for the release of water as a function of the month and the levels upstream. The behavior that would have resulted given the inflow data was modeled. Over 600 models were run. Recommendations were made to the Sudanese authorities. The calculations were run on an IBM 650 computer. Simulation studies to design water resources are discussed further in the article on hydrology transport models, which have been used since the 1980s to analyze water quality.

Despite the development of many reservoirs, drought during the 1980s led to widespread starvation in Ethiopia and Sudan, but Egypt was nourished by water impounded in Lake Nasser. Drought has proven to be a major cause of fatality in the Nile river basin. According to a report by the Strategic Foresight Group, droughts in the last century have affected around 170 million people and killed half a million people. From the 70 incidents of drought which took place between 1900 and 2012, 55 incidents took place in Ethiopia, Sudan, South Sudan, Kenya and Tanzania.

== Water sharing dispute ==
The Nile&#x27;s water has affected the politics of East Africa and the Horn of Africa for many decades. The dispute between Egypt and Ethiopia over the $4.5 billion Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam has become a national preoccupation in both countries, stoking patriotism, deep-seated fears and even murmurs of war. Countries including Uganda, Sudan, Ethiopia and Kenya have complained about Egyptian domination of its water resources. The Nile Basin Initiative promotes a peaceful cooperation among those states.

Several attempts have been made to establish agreements between the countries sharing the Nile waters. On 14 May 2010 at Entebbe, Uganda, Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Tanzania signed a new agreement on sharing the Nile water even though this agreement raised strong opposition from Egypt and Sudan. Ideally, such international agreements should promote equitable and efficient usage of the Nile basin&#x27;s water resources. Without a better understanding about the availability of the future water resources of the Nile, it is possible that conflicts could arise between these countries relying on the Nile for their water supply, economic and social developments.

== Modern achievements and exploration ==
=== White Nile ===
In 1951, American John Goddard together with two French explorers became the first to successfully navigate the entire Nile from its source in Burundi at the potential headsprings of the Kagera River in Burundi to its mouth on the Mediterranean Sea, a journey of approximately . Their 9-month journey is described in the book &quot;Kayaks down the Nile&quot;.

The White Nile Expedition, led by South African national Hendrik Coetzee, navigated the White Nile&#x27;s entire length of approximately . The expedition began at the White Nile&#x27;s beginning at Lake Victoria in Uganda, on 17 January 2004 and arrived at the Mediterranean in Rosetta, four and a half months later.

=== Blue Nile ===
The Blue Nile Expedition, led by geologist Pasquale Scaturro and his partner, kayaker and documentary filmmaker Gordon Brown became the first known people to descend the entire Blue Nile, from Lake Tana in Ethiopia to the beaches of Alexandria on the Mediterranean. Their approximately journey took 114 days, from 25 December 2003 to 28 April 2004. Though their expedition included others, Brown and Scaturro were the only ones to complete the entire journey. Although they descended whitewater manually, the team used outboard motors for much of their journey.

On 29 January 2005, Canadian Les Jickling and New Zealander Mark Tanner completed the first human-powered transit of Ethiopia&#x27;s Blue Nile. Their journey of over took five months. They recount that they paddled through two war zones, regions notorious for bandits, and were arrested at gunpoint.

== Crossings ==

=== Crossings from Khartoum to the Mediterranean Sea ===

The following bridges cross the Blue Nile and connect Khartoum to Khartoum North:
* Mac Nimir Bridge
* Blue Nile Road &amp; Railway Bridge
* Burri Bridge
* Elmansheya Bridge
* Soba Bridge

The following bridges cross the White Nile and connect Khartoum to Omdurman:
* White Nile Bridge
* Victory Bridge, also known as El Fitihab Bridge

The following bridges cross from Omdurman: to Khartoum North:
* Hafaya Bridge

The following bridges cross to Tuti from Khartoum state&#x27;s three cities
* Tuti Bridge (previously known as the Khartoum North-Tuti bridge)

Other bridges
* Shandi Bridge, Shendi
* Atbarah Bridge, Atbarah
* Merowe Dam, Merowe
* Merowe Bridge, Merowe
* Aswan Bridge, Aswan
* Luxor Bridge, Luxor
* Suhag Bridge, Suhag
* Assiut Bridge, Assiut
* Al Minya Bridge, Minya
* Al Marazeek Bridge, Helwan
* First Ring Road Bridge (Moneeb Crossing), Cairo
* Abbas Bridge, Cairo
* University Bridge, Cairo
* Qasr al-Nil Bridge, Cairo
* 6th October Bridge, Cairo
* Abu El Ela Bridge, Cairo (removed in 1998)
* New Abu El Ela Bridge, Cairo
* Imbaba Bridge, Cairo
* Rod Elfarag Bridge, Cairo
* Second Ring Road Bridge, Cairo
* Banha Bridge, Banha
* Samanoud Bridge, Samanoud
* Mansoura 2 Bridges, Mansoura
* Talkha Bridge, Talkha
* Shirbine high Bridge
* Shirbine Bridge
* Kafr Sad – Farscor Bridge
* International Coastal Road Bridge
* Damietta high Bridge, Damietta
* Damietta Bridge, Damietta
* Kafr El Zayat Bridges, Kafr El Zayat
* Zefta Bridge, Zefta
=== Crossings from Jinja, Uganda to Khartoum ===

* Source of the Nile Bridge, Jinja, Uganda
* River Nile Railway Bridge, Jinja, Uganda
* Nalubaale Bridge, Jinja, Uganda (Formerly Owen Falls Bridge)
* Karuma Bridge, Karuma, Uganda
* Pakwach Bridge, Uganda

== See also ==
* Bujagali Hydroelectric Power Station
* Egyptian Public Works
* Kiira Hydroelectric Power Station
* Water politics in the Nile Basin
* Merowe Dam
* Nalubaale Hydroelectric Power Station
* Orders of magnitude
* Vid Flumina, a river of liquid methane and ethane on Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan
* &quot;The River War&quot; (1899), Winston Churchill&#x27;s second book, an account of steaming up the Nile to the Battle of Omdurman, Sudan, in 1898
==Notes and references==
;Notes

;References

;Sources

== Further reading ==
* Jeal, Tim (2011). &quot;Explorers of the Nile: The Triumph and Tragedy of a Great Victorian Adventure&quot;. 
* Moorehead, Alan, &quot;The White Nile&quot; (Hamish Hamilton, 1960; revised and illustrated edition, 1971). Abridged illustrated edition, as The Story of the White Nile (Harper &amp; Row, 1967)
* Moorehead, Alan, &quot;The Blue Nile&quot; (Hamish Hamilton, 1962; revised and illustrated edition, 1972). Abridged illustrated edition, as The Story of the Blue Nile (Harper &amp; Row, 1966)
* Tvedt, Terje, ed. &quot;The River Nile in the Post-Colonial Age: Conflict and Cooperation Among the Nile Basin Countries&quot; (I.B. Tauris, 2010) 293 pages; studies of the river&#x27;s finite resources as shared by multiple nations in the post-colonial era; includes research by scholars from Burundi, Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda.
* Tvedt, Terje, (2004) &quot;The Nile: An Annotated Bibliography&quot;, London/New York, 

== External links ==

* A Struggle Over the Nile – slideshow by &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Thesis Analyzing Nile River Negotiations (archived 10 January 2016)
*Old maps of the Nile, from the Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, The National Library of Israel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4" end="8" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="28" end="38" title="Nile" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="42" end="52" title="Nile" label="River Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="79" end="84" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="101" end="107" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="127" end="144" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q486047" start="227" end="253" title="List of river systems by length" label="longest river in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="318" end="330" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="487" end="501" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="531" end="563" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="565" end="573" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="575" end="582" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="584" end="590" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="592" end="598" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="600" end="605" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="607" end="615" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="617" end="624" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="626" end="637" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="639" end="644" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="650" end="655" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="848" end="859" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814791" start="865" end="875" title="White Nile" label="White Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q882739" start="884" end="893" title="Blue Nile" label="Blue Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="967" end="977" title="River source" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="1048" end="1052" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="1063" end="1073" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="1114" end="1125" title="African Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="1147" end="1160" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q116685" start="1227" end="1236" title="Lake Tana" label="Lake Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="1298" end="1309" title="Confluence" label="rivers meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="1337" end="1345" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q464909" start="1414" end="1427" title="Nubian Desert" label="Nubian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="1432" end="1437" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="1446" end="1457" title="Nile Delta" label="large delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1492" end="1502" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185301" start="1504" end="1525" title="History of Egypt" label="Egyptian civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q246643" start="1530" end="1547" title="History of Sudan" label="Sudanese kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="1717" end="1726" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1776" end="1789" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="1855" end="1860" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="1865" end="1867" title="Po (river)" label="Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="1924" end="1939" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="water discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2082" end="2088" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="2156" end="2164" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="2182" end="2199" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="2303" end="2309" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="2352" end="2359" title="Sahidic" label="Sahidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q890733" start="2384" end="2392" title="Bohairic" label="Bohairic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36503" start="2511" end="2517" title="Nobiin language" label="Nobiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33368" start="2602" end="2609" title="Luganda" label="Luganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33794" start="2675" end="2682" title="Runyoro" label="Runyoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="2721" end="2736" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="2786" end="2801" title="Standard Arabic" label="Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="2838" end="2853" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3036" end="3041" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3057" end="3070" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3122" end="3127" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="3642" end="3649" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="3674" end="3680" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="3694" end="3702" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q685243" start="3719" end="3724" title="Nilus (mythology)" label="Nilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027575" start="3748" end="3758" title="River gods (Greek mythology)" label="river gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="3767" end="3774" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184216" start="3779" end="3785" title="Tethys (mythology)" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q165213" start="3900" end="3920" title="Indigofera tinctoria" label="Indigofera tinctoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="3959" end="3969" title="indigo dye" label="indigo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="4015" end="4022" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855698" start="4074" end="4084" title="Proto-Berber language" label="Old Libyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="4260" end="4273" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4282" end="4299" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="4352" end="4366" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="4510" end="4521" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="4589" end="4598" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q573344" start="4628" end="4637" title="main stem" label="main stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="4693" end="4704" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q828158" start="4709" end="4727" title="evapotranspiration" label="evapotranspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="4733" end="4744" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="4766" end="4774" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814791" start="4817" end="4827" title="White Nile" label="White Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q403145" start="4897" end="4904" title="Lake No" label="Lake No"/>
<link wikidata="Q882739" start="4959" end="4968" title="Blue Nile" label="Blue Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234397" start="5104" end="5121" title="East African Rift" label="East African Rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q116685" start="5173" end="5182" title="Lake Tana" label="Lake Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q655265" start="5190" end="5199" title="Gish Abay" label="Gish Abay"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="5214" end="5233" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750140" start="5405" end="5417" title="Kagera River" label="Kagera River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878289" start="5556" end="5572" title="Ruvyironza River" label="Ruvyironza River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499639" start="5611" end="5623" title="Rurubu River" label="Rurubu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045862" start="5781" end="5789" title="Rukarara River" label="Rukarara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356828" start="5869" end="5883" title="Nyungwe Forest" label="Nyungwe Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="5898" end="5908" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="6077" end="6090" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q487912" start="6094" end="6105" title="Ripon Falls" label="Ripon Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q501709" start="6111" end="6124" title="Jinja, Uganda" label="Jinja, Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q124978" start="6187" end="6197" title="Lake Kyoga" label="Lake Kyoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783287" start="6342" end="6354" title="Masindi Port" label="Masindi Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q23927055" start="6441" end="6453" title="Karuma Falls" label="Karuma Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q495475" start="6509" end="6524" title="Murchison Falls" label="Murchison Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q125888" start="6565" end="6576" title="Lake Albert (Africa)" label="Lake Albert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6827" end="6838" title="White Nile#Albert Nile" label="Albert Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992727" start="6916" end="6922" title="Nimule" label="Nimule"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="7035" end="7045" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034078" start="7055" end="7066" title="Achwa River" label="Achwa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q803634" start="7072" end="7086" title="Bahr el Ghazal River" label="Bahr al Ghazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q403145" start="7143" end="7150" title="Lake No" label="Lake No"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="7257" end="7261" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="7296" end="7307" title="Flooding of the Nile" label="Nile floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="7429" end="7438" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q661702" start="7451" end="7460" title="anabranch" label="anabranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112393" start="7472" end="7485" title="Bahr el Zeraf" label="Bahr el Zeraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098148" start="7605" end="7613" title="Mongalla, South Sudan" label="Mongalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q654544" start="7736" end="7740" title="Sudd" label="Sudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="7814" end="7825" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167980" start="7830" end="7843" title="transpiration" label="transpiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q821911" start="7951" end="7962" title="Sobat River" label="Sobat River"/>
<link wikidata="Q220049" start="7966" end="7973" title="Malakal" label="Malakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="8429" end="8439" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q775361" start="8567" end="8571" title="Renk, South Sudan" label="Renk"/>
<link wikidata="Q649907" start="8717" end="8740" title="Cataracts of the Nile" label="six groups of cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395862" start="8760" end="8768" title="Sabaloka Game Reserve" label="Sabaloka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439710" start="8805" end="8814" title="Abu Hamad" label="Abu Hamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067845" start="8843" end="8855" title="Nubian Swell" label="Nubian Swell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504174" start="8933" end="8959" title="Central African Shear Zone" label="Central African Shear Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q812630" start="8974" end="8987" title="Bayuda Desert" label="Bayuda Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754253" start="8992" end="9001" title="Al Dabbah, Sudan" label="Al Dabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="9064" end="9069" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="9127" end="9139" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182796" start="9182" end="9193" title="Lake Nasser" label="Lake Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="9292" end="9301" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="9388" end="9393" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q243699" start="9482" end="9489" title="Rosetta" label="Rosetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189383" start="9517" end="9525" title="Damietta" label="Damietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="9551" end="9561" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="9668" end="9673" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110347" start="9698" end="9716" title="suspended load" label="suspended sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q889515" start="9742" end="9749" title="bed load" label="bedload"/>
<link wikidata="Q394080" start="9755" end="9765" title="Beni Sweif" label="Beni Sweif"/>
<link wikidata="Q336661" start="9846" end="9850" title="Qena" label="Qena"/>
<link wikidata="Q388108" start="9932" end="9937" title="Sohag" label="Sohag"/>
<link wikidata="Q753897" start="10122" end="10135" title="Atbarah River" label="Atbarah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q116685" start="10228" end="10237" title="Lake Tana" label="Lake Tana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="10411" end="10419" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="10951" end="10963" title="Wet season" label="rainy season"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="11004" end="11023" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q803634" start="11871" end="11885" title="Bahr el Ghazal River" label="Bahr al Ghazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q821911" start="11894" end="11905" title="Sobat River" label="Sobat River"/>
<link wikidata="Q303125" start="12567" end="12584" title="Ouaddaï highlands" label="Ouaddaï highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538740" start="12660" end="12670" title="Wadi Howar" label="Wadi Howar"/>
<link wikidata="Q846331" start="12696" end="12708" title="Gharb Darfur" label="Gharb Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="12896" end="12905" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q187274" start="13161" end="13174" title="Gulf of Sidra" label="Gulf of Sidra"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="13216" end="13235" title="Last Glacial Period" label="most recent ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q20482" start="13279" end="13287" title="Stream capture" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q29962" start="13312" end="13317" title="Asyut" label="Asyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="13381" end="13387" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508" start="13440" end="13460" title="Giza pyramid complex" label="Giza pyramid complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60259056" start="13562" end="13582" title="African Humid Period" label="African Humid Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="13707" end="13709" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="13803" end="13814" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="14081" end="14098" title="satellite imagery" label="satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="14316" end="14333" title="Clastic rock" label="clastic sediments"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="14445" end="14452" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q605948" start="14453" end="14478" title="Messinian salinity crisis" label="Messinian salinity crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="14513" end="14525" title="Endorheic basin" label="closed basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330952" start="14955" end="14966" title="Lake Moeris" label="Lake Moeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511" start="14969" end="14984" title="Lake Tanganyika" label="Lake Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q751607" start="15028" end="15045" title="Virunga Mountains" label="Virunga Volcanoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14520484" start="15236" end="15251" title="Würm glaciation" label="Würm glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460721" start="15261" end="15269" title="Affad 23" label="Affad 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="15276" end="15295" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q17460721" start="15373" end="15378" title="Affad" label="Affad"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792305" start="15398" end="15411" title="Dongola Reach" label="Dongola Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="16055" end="16063" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="16104" end="16113" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="16118" end="16125" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813826" start="16287" end="16298" title="Melut Basin" label="Mellut rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995110" start="16300" end="16315" title="White Nile rift" label="White Nile rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929569" start="16317" end="16331" title="Blue Nile rift" label="Blue Nile rift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16333" end="16344" title="Atbara rift" label="Atbara rift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16349" end="16365" title="Sag El Naam rift" label="Sag El Naam rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="16470" end="16478" title="Tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q654544" start="16533" end="16537" title="Sudd" label="Sudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842715" start="16666" end="16683" title="Bahr el Arab rift" label="Bahr el Arab rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q60259056" start="17595" end="17615" title="African humid period" label="African humid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="17693" end="17702" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="17987" end="18000" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="18034" end="18038" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="18040" end="18047" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144038" start="18350" end="18366" title="Hymn to the Nile" label="Hymn to the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="18528" end="18541" title="Water buffalo" label="Water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="18577" end="18586" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q32143" start="18958" end="18962" title="Hapi (Nile god)" label="Hapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="19017" end="19024" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="19257" end="19259" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q770568" start="19716" end="19721" title="Season of the Inundation" label="Akhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037143" start="19723" end="19728" title="Season of the Emergence" label="Peret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248622" start="19734" end="19739" title="Season of the Harvest" label="Shemu"/>
<link wikidata="Q654544" start="20179" end="20183" title="Sudd" label="Sudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="20215" end="20224" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="20321" end="20336" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q391216" start="20403" end="20416" title="Agatharchides" label="Agatharchides"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="20445" end="20468" title="Ptolemy II Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy II Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089336" start="20732" end="20748" title="Tabula Rogeriana" label="Tabula Rogeriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q348489" start="21360" end="21371" title="James Bruce" label="James Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="21475" end="21481" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q708822" start="21482" end="21492" title="Pedro Páez" label="Pedro Páez"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="21717" end="21735" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180611" start="21740" end="21762" title="Johann Michael Vansleb" label="Johann Michael Vansleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266055" start="21996" end="22005" title="Blue Nile Falls" label="Tis Issat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="22079" end="22085" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q671798" start="22119" end="22132" title="Jerónimo Lobo" label="Jerónimo Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="22321" end="22332" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="22395" end="22410" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="22477" end="22487" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288728" start="22627" end="22636" title="Masaesyli" label="Masaesyli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162775" start="22836" end="22878" title="Turco-Egyptian conquest of Sudan (1820–1824)" label="conquest of the northern and central Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="22886" end="22893" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="22912" end="22924" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947" start="23259" end="23263" title="Juba" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q125084" start="23408" end="23426" title="John Hanning Speke" label="John Hanning Speke"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="23475" end="23497" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Francis Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="23699" end="23713" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511" start="23790" end="23805" title="Lake Tanganyika" label="Lake Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="24147" end="24164" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="24201" end="24212" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q171421" start="24271" end="24291" title="Henry Morton Stanley" label="Henry Morton Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q487912" start="24396" end="24407" title="Ripon Falls" label="Ripon Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q890162" start="25246" end="25259" title="Jonglei Canal" label="Jonglei Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130514" start="25319" end="25324" title="Luxor" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="25343" end="25347" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="25353" end="25364" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q914260" start="25577" end="25584" title="felucca" label="felucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q239107" start="25656" end="25660" title="Edfu" label="Edfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q138833" start="25665" end="25673" title="Kom Ombo" label="Kom Ombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q628643" start="26612" end="26619" title="IBM 650" label="IBM 650"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462112" start="26715" end="26740" title="hydrology transport model" label="hydrology transport model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621793" start="27092" end="27117" title="Strategic Foresight Group" label="Strategic Foresight Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="27472" end="27486" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542454" start="27566" end="27597" title="Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam" label="Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q490388" start="27840" end="27861" title="Nile Basin Initiative" label="Nile Basin Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q211970" start="28036" end="28043" title="Entebbe" label="Entebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141109" start="28654" end="28666" title="John Goddard (adventurer)" label="John Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713858" start="29054" end="29069" title="Hendrik Coetzee" label="Hendrik Coetzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844833" start="29817" end="29827" title="whitewater" label="whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q789774" start="29852" end="29866" title="outboard motor" label="outboard motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q259912" start="30356" end="30372" title="Mac Nimir Bridge" label="Mac Nimir Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q482349" start="30375" end="30410" title="Blue Nile Road &amp;amp; Railway Bridge" label="Blue Nile Road &amp;amp; Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30413" end="30425" title="Burri Bridge" label="Burri Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704376" start="30428" end="30445" title="Elmansheya Bridge" label="Elmansheya Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247214" start="30448" end="30452" title="Soba (city)" label="Soba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30540" end="30557" title="White Nile Bridge" label="White Nile Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30590" end="30607" title="El Fitihab Bridge" label="El Fitihab Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30673" end="30686" title="Hafaya Bridge" label="Hafaya Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q652705" start="30766" end="30777" title="Tuti Bridge" label="Tuti Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q997838" start="30863" end="30869" title="Shendi" label="Shendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q753906" start="30888" end="30895" title="Atbarah" label="Atbarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921988" start="30898" end="30908" title="Merowe Dam" label="Merowe Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784541" start="30910" end="30916" title="Merowe, Sudan" label="Merowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="30957" end="30962" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130514" start="30979" end="30984" title="Luxor" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31001" end="31006" title="Suhag, Egypt" label="Suhag"/>
<link wikidata="Q29962" start="31024" end="31030" title="Assiut" label="Assiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q310117" start="31050" end="31055" title="Minya, Egypt" label="Minya"/>
<link wikidata="Q771345" start="31078" end="31084" title="Helwan" label="Helwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="31129" end="31134" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973889" start="31186" end="31204" title="Qasr al-Nil Bridge" label="Qasr al-Nil Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q996111" start="31214" end="31232" title="6th October Bridge" label="6th October Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949511" start="31242" end="31259" title="Boulak Bridge" label="Abu El Ela Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063565" start="31318" end="31331" title="Imbaba Bridge" label="Imbaba Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q223587" start="31472" end="31480" title="Mansoura" label="Mansoura"/>
<link wikidata="Q189383" start="31634" end="31642" title="Damietta" label="Damietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189383" start="31662" end="31670" title="Damietta" label="Damietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629102" start="31784" end="31809" title="Source of the Nile Bridge" label="Source of the Nile Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q983748" start="31811" end="31816" title="Jinja District" label="Jinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q983748" start="31854" end="31859" title="Jinja District" label="Jinja"/>
<link wikidata="Q501709" start="31888" end="31901" title="Jinja, Uganda" label="Jinja, Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967735" start="31912" end="31929" title="Owen Falls" label="Owen Falls Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373629" start="31948" end="31954" title="Karuma" label="Karuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986717" start="32006" end="32042" title="Bujagali Hydroelectric Power Station" label="Bujagali Hydroelectric Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348437" start="32045" end="32066" title="Egyptian Public Works" label="Egyptian Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406092" start="32069" end="32102" title="Kiira Hydroelectric Power Station" label="Kiira Hydroelectric Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822832" start="32105" end="32137" title="Water politics in the Nile Basin" label="Water politics in the Nile Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921988" start="32140" end="32150" title="Merowe Dam" label="Merowe Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q488982" start="32153" end="32190" title="Nalubaale Hydroelectric Power Station" label="Nalubaale Hydroelectric Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q855630" start="32193" end="32212" title="Orders of magnitude (length)" label="Orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q16661282" start="32215" end="32226" title="Vid Flumina" label="Vid Flumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860428" start="32301" end="32314" title="The River War" label="The River War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="32329" end="32346" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="32409" end="32427" title="Battle of Omdurman" label="Battle of Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803716" start="32524" end="32533" title="Tim Jeal" label="Jeal, Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="33558" end="33576" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="33724" end="33750" title="National Library of Israel" label="National Library of Israel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21245" wikidata="Q207011" url="?curid=21245" title="Neuroscience">
<text>Neuroscience is the scientific study of the nervous system (the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nervous system), its functions, and its disorders. It is a multidisciplinary science that combines physiology, anatomy, molecular biology, developmental biology, cytology, psychology, physics, computer science, chemistry, medicine, statistics, and mathematical modeling to understand the fundamental and emergent properties of neurons, glia and neural circuits. The understanding of the biological basis of learning, memory, behavior, perception, and consciousness has been described by Eric Kandel as the &quot;epic challenge&quot; of the biological sciences.

The scope of neuroscience has broadened over time to include different approaches used to study the nervous system at different scales. The techniques used by neuroscientists have expanded enormously, from molecular and cellular studies of individual neurons to imaging of sensory, motor and cognitive tasks in the brain.

==History==
The earliest study of the nervous system dates to ancient Egypt. Trepanation, the surgical practice of either drilling or scraping a hole into the skull for the purpose of curing head injuries or mental disorders, or relieving cranial pressure, was first recorded during the Neolithic period. Manuscripts dating to 1700 BC indicate that the Egyptians had some knowledge about symptoms of brain damage.

Early views on the function of the brain regarded it to be a &quot;cranial stuffing&quot; of sorts. In Egypt, from the late Middle Kingdom onwards, the brain was regularly removed in preparation for mummification. It was believed at the time that the heart was the seat of intelligence. According to Herodotus, the first step of mummification was to &quot;take a crooked piece of iron, and with it draw out the brain through the nostrils, thus getting rid of a portion, while the skull is cleared of the rest by rinsing with drugs.&quot;

The view that the heart was the source of consciousness was not challenged until the time of the Greek physician Hippocrates. He believed that the brain was not only involved with sensation—since most specialized organs (e.g., eyes, ears, tongue) are located in the head near the brain—but was also the seat of intelligence. Plato also speculated that the brain was the seat of the rational part of the soul. Aristotle, however, believed the heart was the center of intelligence and that the brain regulated the amount of heat from the heart. This view was generally accepted until the Roman physician Galen, a follower of Hippocrates and physician to Roman gladiators, observed that his patients lost their mental faculties when they had sustained damage to their brains.

Abulcasis, Averroes, Avicenna, Avenzoar, and Maimonides, active in the Medieval Muslim world, described a number of medical problems related to the brain. In Renaissance Europe, Vesalius (1514–1564), René Descartes (1596–1650), Thomas Willis (1621–1675) and Jan Swammerdam (1637–1680) also made several contributions to neuroscience.
Luigi Galvani&#x27;s pioneering work in the late 1700s set the stage for studying the electrical excitability of muscles and neurons. In 1843 Emil du Bois-Reymond demonstrated the electrical nature of the nerve signal, whose speed Hermann von Helmholtz proceeded to measure, and in 1875 Richard Caton found electrical phenomena in the cerebral hemispheres of rabbits and monkeys. Adolf Beck published in 1890 similar observations of spontaneous electrical activity of the brain of rabbits and dogs. Studies of the brain became more sophisticated after the invention of the microscope and the development of a staining procedure by Camillo Golgi during the late 1890s. The procedure used a silver chromate salt to reveal the intricate structures of individual neurons. His technique was used by Santiago Ramón y Cajal and led to the formation of the neuron doctrine, the hypothesis that the functional unit of the brain is the neuron. Golgi and Ramón y Cajal shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 for their extensive observations, descriptions, and categorizations of neurons throughout the brain.

In parallel with this research, in 1815 Jean Pierre Flourens induced localized lesions of the brain in living animals to observe their effects on motricity, sensibility and behavior. Work with brain-damaged patients by Marc Dax in 1836 and Paul Broca in 1865 suggested that certain regions of the brain were responsible for certain functions. At the time, these findings were seen as a confirmation of Franz Joseph Gall&#x27;s theory that language was localized and that certain psychological functions were localized in specific areas of the cerebral cortex. The localization of function hypothesis was supported by observations of epileptic patients conducted by John Hughlings Jackson, who correctly inferred the organization of the motor cortex by watching the progression of seizures through the body. Carl Wernicke further developed the theory of the specialization of specific brain structures in language comprehension and production. Modern research through neuroimaging techniques, still uses the Brodmann cerebral cytoarchitectonic map (referring to the study of cell structure) anatomical definitions from this era in continuing to show that distinct areas of the cortex are activated in the execution of specific tasks.

During the 20th century, neuroscience began to be recognized as a distinct academic discipline in its own right, rather than as studies of the nervous system within other disciplines. Eric Kandel and collaborators have cited David Rioch, Francis O. Schmitt, and Stephen Kuffler as having played critical roles in establishing the field. Rioch originated the integration of basic anatomical and physiological research with clinical psychiatry at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, starting in the 1950s. During the same period, Schmitt established a neuroscience research program within the Biology Department at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, bringing together biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics. The first freestanding neuroscience department (then called Psychobiology) was founded in 1964 at the University of California, Irvine by James L. McGaugh. This was followed by the Department of Neurobiology at Harvard Medical School, which was founded in 1966 by Stephen Kuffler.
In the process of treating epilepsy, Wilder Penfield produced maps of the location of various functions (motor, sensory, memory, vision) in the brain. He summarized his findings in a 1950 book called &quot;The Cerebral Cortex of Man&quot;. Wilder Penfield and his co-investigators Edwin Boldrey and Theodore Rasmussen are considered to be the originators of the cortical homunculus.

The understanding of neurons and of nervous system function became increasingly precise and molecular during the 20th century. For example, in 1952, Alan Lloyd Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley presented a mathematical model for the transmission of electrical signals in neurons of the giant axon of a squid, which they called &quot;action potentials&quot;, and how they are initiated and propagated, known as the Hodgkin–Huxley model. In 1961–1962, Richard FitzHugh and J. Nagumo simplified Hodgkin–Huxley, in what is called the FitzHugh–Nagumo model. In 1962, Bernard Katz modeled neurotransmission across the space between neurons known as synapses. Beginning in 1966, Eric Kandel and collaborators examined biochemical changes in neurons associated with learning and memory storage in &quot;Aplysia&quot;. In 1981 Catherine Morris and Harold Lecar combined these models in the Morris–Lecar model. Such increasingly quantitative work gave rise to numerous biological neuron models and models of neural computation.

As a result of the increasing interest about the nervous system, several prominent neuroscience organizations have been formed to provide a forum to all neuroscientists during the 20th century. For example, the International Brain Research Organization was founded in 1961, the International Society for Neurochemistry in 1963, the European Brain and Behaviour Society in 1968, and the Society for Neuroscience in 1969. Recently, the application of neuroscience research results has also given rise to applied disciplines as neuroeconomics, neuroeducation, neuroethics, and neurolaw.

Over time, brain research has gone through philosophical, experimental, and theoretical phases, with work on neural implants and brain simulation predicted to be important in the future.

==Modern neuroscience==

The scientific study of the nervous system increased significantly during the second half of the twentieth century, principally due to advances in molecular biology, electrophysiology, and computational neuroscience. This has allowed neuroscientists to study the nervous system in all its aspects: how it is structured, how it works, how it develops, how it malfunctions, and how it can be changed.

For example, it has become possible to understand, in much detail, the complex processes occurring within a single neuron. Neurons are cells specialized for communication. They are able to communicate with neurons and other cell types through specialized junctions called synapses, at which electrical or electrochemical signals can be transmitted from one cell to another. Many neurons extrude a long thin filament of axoplasm called an axon, which may extend to distant parts of the body and are capable of rapidly carrying electrical signals, influencing the activity of other neurons, muscles, or glands at their termination points. A nervous &quot;system&quot; emerges from the assemblage of neurons that are connected to each other in neural circuits, and networks.

The vertebrate nervous system can be split into two parts: the central nervous system (defined as the brain and spinal cord), and the peripheral nervous system. In many species—including all vertebrates—the nervous system is the most complex organ system in the body, with most of the complexity residing in the brain. The human brain alone contains around one hundred billion neurons and one hundred trillion synapses; it consists of thousands of distinguishable substructures, connected to each other in synaptic networks whose intricacies have only begun to be unraveled. At least one out of three of the approximately 20,000 genes belonging to the human genome is expressed mainly in the brain.

Due to the high degree of plasticity of the human brain, the structure of its synapses and their resulting functions change throughout life.

Making sense of the nervous system&#x27;s dynamic complexity is a formidable research challenge. Ultimately, neuroscientists would like to understand every aspect of the nervous system, including how it works, how it develops, how it malfunctions, and how it can be altered or repaired. Analysis of the nervous system is therefore performed at multiple levels, ranging from the molecular and cellular levels to the systems and cognitive levels. The specific topics that form the main focus of research change over time, driven by an ever-expanding base of knowledge and the availability of increasingly sophisticated technical methods. Improvements in technology have been the primary drivers of progress. Developments in electron microscopy, computer science, electronics, functional neuroimaging, and genetics and genomics have all been major drivers of progress.

Advances in the classification of brain cells have been enabled by electrophysiological recording, single-cell genetic sequencing, and high-quality microscopy, which have combined into a single method pipeline called patch-sequencing in which all three methods are simultaneously applied using miniature tools. The efficiency of this method and the large amounts of data that is generated has allowed researchers to make some general conclusions about cell types; for example that the human and mouse brain have different versions of fundamentally the same cell types.

===Molecular and cellular neuroscience===
Basic questions addressed in molecular neuroscience include the mechanisms by which neurons express and respond to molecular signals and how axons form complex connectivity patterns. At this level, tools from molecular biology and genetics are used to understand how neurons develop and how genetic changes affect biological functions. The morphology, molecular identity, and physiological characteristics of neurons and how they relate to different types of behavior are also of considerable interest.

Questions addressed in cellular neuroscience include the mechanisms of how neurons process signals physiologically and electrochemically. These questions include how signals are processed by neurites and somas and how neurotransmitters and electrical signals are used to process information in a neuron. Neurites are thin extensions from a neuronal cell body, consisting of dendrites (specialized to receive synaptic inputs from other neurons) and axons (specialized to conduct nerve impulses called action potentials). Somas are the cell bodies of the neurons and contain the nucleus.

Another major area of cellular neuroscience is the investigation of the development of the nervous system. Questions include the patterning and regionalization of the nervous system, axonal and dendritic development, trophic interactions, synapse formation and the implication of fractones in neural stem cells, differentiation of neurons and glia (neurogenesis and gliogenesis), and neuronal migration.

Computational neurogenetic modeling is concerned with the development of dynamic neuronal models for modeling brain functions with respect to genes and dynamic interactions between genes, on the cellular level (Computational Neurogenetic Modeling (CNGM) can also be used to model neural systems).

===Neural circuits and systems===
Systems neuroscience research centers on the structural and functional architecture of the developing human brain, and the functions of large-scale brain networks, or functionally-connected systems within the brain. Alongside brain development, systems neuroscience also focuses on how the structure and function of the brain enables or restricts the processing of sensory information, using learned mental models of the world, to motivate behavior.

Questions in systems neuroscience include how neural circuits are formed and used anatomically and physiologically to produce functions such as reflexes, multisensory integration, motor coordination, circadian rhythms, emotional responses, learning, and memory. In other words, this area of research studies how connections are made and morphed in the brain, and the effect it has on human sensation, movement, attention, inhibitory control, decision-making, reasoning, memory formation, reward, and emotion regulation.

Specific areas of interest for the field include observations of how the structure of neural circuits effect skill acquisition, how specialized regions of the brain develop and change (neuroplasticity), and the development of brain atlases, or wiring diagrams of individual developing brains.

The related fields of neuroethology and neuropsychology address the question of how neural substrates underlie specific animal and human behaviors. Neuroendocrinology and psychoneuroimmunology examine interactions between the nervous system and the endocrine and immune systems, respectively. Despite many advancements, the way that networks of neurons perform complex cognitive processes and behaviors is still poorly understood.

===Cognitive and behavioral neuroscience===
Cognitive neuroscience addresses the questions of how psychological functions are produced by neural circuitry. The emergence of powerful new measurement techniques such as neuroimaging (e.g., fMRI, PET, SPECT), EEG, MEG, electrophysiology, optogenetics and human genetic analysis combined with sophisticated experimental techniques from cognitive psychology allows neuroscientists and psychologists to address abstract questions such as how cognition and emotion are mapped to specific neural substrates. Although many studies hold a reductionist stance looking for the neurobiological basis of cognitive phenomena, recent research shows that there is an interplay between neuroscientific findings and conceptual research, soliciting and integrating both perspectives. For example, neuroscience research on empathy solicited an interdisciplinary debate involving philosophy, psychology and psychopathology. Moreover, the neuroscientific identification of multiple memory systems related to different brain areas has challenged the idea of memory as a literal reproduction of the past, supporting a view of memory as a generative, constructive and dynamic process.

Neuroscience is also allied with the social and behavioral sciences, as well as with nascent interdisciplinary fields. Examples of such alliances include neuroeconomics, decision theory, social neuroscience, and neuromarketing to address complex questions about interactions of the brain with its environment. A study into consumer responses for example uses EEG to investigate neural correlates associated with narrative transportation into stories about energy efficiency.

===Computational neuroscience===
Questions in computational neuroscience can span a wide range of levels of traditional analysis, such as development, structure, and cognitive functions of the brain. Research in this field utilizes mathematical models, theoretical analysis, and computer simulation to describe and verify biologically plausible neurons and nervous systems. For example, biological neuron models are mathematical descriptions of spiking neurons which can be used to describe both the behavior of single neurons as well as the dynamics of neural networks. Computational neuroscience is often referred to as theoretical neuroscience.

===Neuroscience and medicine===

====Clinical neuroscience====
Neurology, psychiatry, neurosurgery, psychosurgery, anesthesiology and pain medicine, neuropathology, neuroradiology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, clinical neurophysiology, addiction medicine, and sleep medicine are some medical specialties that specifically address the diseases of the nervous system. These terms also refer to clinical disciplines involving diagnosis and treatment of these diseases.

Neurology works with diseases of the central and peripheral nervous systems, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and stroke, and their medical treatment. Psychiatry focuses on affective, behavioral, cognitive, and perceptual disorders. Anesthesiology focuses on perception of pain, and pharmacologic alteration of consciousness. Neuropathology focuses upon the classification and underlying pathogenic mechanisms of central and peripheral nervous system and muscle diseases, with an emphasis on morphologic, microscopic, and chemically observable alterations. Neurosurgery and psychosurgery work primarily with surgical treatment of diseases of the central and peripheral nervous systems.

Neuroscience underlies the development of various neurotherapy methods to treat diseases of the nervous system.

====Translational research====

Recently, the boundaries between various specialties have blurred, as they are all influenced by basic research in neuroscience. For example, brain imaging enables objective biological insight into mental illnesses, which can lead to faster diagnosis, more accurate prognosis, and improved monitoring of patient progress over time.

Integrative neuroscience describes the effort to combine models and information from multiple levels of research to develop a coherent model of the nervous system. For example, brain imaging coupled with physiological numerical models and theories of fundamental mechanisms may shed light on psychiatric disorders.

Another important area of translational research is brain–computer interfaces (BCIs), or machines that are able to communicate and influence the brain. They are currently being researched for their potential to repair neural systems and restore certain cognitive functions. However, some ethical considerations have to be dealt with before they are accepted.

==Major branches==
Modern neuroscience education and research activities can be very roughly categorized into the following major branches, based on the subject and scale of the system in examination as well as distinct experimental or curricular approaches. Individual neuroscientists, however, often work on questions that span several distinct subfields.

== Careers in neuroscience ==
Source:
=== Bachelor&#x27;s Level ===
=== Master&#x27;s Level ===
=== Advanced Degree ===
==Neuroscience organizations==

The largest professional neuroscience organization is the Society for Neuroscience (SFN), which is based in the United States but includes many members from other countries. Since its founding in 1969 the SFN has grown steadily: as of 2010 it recorded 40,290 members from 83 countries. Annual meetings, held each year in a different American city, draw attendance from researchers, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduates, as well as educational institutions, funding agencies, publishers, and hundreds of businesses that supply products used in research.

Other major organizations devoted to neuroscience include the International Brain Research Organization (IBRO), which holds its meetings in a country from a different part of the world each year, and the Federation of European Neuroscience Societies (FENS), which holds a meeting in a different European city every two years. FENS comprises a set of 32 national-level organizations, including the British Neuroscience Association, the German Neuroscience Society (), and the French &quot;&quot;. The first National Honor Society in Neuroscience, Nu Rho Psi, was founded in 2006. Numerous youth neuroscience societies which support undergraduates, graduates and early career researchers also exist, such as Simply Neuroscience and Project Encephalon.

In 2013, the BRAIN Initiative was announced in the US. The International Brain Initiative was created in 2017, currently integrated by more than seven national-level brain research initiatives (US, Europe, Allen Institute, Japan, China, Australia, Canada, Korea, and Israel) spanning four continents.

===Public education and outreach===
In addition to conducting traditional research in laboratory settings, neuroscientists have also been involved in the promotion of awareness and knowledge about the nervous system among the general public and government officials. Such promotions have been done by both individual neuroscientists and large organizations. For example, individual neuroscientists have promoted neuroscience education among young students by organizing the International Brain Bee, which is an academic competition for high school or secondary school students worldwide. In the United States, large organizations such as the Society for Neuroscience have promoted neuroscience education by developing a primer called Brain Facts, collaborating with public school teachers to develop Neuroscience Core Concepts for K-12 teachers and students, and cosponsoring a campaign with the Dana Foundation called Brain Awareness Week to increase public awareness about the progress and benefits of brain research. In Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research&#x27;s (CIHR) Canadian National Brain Bee is held annually at McMaster University.

Neuroscience educators formed a Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience (FUN) in 1992 to share best practices and provide travel awards for undergraduates presenting at Society for Neuroscience meetings.

Neuroscientists have also collaborated with other education experts to study and refine educational techniques to optimize learning among students, an emerging field called educational neuroscience. Federal agencies in the United States, such as the National Institute of Health (NIH) and National Science Foundation (NSF), have also funded research that pertains to best practices in teaching and learning of neuroscience concepts.

==Engineering applications of neuroscience==

===Neuromorphic computer chips===
Neuromorphic engineering is a branch of neuroscience that deals with creating functional physical models of neurons for the purposes of useful computation. The emergent computational properties of neuromorphic computers are fundamentally different from conventional computers in the sense that they are complex systems, and that the computational components are interrelated with no central processor.

One example of such a computer is the SpiNNaker supercomputer.

Sensors can also be made smart with neuromorphic technology. An example of this is the Event Camera&#x27;s BrainScaleS (brain-inspired Multiscale Computation in Neuromorphic Hybrid Systems), a hybrid analog neuromorphic supercomputer located at Heidelberg University in Germany. It was developed as part of the Human Brain Project&#x27;s neuromorphic computing platform and is the complement to the SpiNNaker supercomputer, which is based on digital technology. The architecture used in BrainScaleS mimics biological neurons and their connections on a physical level; additionally, since the components are made of silicon, these model neurons operate on average 864 times (24 hours of real time is 100 seconds in the machine simulation) that of their biological counterparts.

Recent advances in neuromorphic microchip technology have led a group of scientists to create an artificial neuron that can replace real neurons in diseases.

==Nobel prizes related to neuroscience==

==See also==

* List of neuroscience databases
* List of neuroscience journals
* List of neuroscientists
* Neurosemiotics
* Outline of brain mapping
* Outline of the human brain
* List of regions in the human brain
* Gut–brain axis
* Connectomics
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Squire, L. &quot;et al.&quot; (2012). &quot;Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th edition&quot;. Academic Press; 
* Byrne and Roberts (2004). &quot;From Molecules to Networks&quot;. Academic Press; 
* Sanes, Reh, Harris (2005). &quot;Development of the Nervous System, 2nd edition&quot;. Academic Press; 
* Siegel &quot;et al.&quot; (2005). &quot;Basic Neurochemistry, 7th edition&quot;. Academic Press; 
* Rieke, F. &quot;et al.&quot; (1999). &quot;Spikes: Exploring the Neural Code&quot;. The MIT Press; Reprint edition 
* section.47 Neuroscience 2nd ed. Dale Purves, George J. Augustine, David Fitzpatrick, Lawrence C. Katz, Anthony-Samuel LaMantia, James O. McNamara, S. Mark Williams. Published by Sinauer Associates, Inc., 2001.
* section.18 Basic Neurochemistry: Molecular, Cellular, and Medical Aspects 6th ed. by George J. Siegel, Bernard W. Agranoff, R. Wayne Albers, Stephen K. Fisher, Michael D. Uhler, editors. Published by Lippincott, Williams &amp; Wilkins, 1999.
* Damasio, A. R. (1994). &quot;Descartes&#x27; Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. &quot; New York, Avon Books. (Hardcover) (Paperback)
* Gardner, H. (1976). &quot;The Shattered Mind: The Person After Brain Damage. &quot; New York, Vintage Books, 1976 
* Goldstein, K. (2000). &quot;The Organism. &quot; New York, Zone Books. (Hardcover) (Paperback)
* Subhash Kak, The Architecture of Knowledge: Quantum Mechanics, Neuroscience, Computers and Consciousness, Motilal Banarsidass, 2004, 
* Llinas R. (2001). &quot;I of the vortex: from neurons to self&quot; MIT Press. (Hardcover) (Paperback)
* Luria, A. R. (1997). &quot;The Man with a Shattered World: The History of a Brain Wound. &quot; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press. (Hardcover) (Paperback)
* Luria, A. R. (1998). &quot;The Mind of a Mnemonist: A Little Book About A Vast Memory. &quot; New York, Basic Books, Inc. 
* Medina, J. (2008). &quot;Brain Rules: 12 Principles for Surviving and Thriving at Work, Home, and School. &quot;Seattle, Pear Press. (Hardcover with DVD)
* Pinker, S. (1999). &quot;How the Mind Works. &quot; W. W. Norton &amp; Company. 
* Pinker, S. (2002). &quot;The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. &quot; Viking Adult. 
* Penrose, R., Hameroff, S. R., Kak, S., &amp; Tao, L. (2011). Consciousness and the universe: Quantum physics, evolution, brain &amp; mind. Cambridge, MA: Cosmology Science Publishers.
* Ramachandran, V. S. (1998). &quot;Phantoms in the Brain&quot;. New York, HarperCollins. (Paperback)
* Rose, S. (2006). &quot;21st Century Brain: Explaining, Mending &amp; Manipulating the Mind&quot; (Paperback)
* Sacks, O. &quot;The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat&quot;. Summit Books (Hardcover) (Paperback)
* Sacks, O. (1990). &quot;Awakenings. &quot; New York, Vintage Books. (See also Oliver Sacks) (Hardcover) (Paperback)
* Encyclopedia:Neuroscience Scholarpedia Expert articles
* Sternberg, E. (2007) &quot;Are You a Machine? The Brain, the Mind and What it Means to be Human. &quot; Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books.
* Churchland, P. S. (2011) &quot;Braintrust: What Neuroscience Tells Us about Morality&quot; . Princeton University Press. 


==External links==

* 
* Neuroscience Information Framework (NIF)
* American Society for Neurochemistry
* British Neuroscience Association (BNA)
* Federation of European Neuroscience Societies
* Neuroscience Online (electronic neuroscience textbook)
* HHMI Neuroscience lecture series - &quot;Making Your Mind: Molecules, Motion, and Memory&quot; 
* &quot;Société des Neurosciences&quot;
* Neuroscience For Kids</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="0" end="12" title="Neuroscience" label="Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="20" end="36" title="science" label="scientific study"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="44" end="58" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="64" end="69" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="71" end="82" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="88" end="113" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="158" end="175" title="Multidisciplinary approach" label="multidisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="198" end="208" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="210" end="217" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="219" end="236" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213713" start="238" end="259" title="developmental biology" label="developmental biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141" start="261" end="269" title="cytology" label="cytology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="271" end="281" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="283" end="290" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="292" end="308" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="310" end="319" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="321" end="329" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="331" end="341" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="347" end="368" title="Mathematical Modeling" label="mathematical modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="426" end="432" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="435" end="439" title="glia" label="glia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43283" start="444" end="458" title="neural circuit" label="neural circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="506" end="514" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="516" end="522" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="524" end="532" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="534" end="544" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="550" end="563" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q155529" start="586" end="597" title="Eric Kandel" label="Eric Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="639" end="658" title="Biology" label="biological sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337803" start="820" end="834" title="neuroscientist" label="neuroscientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141" start="881" end="889" title="cell biology" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="923" end="930" title="neuroimaging" label="imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142126" start="934" end="941" title="Sensory neuron" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="943" end="948" title="Motor neuron" label="motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="953" end="962" title="Cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1046" end="1059" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q472953" start="1061" end="1072" title="Trepanation" label="Trepanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="1143" end="1148" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="1192" end="1208" title="Mental illness" label="mental disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1271" end="1280" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1311" end="1318" title="1700 BC" label="1700 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="1337" end="1346" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="1384" end="1396" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1502" end="1507" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="1523" end="1537" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="1598" end="1611" title="Mummy" label="mummification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="1650" end="1655" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="1699" end="1708" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="1879" end="1884" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q440317" start="2035" end="2040" title="Ancient Greek medicine" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="2051" end="2062" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="2263" end="2268" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2347" end="2356" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247627" start="2524" end="2529" title="Medicine in ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="2540" end="2545" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="2590" end="2606" title="Gladiator" label="Roman gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q311495" start="2712" end="2721" title="Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi" label="Abulcasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="2723" end="2731" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="2733" end="2741" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q470914" start="2743" end="2751" title="Ibn Zuhr" label="Avenzoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="2757" end="2767" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2870" end="2888" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="2890" end="2898" title="Vesalius" label="Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2912" end="2926" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q452335" start="2940" end="2953" title="Thomas Willis" label="Thomas Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336794" start="2970" end="2984" title="Jan Swammerdam" label="Jan Swammerdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589" start="3046" end="3059" title="Luigi Galvani" label="Luigi Galvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q389844" start="3132" end="3155" title="Cell excitability" label="electrical excitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q76571" start="3188" end="3208" title="Emil du Bois-Reymond" label="Emil du Bois-Reymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="3277" end="3298" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q322405" start="3333" end="3346" title="Richard Caton" label="Richard Caton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684058" start="3426" end="3436" title="Adolf Beck (physiologist)" label="Adolf Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="3619" end="3629" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="3655" end="3673" title="staining" label="staining procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q150630" start="3677" end="3690" title="Camillo Golgi" label="Camillo Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q416277" start="3735" end="3750" title="silver chromate" label="silver chromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="3805" end="3811" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q150526" start="3840" end="3862" title="Santiago Ramón y Cajal" label="Santiago Ramón y Cajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108577" start="3895" end="3910" title="neuron doctrine" label="neuron doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="4015" end="4052" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q964160" start="4203" end="4223" title="Jean Pierre Flourens" label="Jean Pierre Flourens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507524" start="4382" end="4390" title="Marc Dax" label="Marc Dax"/>
<link wikidata="Q311276" start="4403" end="4413" title="Paul Broca" label="Paul Broca"/>
<link wikidata="Q57511" start="4565" end="4582" title="Franz Joseph Gall" label="Franz Joseph Gall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="4642" end="4665" title="mental process" label="psychological functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="4706" end="4721" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868509" start="4727" end="4751" title="Functional specialization (brain)" label="localization of function"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="4796" end="4805" title="epilepsy" label="epileptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q611821" start="4828" end="4850" title="John Hughlings Jackson" label="John Hughlings Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="4899" end="4911" title="motor cortex" label="motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965" start="4970" end="4983" title="Carl Wernicke" label="Carl Wernicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038773" start="5130" end="5142" title="history of neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q924684" start="5170" end="5178" title="Brodmann areas" label="Brodmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009543" start="5179" end="5209" title="Cytoarchitectonics of the cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cytoarchitectonic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="5237" end="5251" title="Organelle" label="cell structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q155529" start="5581" end="5592" title="Eric Kandel" label="Eric Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713979" start="5622" end="5633" title="David Rioch" label="David Rioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q344882" start="5635" end="5653" title="Francis O. Schmitt" label="Francis O. Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q445338" start="5659" end="5674" title="Stephen Kuffler" label="Stephen Kuffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965939" start="5846" end="5884" title="Walter Reed Army Institute of Research" label="Walter Reed Army Institute of Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="6022" end="6059" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139321" start="6263" end="6279" title="James McGaugh" label="James L. McGaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402048" start="6306" end="6332" title="Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School" label="Department of Neurobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="6336" end="6358" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="6433" end="6441" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q711394" start="6443" end="6458" title="Wilder Penfield" label="Wilder Penfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143310" start="6768" end="6787" title="cortical homunculus" label="cortical homunculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193650" start="6939" end="6957" title="Alan Lloyd Hodgkin" label="Alan Lloyd Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104607" start="6962" end="6975" title="Andrew Huxley" label="Andrew Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="6988" end="7006" title="mathematical model" label="mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="7115" end="7132" title="action potentials" label="action potentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q995215" start="7196" end="7216" title="Hodgkin–Huxley model" label="Hodgkin–Huxley model"/>
<link wikidata="Q502563" start="7312" end="7333" title="FitzHugh–Nagumo model" label="FitzHugh–Nagumo model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4517" start="7344" end="7356" title="Bernard Katz" label="Bernard Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q969316" start="7365" end="7382" title="neurotransmission" label="neurotransmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="7425" end="7433" title="synapses" label="synapses"/>
<link wikidata="Q136564" start="7577" end="7584" title="Aplysia" label="Aplysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914151" start="7663" end="7681" title="Morris–Lecar model" label="Morris–Lecar model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651163" start="7741" end="7764" title="biological neuron model" label="biological neuron model"/>
<link wikidata="Q8588916" start="7770" end="7798" title="models of neural computation" label="models of neural computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048819" start="8012" end="8053" title="International Brain Research Organization" label="International Brain Research Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053383" start="8079" end="8119" title="International Society for Neurochemistry" label="International Society for Neurochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3619149" start="8133" end="8169" title="European Brain and Behaviour Society" label="European Brain and Behaviour Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127934" start="8187" end="8211" title="Society for Neuroscience" label="Society for Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="8303" end="8322" title="Applied science" label="applied disciplines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045712" start="8326" end="8340" title="neuroeconomics" label="neuroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614722" start="8342" end="8356" title="Educational neuroscience" label="neuroeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186272" start="8358" end="8369" title="neuroethics" label="neuroethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002313" start="8375" end="8383" title="neurolaw" label="neurolaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="8603" end="8619" title="scientific method" label="scientific study"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="8746" end="8763" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="8765" end="8782" title="electrophysiology" label="electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037925" start="8788" end="8814" title="computational neuroscience" label="computational neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="8862" end="8876" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="9114" end="9120" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="9271" end="9278" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874819" start="9418" end="9426" title="axoplasm" label="axoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="9437" end="9441" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43283" start="9740" end="9754" title="neural circuit" label="neural circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619446" start="9761" end="9769" title="Neural network (biology)" label="networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="9835" end="9857" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="9874" end="9879" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="9884" end="9895" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="9906" end="9931" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="10006" end="10026" title="Complex system" label="complex organ system"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="10095" end="10106" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="10498" end="10508" title="neuroplasticity" label="plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="11336" end="11355" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="11357" end="11373" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="11375" end="11386" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="11388" end="11411" title="functional neuroimaging" label="functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="11417" end="11425" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="11430" end="11438" title="genomics" label="genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243699" start="11515" end="11525" title="brain cell" label="brain cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917269" start="11580" end="11610" title="Single-cell sequencing" label="single-cell genetic sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473737" start="11698" end="11714" title="patch-sequencing" label="patch-sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896018" start="12122" end="12144" title="molecular neuroscience" label="molecular neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="12234" end="12238" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="12302" end="12319" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="12324" end="12332" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="12433" end="12443" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058372" start="12620" end="12641" title="cellular neuroscience" label="cellular neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q210973" start="12688" end="12695" title="cell signaling" label="signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="12815" end="12831" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="12946" end="12955" title="Perikaryon" label="cell body"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="12971" end="12979" title="dendrite" label="dendrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="13045" end="13049" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="13097" end="13113" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345738" start="13256" end="13289" title="development of the nervous system" label="development of the nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q127698596" start="13313" end="13343" title="Regional specification" label="patterning and regionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q408378" start="13401" end="13421" title="Growth factor" label="trophic interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813773" start="13423" end="13440" title="Synaptogenesis" label="synapse formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045446" start="13464" end="13472" title="fractone" label="fractone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944097" start="13477" end="13493" title="neural stem cell" label="neural stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q210861" start="13496" end="13511" title="Cellular differentiation" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456827" start="13533" end="13545" title="neurogenesis" label="neurogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14908218" start="13550" end="13561" title="gliogenesis" label="gliogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345738" start="13568" end="13586" title="neuronal migration" label="neuronal migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157333" start="13589" end="13624" title="Computational neurogenetic modeling" label="Computational neurogenetic modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617516" start="13921" end="13941" title="Systems neuroscience" label="Systems neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304076" start="14057" end="14082" title="large-scale brain network" label="large-scale brain network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851867" start="14321" end="14333" title="mental model" label="mental model"/>
<link wikidata="Q43283" start="14418" end="14432" title="neural circuit" label="neural circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="14516" end="14522" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166073" start="14526" end="14550" title="multisensory integration" label="multisensory integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q852401" start="14552" end="14570" title="motor coordination" label="motor coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="14572" end="14588" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="14591" end="14610" title="emotion" label="emotional responses"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="14612" end="14620" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="14626" end="14632" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="15078" end="15093" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336265" start="15209" end="15222" title="neuroethology" label="neuroethology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3872" start="15227" end="15242" title="neuropsychology" label="neuropsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="15307" end="15313" title="Ethology" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="15318" end="15323" title="human behavior" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335366" start="15335" end="15353" title="Neuroendocrinology" label="Neuroendocrinology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500332" start="15358" end="15379" title="psychoneuroimmunology" label="psychoneuroimmunology"/>
<link wikidata="Q162606" start="15436" end="15445" title="endocrinology" label="endocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="15450" end="15456" title="immunology" label="immune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="15556" end="15574" title="cognition" label="cognitive processe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138951" start="15663" end="15685" title="Cognitive neuroscience" label="Cognitive neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="15717" end="15740" title="mental process" label="psychological functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619446" start="15757" end="15773" title="biological neural network" label="neural circuitry"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="15836" end="15848" title="neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="15856" end="15860" title="fMRI" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="15862" end="15865" title="Positron emission tomography" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="15867" end="15872" title="SPECT" label="SPECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="15875" end="15878" title="electroencephalography" label="EEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q384188" start="15880" end="15883" title="Magnetoencephalography" label="MEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="15885" end="15902" title="electrophysiology" label="electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q781492" start="15904" end="15916" title="optogenetics" label="optogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="15921" end="15943" title="Human genome" label="human genetic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="15972" end="15995" title="experimental techniques" label="experimental techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="16001" end="16021" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337803" start="16029" end="16043" title="neuroscientist" label="neuroscientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="16049" end="16061" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="16703" end="16709" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="16866" end="16872" title="social science" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919817" start="16877" end="16896" title="behavioral sciences" label="behavioral sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045712" start="16983" end="16997" title="neuroeconomics" label="neuroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="16999" end="17014" title="decision theory" label="decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111072" start="17016" end="17035" title="social neuroscience" label="social neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q516337" start="17041" end="17055" title="neuromarketing" label="neuromarketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835298" start="17241" end="17265" title="Transportation theory (psychology)" label="narrative transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="17285" end="17302" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345738" start="17443" end="17454" title="developmental neuroscience" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q948647" start="17456" end="17465" title="neuroanatomy" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138951" start="17471" end="17490" title="cognitive neuroscience" label="cognitive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="17537" end="17556" title="mathematical models" label="mathematical models"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="17584" end="17603" title="computer simulation" label="computer simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651163" start="17692" end="17716" title="biological neuron models" label="biological neuron models"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619446" start="17859" end="17874" title="neural networks (biology)" label="neural networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q621261" start="18088" end="18101" title="pain medicine" label="pain medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q642836" start="18119" end="18133" title="neuroradiology" label="neuroradiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="18135" end="18148" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189553" start="18150" end="18164" title="otolaryngology" label="otolaryngology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771886" start="18166" end="18190" title="clinical neurophysiology" label="clinical neurophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q55190072" start="18192" end="18210" title="addiction medicine" label="addiction medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744029" start="18216" end="18230" title="sleep medicine" label="sleep medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="18423" end="18432" title="Neurology" label="Neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="18508" end="18537" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="18548" end="18554" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="18585" end="18595" title="Psychiatry" label="Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="18607" end="18616" title="Affect (psychology)" label="affective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="18630" end="18639" title="cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="18645" end="18655" title="perception" label="perceptual"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="18667" end="18681" title="Anesthesiology" label="Anesthesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650750" start="18760" end="18774" title="Neuropathology" label="Neuropathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="18991" end="19003" title="Neurosurgery" label="Neurosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758020" start="19008" end="19021" title="psychosurgery" label="psychosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131726203" start="19171" end="19183" title="neurotherapy" label="neurotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="19363" end="19377" title="basic research" label="basic research"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="19408" end="19421" title="brain imaging" label="brain imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043284" start="19599" end="19623" title="Integrative neuroscience" label="Integrative neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="19967" end="19991" title="brain–computer interface" label="brain–computer interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127934" start="20844" end="20868" title="Society for Neuroscience" label="Society for Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="20898" end="20911" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048819" start="21425" end="21466" title="International Brain Research Organization" label="International Brain Research Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440800" start="21567" end="21612" title="Federation of European Neuroscience Societies" label="Federation of European Neuroscience Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970552" start="21760" end="21792" title="British Neuroscience Association" label="British Neuroscience Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995372" start="21909" end="21919" title="Nu Rho Psi" label="Nu Rho Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955726" start="22127" end="22143" title="BRAIN Initiative" label="BRAIN Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143116" start="22312" end="22318" title="Human Brain Project" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731705" start="22320" end="22335" title="Allen Institute for Brain Science" label="Allen Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136548" start="22337" end="22342" title="Brain/MINDS" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136260" start="22344" end="22349" title="China Brain Project" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257698" start="22570" end="22606" title="public awareness of science" label="promotion of awareness and knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351798" start="22890" end="22913" title="International Brain Bee" label="International Brain Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214723" start="23312" end="23327" title="Dana Foundation" label="Dana Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="23552" end="23571" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614722" start="23951" end="23975" title="educational neuroscience" label="educational neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="24028" end="24056" title="National Institute of Health" label="National Institute of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="24067" end="24094" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981312" start="24292" end="24316" title="Neuromorphic engineering" label="Neuromorphic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979154" start="24381" end="24395" title="physical model" label="physical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="24595" end="24610" title="complex system" label="complex systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576855" start="24733" end="24742" title="SpiNNaker" label="SpiNNaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759931" start="24846" end="24858" title="Event Camera" label="Event Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143116" start="25070" end="25089" title="Human Brain Project" label="Human Brain Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981312" start="25556" end="25568" title="neuromorphic" label="neuromorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335205" start="25754" end="25784" title="List of neuroscience databases" label="List of neuroscience databases"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518223" start="25787" end="25816" title="List of neuroscience journals" label="List of neuroscience journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301349" start="25819" end="25842" title="List of neuroscientists" label="List of neuroscientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q130973651" start="25845" end="25859" title="Neurosemiotics" label="Neurosemiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643456" start="25862" end="25886" title="Outline of brain mapping" label="Outline of brain mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842197" start="25889" end="25915" title="Outline of the human brain" label="Outline of the human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245053" start="25918" end="25952" title="List of regions in the human brain" label="List of regions in the human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077315" start="25955" end="25969" title="Gut–brain axis" label="Gut–brain axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993446" start="25972" end="25984" title="Connectomics" label="Connectomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076913" start="26114" end="26128" title="Academic Press" label="Academic Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="26508" end="26521" title="The MIT Press" label="The MIT Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="27105" end="27115" title="Avon (publishers)" label="Avon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="27237" end="27250" title="Random House" label="Vintage Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q92830" start="27357" end="27368" title="Subhash Kak" label="Subhash Kak"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27517" end="27554" title="I of the vortex: from neurons to self" label="I of the vortex: from neurons to self"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="27694" end="27718" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="27720" end="27744" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034881" start="27876" end="27887" title="Basic Books" label="Basic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282208" start="28105" end="28117" title="W. W. Norton" label="W. W. Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149841" start="28457" end="28478" title="Phantoms in the Brain" label="Phantoms in the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603302" start="28652" end="28690" title="The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat" label="The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q258662" start="28815" end="28827" title="Oliver Sacks" label="Oliver Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106649702" start="28881" end="28893" title="Scholarpedia" label="Scholarpedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21247" wikidata="Q1615" url="?curid=21247" title="Neil Armstrong">
<text>Neil Alden Armstrong (August 5, 1930 – August 25, 2012) was an American astronaut and aeronautical engineer who, in 1969, became the first person to walk on the Moon. He was also a naval aviator, test pilot, and university professor.

Armstrong was born and raised in Wapakoneta, Ohio. He entered Purdue University, studying aeronautical engineering, with the U.S. Navy paying his tuition under the Holloway Plan. He became a midshipman in 1949 and a naval aviator the following year. He saw action in the Korean War, flying the Grumman F9F Panther from the aircraft carrier . After the war, he completed his bachelor&#x27;s degree at Purdue and became a test pilot at the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) High-Speed Flight Station at Edwards Air Force Base in California. He was the project pilot on Century Series fighters and flew the North American X-15 seven times. He was also a participant in the U.S. Air Force&#x27;s Man in Space Soonest and X-20 Dyna-Soar human spaceflight programs.

Armstrong joined the NASA Astronaut Corps in the second group, which was selected in 1962. He made his first spaceflight as command pilot of Gemini 8 in March 1966, becoming NASA&#x27;s first civilian astronaut to fly in space. During this mission with pilot David Scott, he performed the first docking of two spacecraft; the mission was aborted after Armstrong used some of his re-entry control fuel to stabilize a dangerous roll caused by a stuck thruster. During training for Armstrong&#x27;s second and last spaceflight as commander of Apollo 11, he had to eject from the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle moments before a crash.

On July 20, 1969, Armstrong and Apollo 11 Lunar Module (LM) pilot Buzz Aldrin became the first people to land on the Moon, and the next day they spent two and a half hours outside the Lunar Module &quot;Eagle&quot; spacecraft while Michael Collins remained in lunar orbit in the Apollo Command Module &quot;Columbia&quot;. When Armstrong first stepped onto the lunar surface, he famously said: &quot;That&#x27;s one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind.&quot; It was broadcast live to an estimated 530 million viewers worldwide. Apollo 11 was a major U.S. victory in the Space Race, by fulfilling a national goal proposed in 1961 by President John F. Kennedy &quot;of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth&quot; before the end of the decade. Along with Collins and Aldrin, Armstrong was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Richard Nixon and received the 1969 Collier Trophy. President Jimmy Carter presented him with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978, he was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1979, and with his former crewmates received the Congressional Gold Medal in 2009.

After he resigned from NASA in 1971, Armstrong taught in the Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University of Cincinnati until 1979. He served on the Apollo 13 accident investigation and on the Rogers Commission, which investigated the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster. In 2012, Armstrong died because of complications resulting from coronary bypass surgery, at the age of 82.
== Early life and education ==
Armstrong was born near Wapakoneta, Ohio, on August 5, 1930, the son of Viola Louise (née Engel) and Stephen Koenig Armstrong. He was of German, English, Scots-Irish, and Scottish descent. He is a descendant of Clan Armstrong. He had a younger sister, June, and a younger brother, Dean. His father was an auditor for the Ohio state government, and the family moved around the state repeatedly, living in 16 towns over the next 14 years. Armstrong&#x27;s love for flying grew during this time, having started at the age of two when his father took him to the Cleveland Air Races. When he was five or six, he experienced his first airplane flight in Warren, Ohio, when he and his father took a ride in a Ford Trimotor (also known as the &quot;Tin Goose&quot;).

The family&#x27;s last move was in 1944 and took them back to Wapakoneta, where Armstrong attended Blume High School and took flying lessons at the Wapakoneta airfield. He earned a student flight certificate on his 16th birthday, then soloed in August, all before he had a driver&#x27;s license. He was an active Boy Scout and earned the rank of Eagle Scout. As an adult, he was recognized by the Scouts with their Distinguished Eagle Scout Award and Silver Buffalo Award. While flying toward the Moon on July 18, 1969, he sent his regards to attendees at the National Scout jamboree in Idaho. Among the few personal items that he carried with him to the Moon and back was a World Scout Badge.

At age 17, in 1947, Armstrong began studying aeronautical engineering at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana; he was the second person in his family to attend college. Armstrong was also accepted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), but he resolved to go to Purdue after watching a football game between the Purdue Boilermakers and the Ohio State Buckeyes at the Ohio Stadium in 1945 in which quarterback Bob DeMoss led the Boilermakers to a sound victory over the highly regarded Buckeyes. An uncle who attended MIT had also advised him that he could receive a good education without going all the way to Cambridge, Massachusetts. His college tuition was paid for under the Holloway Plan. Successful applicants committed to two years of study, followed by two years of flight training and one year of service as an aviator in the U.S. Navy, then completion of the final two years of their bachelor&#x27;s degree. Armstrong did not take courses in naval science, nor did he join the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps.

== Navy service ==

Armstrong&#x27;s call-up from the Navy arrived on January 26, 1949, requiring him to report to Naval Air Station Pensacola in Florida for flight training with class 5-49. After passing the medical examinations, he became a midshipman on February 24, 1949. Flight training was conducted in a North American SNJ trainer, in which he soloed on September 9, 1949. On March 2, 1950, he made his first aircraft carrier landing on , an achievement he considered comparable to his first solo flight. He was then sent to Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in Texas for training on the Grumman F8F Bearcat, culminating in a carrier landing on . On August 16, 1950, Armstrong was informed by letter that he was a fully qualified naval aviator. His mother and sister attended his graduation ceremony on August 23, 1950.

Armstrong was assigned to Fleet Aircraft Service Squadron7 (FASRON 7) at NAS San Diego (now known as NAS North Island). On November 27, 1950, he was assigned to VF-51, an all-jet squadron, becoming its youngest officer, and made his first flight in a jet, a Grumman F9F Panther, on January 5, 1951. He was promoted to ensign on June 5, 1951, and made his first jet carrier landing on two days later. On June 28, 1951, &quot;Essex&quot; had set sail for Korea, with VF-51 aboard to act as ground-attack aircraft. VF-51 flew ahead to Naval Air Station Barbers Point in Hawaii, where it conducted fighter-bomber training before rejoining the ship at the end of July.

On August 29, 1951, Armstrong saw action in the Korean War as an escort for a photo reconnaissance plane over Songjin. Five days later, on September 3, he flew armed reconnaissance over the primary transportation and storage facilities south of the village of Majon-ni, west of Wonsan. According to Armstrong, he was making a low bombing run at when of his wing was torn off after it collided with a cable that was strung across the hills as a booby trap. He was flying above the ground when he hit it. While there was heavy anti-aircraft fire in the area, none hit Armstrong&#x27;s aircraft. An initial report to the commanding officer of &quot;Essex&quot; said that Armstrong&#x27;s F9F Panther was hit by anti-aircraft fire. The report indicated he was trying to regain control and collided with a pole, which sliced off of the Panther&#x27;s right wing. Further perversions of the story by different authors added that he was only from the ground and that of his wing was sheared off.
Armstrong flew the plane back to friendly territory, but because of the loss of the aileron, ejection was his only safe option. He intended to eject over water and await rescue by Navy helicopters, but his parachute was blown back over land. A jeep driven by a roommate from flight school picked him up; it is unknown what happened to the wreckage of his aircraft, F9F-2 BuNo &quot;125122&quot;.

In all, Armstrong flew 78missions over Korea for a total of 121hours in the air, a third of them in January 1952, with the final mission on March 5, 1952. Of 492 U.S. Navy personnel killed in the Korean War, 27 of them were from &quot;Essex&quot; on this war cruise. Armstrong received the Air Medal for 20 combat missions, two gold stars for the next 40, the Korean Service Medal and Engagement Star, the National Defense Service Medal, and the United Nations Korea Medal.

Armstrong&#x27;s regular commission was terminated on February 25, 1952, and he became an ensign in the United States Navy Reserve. On completion of his combat tour with &quot;Essex&quot;, he was assigned to a transport squadron, VR-32, in May 1952. He was released from active duty on August 23, 1952, but remained in the reserve, and was promoted to lieutenant (junior grade) on May 9, 1953. As a reservist, he continued to fly, first with VF-724 at Naval Air Station Glenview in Illinois, and then, after moving to California, with VF-773 at Naval Air Station Los Alamitos. He remained in the reserve for eight years before resigning his commission on October 21, 1960.

== College years ==
After his service with the Navy, Armstrong returned to Purdue. His previously earned good but not outstanding grades now improved, lifting his final Grade Point Average (GPA) to a respectable but not outstanding 4.8 out of 6.0. He pledged the Phi Delta Theta fraternity, and lived in its fraternity house. He wrote and co-directed two musicals as part of the all-student revue. The first was a version of &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;, co-directed with his girlfriend Joanne Alford from the Alpha Chi Omega sorority, with songs from the 1937 Walt Disney film, including &quot;Someday My Prince Will Come&quot;; the second was titled &quot;The Land of Egelloc&quot; (&quot;college&quot; spelled backward), with music from Gilbert and Sullivan but new lyrics. 

Armstrong was chairman of the Purdue Aero Flying Club, and flew the club&#x27;s aircraft, an Aeronca and a couple of Pipers, which were kept at nearby Aretz Airport in Lafayette, Indiana. Flying the Aeronca to Wapakoneta in 1954, he damaged it in a rough landing in a farmer&#x27;s field, and it had to be hauled back to Lafayette on a trailer. He was a baritone player in the Purdue All-American Marching Band. Ten years later he was made an honorary member of Kappa Kappa Psi national band honorary fraternity. Armstrong graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in Aeronautical Engineering in January 1955. In 1970, he completed his Master of Science degree in Aerospace Engineering at the University of Southern California (USC). He would eventually be awarded honorary doctorates by several universities.

Armstrong met Janet Elizabeth Shearon, who was majoring in home economics, at a party hosted by Alpha Chi Omega. According to the couple, there was no real courtship, and neither could remember the exact circumstances of their engagement. They were married on January 28, 1956, at the Congregational Church in Wilmette, Illinois. When he moved to Edwards Air Force Base, he lived in the bachelor quarters of the base, while Janet lived in the Westwood district of Los Angeles. After one semester, they moved into a house in Antelope Valley, near Edwards AFB. Janet did not finish her degree, a fact she regretted later in life. The couple had three children. In June 1961, their daughter Karen was diagnosed with diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma, a malignant tumor of the middle part of her brain stem. X-ray treatment slowed its growth, but her health deteriorated to the point where she could no longer walk or talk. She died of pneumonia, related to her weakened health, on January 28, 1962, aged two.

== Test pilot ==
Following his graduation from Purdue, Armstrong became an experimental research test pilot. He applied at the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) High-Speed Flight Station at Edwards Air Force Base. NACA had no open positions, and forwarded his application to the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland, where Armstrong made his first test flight on March 1, 1955. Armstrong&#x27;s stint at Cleveland lasted only a couple of months before a position at the High-Speed Flight Station became available, and he reported for work there on July 11, 1955.
On his first day, Armstrong was tasked with piloting chase planes during releases of experimental aircraft from modified bombers. He also flew the modified bombers, and on one of these missions had his first flight incident at Edwards. On March 22, 1956, he was in a Boeing B-29 Superfortress, which was to air-drop a Douglas D-558-2 Skyrocket. He sat in the right-hand co-pilot seat while pilot in command, Stan Butchart sat in the left-hand pilot seat flying the B-29.

As they climbed to , the number-four engine stopped and the propeller began windmilling (rotating freely) in the airstream. Hitting the switch that would stop the propeller&#x27;s spinning, Butchart watched it slow, then resume spinning even faster than the others; if it spun too fast, it would break apart. Their aircraft needed to hold an airspeed of to launch its Skyrocket payload, and the B-29 could not land with the Skyrocket attached to its belly. Armstrong and Butchart brought the aircraft into a nose-down attitude to increase speed, then launched the Skyrocket. At the instant of launch, the number-four engine propeller disintegrated. Pieces of it damaged the number-three engine and hit the number-two engine. Butchart and Armstrong were forced to shut down the damaged number-three engine, along with the number-one engine, because of the torque it created. They made a slow, circling descent from using only the number-two engine, and landed safely.

Armstrong served as project pilot on Century Series fighters, including the North American F-100 Super Sabre A and C variants, the McDonnell F-101 Voodoo, the Lockheed F-104 Starfighter, the Republic F-105 Thunderchief and the Convair F-106 Delta Dart. He also flew the Douglas DC-3, Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star, North American F-86 Sabre, McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II, Douglas F5D-1 Skylancer, Boeing B-29 Superfortress, Boeing B-47 Stratojet and Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker, and was one of eight elite pilots involved in the Paresev paraglider research vehicle program. Over his career, he flew more than 200 different models of aircraft. His first flight in a rocket-powered aircraft was on August 15, 1957, in the Bell X-1B, to an altitude of . On landing, the poorly designed nose landing gear failed, as had happened on about a dozen previous flights of the Bell X-1B. He flew the North American X-15 seven times, including the first flight with the Q-ball system, the first flight of the number3 X-15 airframe, and the first flight of the MH-96 adaptive flight control system. He became an employee of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) when it was established on October 1, 1958, absorbing NACA.

Armstrong was involved in several incidents that went down in Edwards folklore or were chronicled in the memoirs of colleagues. During his sixth X-15 flight on April 20, 1962, Armstrong was testing the MH-96 control system when he flew to a height of over (the highest he flew before Gemini 8). He held up the aircraft nose during its descent to demonstrate the MH-96&#x27;s g-limiting performance, and the X-15 ballooned back up to around . He flew past the landing field at Mach3 at over in altitude, and ended up south of Edwards. After sufficient descent, he turned back toward the landing area, and landed. It was the longest X-15 flight in both flight time and length of the ground track.

Fellow astronaut Michael Collins wrote that of the X-15 pilots Armstrong &quot;had been considered one of the weaker stick-and-rudder men, but the very best when it came to understanding the machine&#x27;s design and how it operated&quot;. Many of the test pilots at Edwards praised Armstrong&#x27;s engineering ability. Milt Thompson said he was &quot;the most technically capable of the early X-15 pilots&quot;. Bill Dana said Armstrong &quot;had a mind that absorbed things like a sponge&quot;. Those who flew for the Air Force tended to have a different opinion, especially people like Chuck Yeager and Pete Knight, who did not have engineering degrees. Knight said that pilot-engineers flew in a way that was &quot;more mechanical than it is flying&quot;, and gave this as the reason why some pilot-engineers got into trouble: Their flying skills did not come naturally. Armstrong made seven flights in the X-15 between November 30, 1960, and July 26, 1962. He reached a top speed of Mach 5.74 () in the X-15-1, and left the Flight Research Center with a total of 2,400 flying hours.

On April 24, 1962, Armstrong flew for the only time with Yeager. Their job, flying a T-33, was to evaluate Smith Ranch Dry Lake in Nevada for use as an emergency landing site for the X-15. In his autobiography, Yeager wrote that he knew the lake bed was unsuitable for landings after recent rains, but Armstrong insisted on flying out anyway. As they attempted a touch-and-go, the wheels became stuck and they had to wait for rescue. As Armstrong told the story, Yeager never tried to talk him out of it and they made a first successful landing on the east side of the lake. Then Yeager told him to try again, this time a bit slower. On the second landing, they became stuck, provoking Yeager to fits of laughter.

On May 21, 1962, Armstrong was involved in the &quot;Nellis Affair&quot;. He was sent in an F-104 to inspect Delamar Dry Lake in southern Nevada, again for emergency landings. He misjudged his altitude and did not realize that the landing gear had not fully extended. As he touched down, the landing gear began to retract; Armstrong applied full power to abort the landing, but the ventral fin and landing gear door struck the ground, damaging the radio and releasing hydraulic fluid. Without radio communication, Armstrong flew south to Nellis Air Force Base, past the control tower, and waggled his wings, the signal for a no-radio approach. The loss of hydraulic fluid caused the tailhook to release, and upon landing, he caught the arresting wire attached to an anchor chain, and dragged the chain along the runway.

It took thirty minutes to clear the runway and rig another arresting cable. Armstrong telephoned Edwards and asked for someone to collect him. Milt Thompson was sent in an F-104B, the only two-seater available, but a plane Thompson had never flown. With great difficulty, Thompson made it to Nellis, where a strong crosswind caused a hard landing and the left main tire suffered a blowout. The runway was again closed to clear it, and Bill Dana was sent to Nellis in a T-33, but he almost landed long. The Nellis base operations office then decided that to avoid any further problems, it would be best to find the three NASA pilots ground transport back to Edwards.

== Astronaut career ==
In June 1958, Armstrong was selected for the U.S. Air Force&#x27;s Man in Space Soonest program, but the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) canceled its funding on August 1, 1958, and on November 5, 1958, it was superseded by Project Mercury, a civilian project run by NASA. As a NASA civilian test pilot, Armstrong was ineligible to become one of its astronauts at this time, as selection was restricted to military test pilots. In November 1960, he was chosen as part of the pilot consultant group for the X-20 Dyna-Soar, a military space plane under development by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force, and on March 15, 1962, he was selected by the U.S. Air Force as one of seven pilot-engineers who would fly the X-20 when it got off the design board.

In April 1962, NASA sought applications for the second group of NASA astronauts for Project Gemini, a proposed two-man spacecraft. This time, selection was open to qualified civilian test pilots. Armstrong visited the Seattle World&#x27;s Fair in May 1962 and attended a conference there on space exploration that was co-sponsored by NASA. After he returned from Seattle on June 4, he applied to become an astronaut. His application arrived about a week past the June 1, 1962, deadline, but Dick Day, a flight simulator expert with whom Armstrong had worked closely at Edwards, saw the late arrival of the application and slipped it into the pile before anyone noticed. At Brooks Air Force Base at the end of June, Armstrong underwent a medical exam that many of the applicants described as painful and at times seemingly pointless.

NASA&#x27;s Director of Flight Crew Operations, Deke Slayton, called Armstrong on September 13, 1962, and asked whether he would be interested in joining the NASA Astronaut Corps as part of what the press dubbed &quot;the New Nine&quot;; without hesitation, Armstrong said yes. The selections were kept secret until three days later, although newspaper reports had circulated since earlier that year that he would be selected as the &quot;first civilian astronaut&quot;. Armstrong was one of two civilian pilots selected for this group; the other was Elliot See, another former naval aviator. NASA selected the second group that, compared with the Mercury Seven astronauts, were younger, and had more impressive academic credentials. Collins wrote that Armstrong was by far the most experienced test pilot in the Astronaut Corps.

=== Gemini program ===
==== Gemini 5 ====
On February 8, 1965, Armstrong and Elliot See were picked as the backup crew for Gemini 5, with Armstrong as commander, supporting the prime crew of Gordon Cooper and Pete Conrad. The mission&#x27;s purpose was to practice space rendezvous and to develop procedures and equipment for a seven-day flight, all of which would be required for a mission to the Moon. With two other flights (Gemini 3 and Gemini 4) in preparation, six crews were competing for simulator time, so Gemini5 was postponed. It finally lifted off on August 21. Armstrong and See watched the launch at Cape Kennedy, then flew to the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC) in Houston. The mission was generally successful, despite a problem with the fuel cells that prevented a rendezvous. Cooper and Conrad practiced a &quot;phantom rendezvous&quot;, carrying out the maneuver without a target.

==== Gemini 8 ====

The crews for Gemini8 were assigned on September 20, 1965. Under the normal rotation system, the backup crew for one mission became the prime crew for the third mission after, but Slayton designated David Scott as the pilot of Gemini8. Scott was the first member of the third group of astronauts, who was selected on October 18, 1963, to receive a prime crew assignment. See was designated to command Gemini 9. Henceforth, each Gemini mission was commanded by a member of Armstrong&#x27;s group, with a member of Scott&#x27;s group as the pilot. Conrad would be Armstrong&#x27;s backup this time, and Richard F. Gordon Jr. his pilot. Armstrong became the first American civilian in space. (Valentina Tereshkova of the Soviet Union had become the first civilian—and first woman—nearly three years earlier aboard Vostok 6 when it launched on June 16, 1963.) Armstrong would also be the last of his group to fly in space, as See died in a T-38 crash on February 28, 1966, that also took the life of crewmate Charles Bassett. They were replaced by the backup crew of Tom Stafford and Gene Cernan, while Jim Lovell and Buzz Aldrin moved up from the backup crew of Gemini 10 to become the backup for Gemini 9, and would eventually fly Gemini 12.

Gemini 8 launched on March 16, 1966. It was the most complex mission yet, with a rendezvous and docking with an uncrewed Agena target vehicle, and the planned second American spacewalk (EVA) by Scott. The mission was planned to last 75hours and 55orbits. After the Agena lifted off at 10:00:00 EST, the Titan II rocket carrying Armstrong and Scott ignited at 11:41:02 EST, putting them into an orbit from which they chased the Agena. They achieved the first-ever docking between two spacecraft. Contact with the crew was intermittent due to the lack of tracking stations covering their entire orbits. While out of contact with the ground, the docked spacecraft began to roll, and Armstrong attempted to correct this with the Gemini&#x27;s Orbit Attitude and Maneuvering System (OAMS). Following the earlier advice of Mission Control, they undocked, but the roll increased dramatically until they were turning about once per second, indicating a problem with Gemini&#x27;s attitude control. Armstrong engaged the Reentry Control System (RCS) and turned off the OAMS. Mission rules dictated that once this system was turned on, the spacecraft had to reenter at the next possible opportunity. It was later thought that damaged wiring caused one of the thrusters to stick in the on position.
A few people in the Astronaut Office, including Walter Cunningham, felt that Armstrong and Scott &quot;had botched their first mission&quot;. There was speculation that Armstrong could have salvaged the mission if he had turned on only one of the two RCS rings, saving the other for mission objectives. These criticisms were unfounded; no malfunction procedures had been written, and it was possible to turn on only both RCS rings, not one or the other. Gene Kranz wrote, &quot;The crew reacted as they were trained, and they reacted wrong because we trained them wrong.&quot; The mission planners and controllers had failed to realize that when two spacecraft were docked, they must be considered one spacecraft. Kranz considered this the mission&#x27;s most important lesson. Armstrong was depressed that the mission was cut short, canceling most mission objectives and robbing Scott of his EVA. The Agena was later reused as a docking target by Gemini 10. Armstrong and Scott received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal, and the Air Force awarded Scott the Distinguished Flying Cross as well. Scott was promoted to lieutenant colonel, and Armstrong received a $678 raise in pay to $21,653 a year (), making him NASA&#x27;s highest-paid astronaut.

==== Gemini 11 ====

In Armstrong&#x27;s final assignment in the Gemini program, he was the back-up Command Pilot for Gemini 11. Having trained for two flights, Armstrong was quite knowledgeable about the systems and took on a teaching role for the rookie backup pilot, William Anders. The launch was on September 12, 1966, with Conrad and Gordon on board, who successfully completed the mission objectives, while Armstrong served as a capsule communicator (CAPCOM).

Following the flight, President Lyndon B. Johnson asked Armstrong and his wife to take part in a 24-day goodwill tour of South America. Also on the tour, which took in 11countries and 14major cities, were Dick Gordon, George Low, their wives, and other government officials. In Paraguay, Armstrong greeted dignitaries in their local language, Guarani; in Brazil he talked about the exploits of the Brazilian-born aviation pioneer Alberto Santos-Dumont.

=== Apollo program ===
On January 27, 1967—the day of the Apollo 1 fire—Armstrong was in Washington, D.C., with Cooper, Gordon, Lovell and Scott Carpenter for the signing of the United Nations Outer Space Treaty. The astronauts chatted with the assembled dignitaries until 18:45, when Carpenter went to the airport, and the others returned to the Georgetown Inn, where they each found messages to phone the MSC. During these calls, they learned of the deaths of Gus Grissom, Ed White and Roger Chaffee in the fire. Armstrong and the group spent the rest of the night drinking scotch and discussing what had happened.

On April 5, 1967, the same day the Apollo1 investigation released its final report, Armstrong and 17 other astronauts gathered for a meeting with Slayton. The first thing Slayton said was, &quot;The guys who are going to fly the first lunar missions are the guys in this room.&quot; According to Cernan, only Armstrong showed no reaction to the statement. To Armstrong it came as no surprise—the room was full of veterans of Project Gemini, the only people who could fly the lunar missions. Slayton talked about the planned missions and named Armstrong to the backup crew for Apollo 9, which at that stage was planned as a medium Earth orbit test of the combined lunar module and command and service module.

The crew was officially assigned on November 20, 1967. For crewmates, Armstrong was assigned Lovell and Aldrin, from Gemini 12. After design and manufacturing delays of the lunar module (LM), Apollo 8 and9 swapped prime and backup crews. Based on the normal crew rotation, Armstrong would command Apollo 11, with one change: Collins on the Apollo8 crew began experiencing trouble with his legs. Doctors diagnosed the problem as a bony growth between his fifth and sixth vertebrae, requiring surgery. Lovell took his place on the Apollo8 crew, and, when Collins recovered, he joined Armstrong&#x27;s crew.

To give the astronauts practice piloting the LM on its descent, NASA commissioned Bell Aircraft to build two Lunar Landing Research Vehicles (LLRV), later augmented with three Lunar Landing Training Vehicles (LLTV). Nicknamed the &quot;Flying Bedsteads&quot;, they simulated the Moon&#x27;s one-sixth gravity using a turbofan engine to support five-sixths of the craft&#x27;s weight. On May 6, 1968, above the ground, Armstrong&#x27;s controls started to degrade and the LLRV began rolling. He ejected safely before the vehicle struck the ground and burst into flames. Later analysis suggested that if he had ejected half a second later, his parachute would not have opened in time. His only injury was from biting his tongue. The LLRV was completely destroyed. Even though he was nearly killed, Armstrong maintained that without the LLRV and LLTV, the lunar landings would not have been successful, as they gave commanders essential experience in piloting the lunar landing craft.

In addition to the LLRV training, NASA began lunar landing simulator training after Apollo 10 was completed. Aldrin and Armstrong trained for a variety of scenarios that could develop during a real lunar landing. They also received briefings from geologists at NASA.

==== Apollo 11 ====
After Armstrong served as backup commander for Apollo8, Slayton offered him the post of commander of Apollo 11 on December 23, 1968, as Apollo8 orbited the Moon. According to Armstrong&#x27;s 2005 biography, Slayton told him that although the planned crew was Commander Armstrong, Lunar Module Pilot Buzz Aldrin, and Command Module Pilot Michael Collins, he was offering Armstrong the chance to replace Aldrin with Jim Lovell. After thinking it over for a day, Armstrong told Slayton he would stick with Aldrin, as he had no difficulty working with him and thought Lovell deserved his own command. Replacing Aldrin with Lovell would have made Lovell the lunar module pilot, unofficially the lowest ranked member, and Armstrong could not justify placing Lovell, the commander of Gemini 12, in the number3 position of the crew. The crew of Apollo 11 was assigned on January 9, 1969, as Armstrong, Collins, and Aldrin, with Lovell, Anders, and Fred Haise as the backup crew.

According to Chris Kraft, a March 1969 meeting among Slayton, George Low, Bob Gilruth, and Kraft determined that Armstrong would be the first person on the Moon, in part because NASA management saw him as a person who did not have a large ego. A press conference on April 14, 1969, gave the design of the LM cabin as the reason for Armstrong&#x27;s being first; the hatch opened inwards and to the right, making it difficult for the LM pilot, on the right-hand side, to exit first. At the time of their meeting, the four men did not know about the hatch consideration. The first knowledge of the meeting outside the small group came when Kraft wrote his book. Methods of circumventing this difficulty existed, but it is not known if these were considered at the time. Slayton added, &quot;Secondly, just on a pure protocol basis, I figured the commander ought to be the first guy out... I changed it as soon as I found they had the time line that showed that. Bob Gilruth approved my decision.&quot;

==== Voyage to the Moon ====
A Saturn V rocket launched Apollo 11 from Launch Complex 39A at the Kennedy Space Center on July 16, 1969, at 13:32:00 UTC (09:32:00 EDT local time). Armstrong&#x27;s wife Janet and two sons watched from a yacht moored on the Banana River. During the launch, Armstrong&#x27;s heart rate peaked at 110beats per minute. He found the first stage the loudest, much noisier than the Gemini8 Titan II launch. The Apollo command module was relatively roomy compared with the Gemini spacecraft. None of the Apollo 11 crew suffered space sickness, as some members of previous crews had. Armstrong was especially glad about this, as he had been prone to motion sickness as a child and could experience nausea after long periods of aerobatics.
Apollo 11&#x27;s objective was to land safely on the Moon, rather than to touch down at a precise location. Three minutes into the lunar descent, Armstrong noted that craters were passing about two seconds too early, which meant the Lunar Module &quot;Eagle&quot; would probably touch down several miles (kilometres) beyond the planned landing zone. As the &quot;Eagle&quot;″s landing radar acquired the surface, several computer error alarms sounded. The first was a code 1202 alarm, and even with their extensive training, neither Armstrong nor Aldrin knew what this code meant. They promptly received word from CAPCOM Charles Duke in Houston that the alarms were not a concern; the 1202 and 1201 alarms were caused by executive overflows in the lunar module guidance computer. In 2007, Aldrin said the overflows were caused by his own counter-checklist choice of leaving the docking radar on during the landing process, causing the computer to process unnecessary radar data. When it did not have enough time to execute all tasks, the computer dropped the lower-priority ones, triggering the alarms. Aldrin said he decided to leave the radar on in case an abort was necessary when re-docking with the Apollo command module; he did not realize it would cause the processing overflows.

When Armstrong noticed they were heading toward a landing area that seemed unsafe, he took manual control of the LM and attempted to find a safer area. This took longer than expected, and longer than most simulations had taken. For this reason, Mission Control was concerned that the LM was running low on fuel. On landing, Aldrin and Armstrong believed they had 40seconds of fuel left, including the 20seconds&#x27; worth which had to be saved in the event of an abort. During training, Armstrong had, on several occasions, landed with fewer than 15seconds of fuel; he was also confident the LM could survive a fall of up to . Post-mission analysis showed that at touchdown there were 45 to 50seconds of propellant burn time left.

The landing on the surface of the Moon occurred several seconds after 20:17:40 UTC on July 20, 1969. One of three probes attached to three of the LM&#x27;s four legs made contact with the surface, a panel light in the LM illuminated, and Aldrin called out, &quot;Contact light.&quot; Armstrong shut the engine off and said, &quot;Shutdown.&quot; As the LM settled onto the surface, Aldrin said, &quot;Okay, engine stop&quot;; then they both called out some post-landing checklist items. After a 10-second pause, Duke acknowledged the landing with, &quot;We copy you down, &quot;Eagle&quot;.&quot; Armstrong confirmed the landing to Mission Control and the world with the words, &quot;Houston, Tranquility Base here. The &quot;Eagle&quot; has landed.&quot; Aldrin and Armstrong celebrated with a brisk handshake and pat on the back. They then returned to the checklist of contingency tasks, should an emergency liftoff become necessary. After Armstrong confirmed touch down, Duke re-acknowledged, adding a comment about the flight crew&#x27;s relief: &quot;Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We&#x27;re breathing again. Thanks a lot.&quot; During the landing, Armstrong&#x27;s heart rate ranged from 100 to 150beats per minute.

==== First Moon walk ====

The flight plan called for a crew rest period before leaving the module, but Armstrong asked for this to be moved to earlier in the evening, Houston time. When he and Aldrin were ready to go outside, &quot;Eagle&quot; was depressurized, the hatch was opened, and Armstrong made his way down the ladder. At the bottom of the ladder, while standing on a Lunar Module landing pad, Armstrong said, &quot;I&#x27;m going to step off the LM now&quot;. He turned and set his left boot on the lunar surface at 02:56 UTC July 21, 1969, then said, &quot;That&#x27;s one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind.&quot; The exact time of Armstrong&#x27;s first step on the Moon is unclear.

Armstrong prepared his famous epigram on his own. In a post-flight press conference, he said that he chose the words &quot;just prior to leaving the LM.&quot; In a 1983 interview in &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine, he explained to George Plimpton: &quot;I always knew there was a good chance of being able to return to Earth, but I thought the chances of a successful touch down on the moon surface were about even money—fifty–fifty... Most people don&#x27;t realize how difficult the mission was. So it didn&#x27;t seem to me there was much point in thinking of something to say if we&#x27;d have to abort landing.&quot; In 2012, his brother Dean Armstrong said that Neil showed him a draft of the line months before the launch. Historian Andrew Chaikin, who interviewed Armstrong in 1988 for his book &quot;A Man on the Moon&quot;, disputed that Armstrong claimed to have conceived the line during the mission.

Recordings of Armstrong&#x27;s transmission do not provide evidence for the indefinite article &quot;a&quot; before &quot;man&quot;, though NASA and Armstrong insisted for years that static obscured it. Armstrong stated he would never make such a mistake, but after repeated listenings to recordings, he eventually conceded he must have dropped the &quot;a&quot;. He later said he &quot;would hope that history would grant me leeway for dropping the syllable and understand that it was certainly intended, even if it was not said—although it might actually have been&quot;. There have since been claims and counter-claims about whether acoustic analysis of the recording reveals the presence of the missing &quot;a&quot;; Peter Shann Ford, an Australian computer programmer, conducted a digital audio analysis and claims that Armstrong did say &quot;a man&quot;, but the &quot;a&quot; was inaudible due to the limitations of communications technology of the time. Ford and James R. Hansen, Armstrong&#x27;s authorized biographer, presented these findings to Armstrong and NASA representatives, who conducted their own analysis. Armstrong found Ford&#x27;s analysis &quot;persuasive&quot;. Linguists David Beaver and Mark Liberman wrote of their skepticism of Ford&#x27;s claims on the blog Language Log. A 2016 peer-reviewed study again concluded Armstrong had included the article. NASA&#x27;s transcript continues to show the &quot;a&quot; in parentheses.

When Armstrong made his proclamation, Voice of America was rebroadcast live by the BBC and many other stations worldwide. An estimated 530million people viewed the event, 20 percent out of a world population of approximately 3.6billion.


About 19minutes after Armstrong&#x27;s first step, Aldrin joined him on the surface, becoming the second human to walk on the Moon. They began their tasks of investigating how easily a person could operate on the lunar surface. Armstrong unveiled a plaque commemorating the flight, and with Aldrin, planted the flag of the United States. Although Armstrong had wanted the flag to be draped on the flagpole, it was decided to use a metal rod to hold it horizontally. However, the rod did not fully extend, leaving the flag with a slightly wavy appearance, as if there were a breeze. Shortly after the flag planting, President Richard Nixon spoke to them by telephone from his office. He spoke for about a minute, after which Armstrong responded for about thirty seconds. In the Apollo 11 photographic record, there are only five images of Armstrong partly shown or reflected. The mission was planned to the minute, with the majority of photographic tasks performed by Armstrong with the single Hasselblad camera.

After helping to set up the Early Apollo Scientific Experiment Package, Armstrong went for a walk to what is now known as East Crater, east of the LM, the greatest distance traveled from the LM on the mission. His final task was to remind Aldrin to leave a small package of memorial items to Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Vladimir Komarov, and Apollo1 astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. The Apollo 11 EVA lasted two and a half hours. Each of the subsequent five landings was allotted a progressively longer EVA period; the crew of Apollo 17 spent over 22hours exploring the lunar surface. In a 2010 interview, Armstrong explained that NASA limited their Moon walk because they were unsure how the space suits would cope with the Moon&#x27;s extremely high temperature.

===== Return to Earth =====

After they re-entered the LM, the hatch was closed and sealed. While preparing for liftoff, Armstrong and Aldrin discovered that, in their bulky space suits, they had broken the ignition switch for the ascent engine; using part of a pen, they pushed in the circuit breaker to start the launch sequence. The &quot;Eagle&quot; then continued to its rendezvous in lunar orbit, where it docked with &quot;Columbia&quot;, the command and service module. The three astronauts returned to Earth and splashed down in the Pacific Ocean, to be picked up by the .

After being released from an 18-day quarantine to ensure that they had not picked up any infections or diseases from the Moon, the crew was feted across the United States and around the world as part of a 38-day &quot;Giant Leap&quot; tour. 
The tour began on August 13, when the three astronauts spoke and rode in ticker-tape parades in their honor in New York and Chicago, with an estimated six million attendees. On the same evening an official state dinner was held in Los Angeles to celebrate the flight, attended by members of Congress, 44governors, the Chief Justice of the United States, and ambassadors from 83nations. President Nixon and Vice President Agnew presented each astronaut with a Presidential Medal of Freedom.

After the tour Armstrong took part in Bob Hope&#x27;s 1969 USO show, primarily to Vietnam. In May 1970, Armstrong traveled to the Soviet Union to present a talk at the 13th annual conference of the International Committee on Space Research; after arriving in Leningrad from Poland, he traveled to Moscow where he met Premier Alexei Kosygin. Armstrong was the first westerner to see the supersonic Tupolev Tu-144 and was given a tour of the Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, which he described as &quot;a bit Victorian in nature&quot;. At the end of the day, he was surprised to view a delayed video of the launch of Soyuz 9 as it had not occurred to Armstrong that the mission was taking place, even though Valentina Tereshkova had been his host and her husband, Andriyan Nikolayev, was on board.

== Life after Apollo ==
=== Teaching ===
Shortly after Apollo 11, Armstrong stated that he did not plan to fly in space again. He was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics for the Office of Advanced Research and Technology at ARPA, served in the position for a year, then resigned from it and NASA in 1971. He accepted a teaching position in the Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University of Cincinnati, having chosen Cincinnati over other universities, including his &quot;alma mater&quot; Purdue, because Cincinnati had a small aerospace department, and said he hoped the faculty there would not be annoyed that he came straight into a professorship with only a USC master&#x27;s degree. He began his master&#x27;s degree while stationed at Edwards years before, and completed it after Apollo 11 by presenting a report on various aspects of Apollo, instead of a thesis on the simulation of hypersonic flight.

At Cincinnati, Armstrong was University Professor of Aerospace Engineering. He took a heavy teaching load, taught core classes, and created two graduate-level classes: aircraft design and experimental flight mechanics. He was considered a good teacher, and a tough grader. His research activities during this time did not involve his work at NASA, as he did not want to give the appearance of favoritism; he later regretted the decision. After teaching for eight years, Armstrong resigned in 1980. When the university changed from an independent municipal university to a state school, bureaucracy increased. He did not want to be a part of the faculty collective bargaining group, so he decided to teach half-time. According to Armstrong, he had the same amount of work but received half his salary. In 1979, less than 10% of his income came from his university salary. Employees at the university did not know why he left.

=== NASA commissions ===
In 1970, after an explosion aboard Apollo 13 aborted its lunar landing, Armstrong was part of Edgar Cortright&#x27;s investigation of the mission. He produced a detailed chronology of the flight. He determined that a 28-volt thermostat switch in an oxygen tank, which was supposed to have been replaced with a 65-volt version, led to the explosion. Cortright&#x27;s report recommended the entire tank be redesigned at a cost of $40million. Many NASA managers, including Armstrong, opposed the recommendation, since only the thermostat switch had caused the problem. They lost the argument, and the tanks were redesigned.

In 1986, President Ronald Reagan asked Armstrong to join the Rogers Commission investigating the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster. Armstrong was made vice chairman of the commission and held private interviews with contacts he had developed over the years to help determine the cause of the disaster. He helped limit the committee&#x27;s recommendations to nine, believing that if there were too many, NASA would not act on them.
Armstrong was appointed to a fourteen-member commission by President Reagan to develop a plan for American civilian spaceflight in the 21st century. The commission was chaired by former NASA administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine, with whom Armstrong had worked during the Apollo program. The group published a book titled &quot;Pioneering the Space Frontier: The Report on the National Commission on Space&quot;, recommending a permanent lunar base by 2006, and sending people to Mars by 2015. The recommendations were largely ignored, overshadowed by the &quot;Challenger&quot; disaster.

Armstrong and his wife attended the memorial service for the victims of the Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster in 2003, at the invitation of President George W. Bush.

=== Business activities ===
After Armstrong retired from NASA in 1971, he acted as a spokesman for several businesses. The first company to successfully approach him was Chrysler, for whom he appeared in advertising starting in January 1979. Armstrong thought they had a strong engineering division, and they were in financial difficulty. He later acted as a spokesman for other American companies, including General Time Corporation and the Bankers Association of America. He acted as a spokesman for only American companies.

In addition to his duties as a spokesman, he also served on the board of directors of several companies. The first company board Armstrong joined was Gates Learjet, chairing their technical committee. He flew their new and experimental jets and even set a climb and altitude record for business jets. Armstrong became a member of Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Company&#x27;s board in 1973. They were interested in nuclear power and wanted to increase the company&#x27;s technical competence. He served on the board of Taft Broadcasting, also based in Cincinnati. Armstrong joined the board of solid rocket booster Thiokol in 1989, after previously serving on the Rogers Commission which found that the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot; was destroyed due to a defect in the Thiokol-manufactured solid rocket boosters. When Armstrong left the University of Cincinnati, he became the chairman of Cardwell International Ltd., a company that manufactured drilling rigs. He served on additional aerospace boards, first United Airlines in 1978, and later Eaton Corporation in 1980. He was asked to chair the board of directors for a subsidiary of Eaton, AIL Systems. He chaired the board through the company&#x27;s 2000 merger with EDO Corporation, until his retirement in 2002.

=== North Pole expedition ===
In 1985, professional expedition leader Mike Dunn organized a trip to take men he deemed the &quot;greatest explorers&quot; to the North Pole. The group included Armstrong, Edmund Hillary, Hillary&#x27;s son Peter, Steve Fossett, and Patrick Morrow. They arrived at the Pole on April 6, 1985. He did not inform the media of the trip, preferring to keep it private.

=== Public profile ===

Armstrong&#x27;s family described him as a &quot;reluctant American hero&quot;. He kept a low profile later in his life, leading to the belief that he was a recluse. Recalling Armstrong&#x27;s humility, John Glenn, the first American to orbit Earth, told CNN: &quot;[Armstrong] didn&#x27;t feel that he should be out huckstering himself. He was a humble person, and that&#x27;s the way he remained after his lunar flight, as well as before.&quot; Armstrong turned down most requests for interviews and public appearances. Michael Collins said in his book &quot;Carrying the Fire&quot; that when Armstrong moved to a dairy farm to become a college professor, it was like he &quot;retreated to his castle and pulled up the drawbridge&quot;. Armstrong found this amusing, and said, &quot;...those of us that live out in the hinterlands think that people that live inside the Beltway are the ones that have the problems.&quot;

Andrew Chaikin says in &quot;A Man on the Moon&quot; that Armstrong kept a low profile but was not a recluse, citing his participation in interviews, advertisements for Chrysler, and hosting a cable television series. Between 1991 and 1993, he hosted &quot;First Flights with Neil Armstrong&quot;, an aviation history documentary series on A&amp;E. In 2010, Armstrong voiced the character of Dr. Jack Morrow in &quot;Quantum Quest: A Cassini Space Odyssey&quot;, an animated educational sci-fi adventure film initiated by JPL/NASA through a grant from Jet Propulsion Lab.

Armstrong guarded the use of his name, image, and famous quote. When it was launched in 1981, MTV wanted to use his quote in its station identification, with the American flag replaced with the MTV logo, but he refused the use of his voice and likeness. He sued Hallmark Cards in 1994, when they used his name, and a recording of the &quot;one small step&quot; quote, in a Christmas ornament without his permission. The lawsuit was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum, which Armstrong donated to Purdue.

For many years, he wrote letters congratulating new Eagle Scouts on their accomplishment, but decided to quit the practice in the 1990s because he felt the letters should be written by people who knew the scout. (In 2003, he received 950congratulation requests.) This contributed to the myth of his reclusiveness. Armstrong used to autograph everything except first day covers. Around 1993, he found out his signatures were being sold online, and that most of them were forgeries, and stopped giving autographs.

== Personal life ==

Some former astronauts, including Glenn and Apollo 17&#x27;s Harrison Schmitt, sought political careers after leaving NASA. Armstrong was approached by groups from both the Democratic and Republican parties but declined the offers. He supported states&#x27; rights and opposed the U.S. acting as the &quot;world&#x27;s policeman&quot;.

When Armstrong applied at a local Methodist church to lead a Boy Scout troop in the late 1950s, he gave his religious affiliation as &quot;deist&quot;. His mother later said that his religious views caused her grief and distress in later life, as she was a Christian. Upon his return from the Moon, Armstrong gave a speech in front of the U.S. Congress in which he thanked them for giving him the opportunity to see some of the &quot;grandest views of the Creator&quot;. In the early 1980s, he was the subject of a hoax claiming that he converted to Islam after hearing the call to prayer while walking on the Moon. Indonesian singer Suhaemi wrote a song called &quot;Gema Suara Adzan di Bulan&quot; (&quot;The Resonant Sound of the Call to Prayer on the Moon&quot;) which described Armstrong&#x27;s supposed conversion, and the song was widely discussed by Jakarta news outlets in 1983. Similar hoax stories were seen in Egypt and Malaysia. In March 1983, the U.S. State Department responded by issuing a message to embassies and consulates in Muslim countries saying that Armstrong had not converted to Islam. The hoax surfaced occasionally for the next three decades. Part of the confusion arose from the similarity between the names of the country of Lebanon, which has a majority Muslim population, and Armstrong&#x27;s longtime residence in Lebanon, Ohio.

In 1972, Armstrong visited the Scottish town of Langholm, the traditional seat of Clan Armstrong. He was made the first freeman of the burgh, and happily declared the town his home. To entertain the crowd, the Justice of the Peace read from an unrepealed archaic 400-year-old law that required him to hang any Armstrong found in the town.

Armstrong flew light aircraft for pleasure. He enjoyed gliders and before the Moon flight had earned a gold badge with two diamonds from the International Gliding Commission. He continued to fly engineless aircraft well into his 70s.

While working on his farm in November 1978, Armstrong jumped off the back of his grain truck and caught his wedding ring in its wheel, tearing the tip off his left ring finger. He collected the severed tip, packed it in ice, and had surgeons reattach it at a nearby hospital in Louisville, Kentucky. In February 1991, he suffered a mild heart attack while skiing with friends at Aspen, Colorado.

Armstrong and his first wife, Janet, separated in 1990 and divorced in 1994 after 38 years of marriage. He met his second wife, Carol Held Knight, at a golf tournament in 1992, when they were seated together at breakfast. She said little to Armstrong, but he called her two weeks later to ask what she was doing. She replied that she was cutting down a cherry tree, and he arrived at her house 35 minutes later to help. They were married in Ohio on June 12, 1994, and had a second ceremony at San Ysidro Ranch in California. They lived in Indian Hill, Ohio. Through his marriage to Carol, he was the father-in-law of future New York Mets general manager Brodie Van Wagenen.

In May 2005, Armstrong became involved in a legal dispute with Mark Sizemore, his barber of 20years. After cutting Armstrong&#x27;s hair, Sizemore sold some of it to a collector for $3,000 without Armstrong&#x27;s knowledge or permission. Armstrong threatened legal action against Sizemore unless he returned the hair or donated the proceeds to a charity of Armstrong&#x27;s choosing. Sizemore, unable to retrieve the hair, donated the proceeds to charity.

== Illness and death ==

On August 7, 2012, Armstrong underwent bypass surgery at Mercy Faith–Fairfield Hospital in Fairfield, Ohio, to relieve coronary artery disease. Although he was reportedly recovering well, he developed complications and died on August 25. President Barack Obama issued a statement memorializing Armstrong as &quot;among the greatest of American heroes—not just of his time, but of all time&quot;, and added that Armstrong had carried the aspirations of the United States&#x27; citizens and had delivered &quot;a moment of human achievement that will never be forgotten.&quot;
Armstrong&#x27;s family released a statement describing him as a &quot;reluctant American hero [who had] served his nation proudly, as a navy fighter pilot, test pilot, and astronaut ... While we mourn the loss of a very good man, we also celebrate his remarkable life and hope that it serves as an example to young people around the world to work hard to make their dreams come true, to be willing to explore and push the limits, and to selflessly serve a cause greater than themselves. For those who may ask what they can do to honor Neil, we have a simple request. Honor his example of service, accomplishment and modesty, and the next time you walk outside on a clear night and see the moon smiling down at you, think of Neil Armstrong and give him a wink.&quot;

Buzz Aldrin called Armstrong &quot;a true American hero and the best pilot I ever knew&quot;, and said he was disappointed that they would not be able to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Moon landing together in 2019. Michael Collins said, &quot;He was the best, and I will miss him terribly.&quot; NASA Administrator Charles Bolden said, &quot;As long as there are history books, Neil Armstrong will be included in them, remembered for taking humankind&#x27;s first small step on a world beyond our own&quot;.

A tribute was held for Armstrong on September 13, at Washington National Cathedral, whose Space Window depicts the Apollo 11 mission and holds a sliver of Moon rock amid its stained-glass panels. In attendance were Armstrong&#x27;s Apollo 11 crewmates, Collins and Aldrin; Gene Cernan, the Apollo 17 mission commander and last man to walk on the Moon; and former senator and astronaut John Glenn, the first American to orbit the Earth. In his eulogy, Charles Bolden praised Armstrong&#x27;s &quot;courage, grace, and humility&quot;. Cernan recalled Armstrong&#x27;s low-fuel approach to the Moon: &quot;When the gauge says empty, we all know there&#x27;s a gallon or two left in the tank!&quot; Diana Krall sang the song &quot;Fly Me to the Moon&quot;. Collins led prayers. David Scott spoke, possibly for the first time, about an incident during their Gemini 8 mission: minutes before the hatch was to be sealed, a small chip of dried glue fell into the latch of his harness and prevented it from being buckled, threatening to abort the mission. Armstrong then called on Conrad to solve the problem, which he did, and the mission proceeded. &quot;That happened because Neil Armstrong was a team player—he always worked on behalf of the team.&quot; Congressman Bill Johnson from Armstrong&#x27;s home state of Ohio led calls for President Barack Obama to authorize a state funeral in Washington D.C. Throughout his lifetime, Armstrong shunned publicity and rarely gave interviews. Mindful that Armstrong would have objected to a state funeral, his family opted to have a private funeral in Cincinnati. On September 14, Armstrong&#x27;s cremated remains were scattered in the Atlantic Ocean from the . Flags were flown at half-staff on the day of Armstrong&#x27;s funeral.

In July 2019, after observations of the 50th anniversary of the Moon landing, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported on details of a medical malpractice suit Armstrong&#x27;s family had filed against Mercy Health–Fairfield Hospital, where he died. When Armstrong appeared to be recovering from his bypass surgery, nurses removed the wires connected to his temporary pacemaker. He began to bleed internally and his blood pressure dropped. Doctors took him to the hospital&#x27;s catheterization laboratory, and only later began operating. Two of the three physicians who reviewed the medical files during the lawsuit called this a serious error, saying surgery should have begun immediately; experts the &quot;Times&quot; talked to, while qualifying their judgement by noting that they were unable to review the specific records in the case, said that taking a patient directly to the operating room under those circumstances generally gave them the highest chance of survival.

The family ultimately settled for $6 million in 2014. Letters included with the 93 pages of documents sent to the &quot;Times&quot; by an unknown person show that his sons intimated to the hospital, through their lawyers, that they might discuss what happened to their father publicly at the 45th anniversary observances in 2014. The hospital, fearing the bad publicity that would result from being accused of negligently causing the death of a revered figure such as Armstrong, agreed to pay as long as the family never spoke about the suit or the settlement. Armstrong&#x27;s wife, Carol, was not a party to the lawsuit. She reportedly felt that her husband would have been opposed to taking legal action.

== Legacy ==

When Pete Conrad of Apollo 12 became the third man to walk on the Moon, on November 19, 1969, his first words referenced Armstrong. The shorter of the two, when Conrad stepped from the LM onto the surface he proclaimed &quot;Whoopie! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that&#x27;s a long one for me.&quot;

Armstrong received many honors and awards, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom (with distinction) from President Nixon, the Cullum Geographical Medal from the American Geographical Society, and the Collier Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association (1969); the NASA Distinguished Service Medal and the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy (1970); the Sylvanus Thayer Award by the United States Military Academy (1971); the Congressional Space Medal of Honor from President Jimmy Carter (1978); the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy from the National Aeronautic Association (2001); and a Congressional Gold Medal (2011).

Armstrong was elected as member into the National Academy of Engineering in 1978 for contributions to aerospace engineering, scientific knowledge, and exploration of the universe as an experimental test pilot and astronaut. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2001.

Armstrong and his Apollo 11 crewmates were the 1999 recipients of the Langley Gold Medal from the Smithsonian Institution. On April 18, 2006, he received NASA&#x27;s Ambassador of Exploration Award. The Space Foundation named Armstrong as a recipient of its 2013 General James E. Hill Lifetime Space Achievement Award. Armstrong was also inducted into the Aerospace Walk of Honor, the International Space Hall of Fame, National Aviation Hall of Fame, and the United States Astronaut Hall of Fame. He was awarded his Naval Astronaut badge in a ceremony on board the aircraft carrier on March 10, 2010, in a ceremony attended by Lovell and Cernan.

The lunar crater Armstrong, from the Apollo 11 landing site, and asteroid 6469 Armstrong are named in his honor. There are more than a dozen elementary, middle and high schools named for Armstrong in the United States, and many places around the world have streets, buildings, schools, and other places named for him or Apollo. The Armstrong Air and Space Museum, in Armstrong&#x27;s hometown of Wapakoneta, and the Neil Armstrong Airport in New Knoxville, Ohio, are named after him. The mineral armstrongite is named after him, and the mineral armalcolite is named, in part, after him.

In October 2004 Purdue University named its new engineering building Neil Armstrong Hall of Engineering; the building was dedicated on October 27, 2007, during a ceremony at which Armstrong was joined by fourteen other Purdue astronauts. The NASA Dryden Flight Research Center was renamed the NASA Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center in 2014. In September 2012, the U.S. Navy named the first &quot;Armstrong&quot;-class vessel . Delivered to the Navy on September 23, 2015, it is a modern oceanographic research platform supporting a wide range of activities by academic groups. In 2019, the College of Engineering at Purdue University celebrated the 50th anniversary of Neil Armstrong&#x27;s walk on the Moon by launching the Neil Armstrong Distinguished Visiting Fellows Program, which brings highly accomplished scholars and practitioners to the college to catalyze collaborations with faculty and students.

Armstrong&#x27;s authorized biography, &quot;First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong&quot;, was published in 2005. For many years, he turned down biography offers from authors such as Stephen Ambrose and James A. Michener but agreed to work with James R. Hansen after reading one of Hansen&#x27;s other biographies. He recalled his initial concerns about the Apollo 11 mission, when he had believed there was only a 50% chance of landing on the Moon. &quot;I was elated, ecstatic and extremely surprised that we were successful&quot;. A film adaptation of the book, starring Ryan Gosling and directed by Damien Chazelle, was released in October 2018.

In July 2018, Armstrong&#x27;s sons put his collection of memorabilia up for sale, including his Boy Scout cap, and various flags and medals flown on his space missions. A series of auctions held November 1–3, 2018, realized $5,276,320 (~$ in ). , the auction sales totaled $16.7million. Two fragments of wood from the propeller and four pieces of fabric from the wing of the 1903 &quot;Wright Flyer&quot; that Armstrong took to the Moon fetched between $112,500 and $275,000 each. Armstrong&#x27;s wife, Carol, has not put any of his memorabilia up for sale.

Armstrong donated his papers to Purdue. Along with posthumous donations by his widow Carol, the collection consists of over 450boxes of material. In May 2019, she donated two pieces of fabric from the &quot;Wright Flyer&quot;, along with his correspondence related to them.
In a 2010 &quot;Space Foundation&quot; survey, Armstrong was ranked as the number-one most popular space hero; and in 2013, &quot;Flying&quot; magazine ranked him number one on its list of 51 Heroes of Aviation. The press often asked Armstrong for his views on the future of spaceflight. In 2005, he said that a human mission to Mars would be easier than the lunar challenge of the 1960s. In 2010, he made a rare public criticism of the decision to cancel the Ares I launch vehicle and the Constellation Moon landing program. In an open letter also signed by fellow Apollo veterans Lovell and Cernan, he said, &quot;For The United States, the leading space faring nation for nearly half a century, to be without carriage to low Earth orbit and with no human exploration capability to go beyond Earth orbit for an indeterminate time into the future, destines our nation to become one of second or even third rate stature&quot;. On November 18, 2010, aged 80, he said in a speech during the &quot;Science &amp; Technology Summit&quot; in the Hague, Netherlands, that he would offer his services as commander on a mission to Mars if he were asked.

The planetarium at Altoona Area High School in Altoona, Pennsylvania is named after Armstrong and is home to a Space Race museum. A campsite in Camp Sandy Beach at Yawgoog Scout Reservation in Rockville, Rhode Island, is named in his honor, a nod to his Scouting career.

Armstrong was named the class exemplar for the Class of 2019 at the U.S. Air Force Academy.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

* 


== External links ==



* Neil Armstrong Commemorative Website – University of Cincinnati
* Neil Armstrong collected news and commentary. &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="0" end="20" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Alden Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="72" end="81" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="86" end="107" title="aerospace engineering" label="aeronautical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="133" end="165" title="Apollo 11#Lunar surface operations" label="first person to walk on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="181" end="194" title="Naval aviator (United States)" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="196" end="206" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q492796" start="268" end="284" title="Wapakoneta, Ohio" label="Wapakoneta, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="297" end="314" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="325" end="349" title="aeronautical engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="360" end="369" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499118" start="399" end="412" title="Holloway Plan" label="Holloway Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="426" end="436" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="451" end="464" title="Naval aviator (United States)" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="506" end="516" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="529" end="548" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="558" end="574" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="673" end="716" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="724" end="749" title="Armstrong Flight Research Center" label="High-Speed Flight Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="753" end="775" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054464" start="819" end="833" title="Century Series" label="Century Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="856" end="875" title="North American X-15" label="North American X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="922" end="936" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888510" start="944" end="964" title="Man in Space Soonest" label="Man in Space Soonest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146" start="969" end="983" title="Boeing X-20 Dyna-Soar" label="X-20 Dyna-Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="984" end="1001" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869369" start="1034" end="1054" title="NASA Astronaut Corps" label="NASA Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="1062" end="1074" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="second group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="1122" end="1133" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q617651" start="1154" end="1162" title="Gemini 8" label="Gemini 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1187" end="1191" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q278656" start="1272" end="1283" title="David Scott" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q557450" start="1308" end="1315" title="Docking and berthing of spacecraft" label="docking"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1323" end="1333" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="1553" end="1562" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877372" start="1589" end="1619" title="Lunar Landing Research Vehicle" label="Lunar Landing Research Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="1687" end="1699" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="1711" end="1722" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Buzz Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="1750" end="1766" title="Moon landing" label="land on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28101302" start="1829" end="1859" title="Lunar Module Eagle" label="Lunar Module &amp;quot;Eagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="1877" end="1892" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753536" start="1924" end="1966" title="Command module Columbia" label="Apollo Command Module &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="2230" end="2240" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="2302" end="2317" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="2484" end="2513" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="2527" end="2540" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="2563" end="2577" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="2589" end="2601" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126046" start="2625" end="2659" title="Congressional Space Medal of Honor" label="Congressional Space Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="2694" end="2724" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="2777" end="2801" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="2916" end="2940" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="2970" end="2979" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q105391289" start="3014" end="3031" title="Rogers Commission Report" label="Rogers Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="3056" end="3101" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="3138" end="3151" title="Complication (medicine)" label="complications"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="3167" end="3190" title="coronary bypass surgery" label="coronary bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q492796" start="3265" end="3281" title="Wapakoneta, Ohio" label="Wapakoneta, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q612668" start="3452" end="3466" title="Clan Armstrong" label="Clan Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10949665" start="3546" end="3553" title="auditor" label="auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589278" start="3562" end="3583" title="Government of Ohio" label="Ohio state government"/>
<link wikidata="Q825144" start="3799" end="3818" title="National Air Races" label="Cleveland Air Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q862733" start="3889" end="3901" title="Warren, Ohio" label="Warren, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q744306" start="3943" end="3956" title="Ford Trimotor" label="Ford Trimotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930726" start="4100" end="4117" title="Blume High School" label="Blume High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454245" start="4236" end="4242" title="First solo flight" label="soloed"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="4314" end="4323" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046356" start="4347" end="4358" title="Eagle Scout (Boy Scouts of America)" label="Eagle Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282987" start="4416" end="4447" title="Distinguished Eagle Scout Award" label="Distinguished Eagle Scout Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515877" start="4452" end="4472" title="Silver Buffalo Award" label="Silver Buffalo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191874" start="4561" end="4584" title="National Scout jamboree (Boy Scouts of America)" label="National Scout jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="4741" end="4765" title="Aerospace engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="4769" end="4786" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q166481" start="4790" end="4813" title="West Lafayette, Indiana" label="West Lafayette, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4908" end="4945" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="5002" end="5010" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260970" start="5028" end="5047" title="Purdue Boilermakers football" label="Purdue Boilermakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080909" start="5056" end="5075" title="Ohio State Buckeyes football" label="Ohio State Buckeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q774694" start="5083" end="5095" title="Ohio Stadium" label="Ohio Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932246" start="5125" end="5135" title="Bob DeMoss" label="Bob DeMoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="5326" end="5350" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5395" end="5408" title="James L. Holloway, Jr.#Holloway Plan" label="Holloway Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="5551" end="5560" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="5610" end="5632" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981909" start="5703" end="5740" title="Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps" label="Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="5858" end="5885" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="5986" end="5996" title="midshipman" label="midshipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="6054" end="6080" title="North American T-6 Texan" label="North American SNJ trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="6159" end="6175" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016314" start="6275" end="6307" title="Naval Air Station Corpus Christi" label="Naval Air Station Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476388" start="6337" end="6356" title="Grumman F8F Bearcat" label="Grumman F8F Bearcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="6479" end="6492" title="United States Naval Aviator" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800390" start="6643" end="6656" title="Naval Air Station North Island" label="NAS San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552917" start="6731" end="6736" title="VF-51" label="VF-51"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="6828" end="6847" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="6888" end="6894" title="Ensign (rank)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="7058" end="7080" title="ground-attack aircraft" label="ground-attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015575" start="7102" end="7133" title="Naval Air Station Barbers Point" label="Naval Air Station Barbers Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="7283" end="7293" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="7319" end="7333" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q714873" start="7345" end="7352" title="Songjin" label="Songjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109374" start="7513" end="7519" title="Wonsan" label="Wonsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="7943" end="7961" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="8308" end="8315" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="8317" end="8325" title="ejection seat" label="ejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q980090" start="8911" end="8920" title="Air Medal" label="Air Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189410" start="8949" end="8959" title="5/16 inch star" label="gold stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613227" start="8981" end="9001" title="Korean Service Medal" label="Korean Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611552" start="9027" end="9057" title="National Defense Service Medal" label="National Defense Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666524" start="9067" end="9093" title="United Nations Korea Medal" label="United Nations Korea Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="9200" end="9226" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="United States Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824398" start="9448" end="9473" title="lieutenant (junior grade)" label="lieutenant (junior grade)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015150" start="9548" end="9574" title="Naval Air Station Glenview" label="Naval Air Station Glenview"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298050" start="9641" end="9671" title="Naval Air Station Los Alamitos" label="Naval Air Station Los Alamitos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9900" end="9906" title="Academic grading in the United States#Six-point system" label="grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378722" start="10033" end="10048" title="Phi Delta Theta" label="Phi Delta Theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="10049" end="10059" title="Fraternities and sororities in North America" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735006" start="10295" end="10310" title="Alpha Chi Omega" label="Alpha Chi Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="10341" end="10362" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="1937 Walt Disney film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685941" start="10380" end="10407" title="Someday My Prince Will Come" label="Someday My Prince Will Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="10525" end="10545" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031924" start="10657" end="10664" title="Aeronca Aircraft" label="Aeronca"/>
<link wikidata="Q934012" start="10681" end="10687" title="Piper Aircraft" label="Pipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q638187" start="10732" end="10750" title="Lafayette, Indiana" label="Lafayette, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q790468" start="10918" end="10926" title="baritone horn" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260967" start="10941" end="10974" title="Purdue All-American Marching Band" label="Purdue All-American Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192863" start="11026" end="11041" title="Kappa Kappa Psi" label="Kappa Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="11134" end="11158" title="Aeronautical Engineering" label="Aeronautical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="11230" end="11251" title="Aerospace Engineering" label="Aerospace Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="11259" end="11292" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="11436" end="11450" title="family and consumer science" label="home economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q578301" start="11687" end="11705" title="Wilmette, Illinois" label="Wilmette, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="11724" end="11746" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199774" start="11820" end="11828" title="Westwood, Los Angeles" label="Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624332" start="11901" end="11916" title="Antelope Valley" label="Antelope Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339127" start="12090" end="12122" title="diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma" label="diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="12126" end="12135" title="malignant" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="12136" end="12141" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="12168" end="12178" title="Brainstem" label="brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="12308" end="12317" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="12510" end="12553" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="12561" end="12586" title="Armstrong Flight Research Center" label="High-Speed Flight Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q618728" start="12679" end="12713" title="Glenn Research Center" label="Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="12717" end="12726" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977227" start="13027" end="13038" title="chase plane" label="chase plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="13241" end="13266" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q60578" start="13292" end="13317" title="Douglas D-558-2 Skyrocket" label="Douglas D-558-2 Skyrocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="13471" end="13489" title="aircraft engine position number" label="number-four engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="13506" end="13515" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235286" start="13964" end="13972" title="Attitude (geometry)" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="14301" end="14307" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054464" start="14451" end="14465" title="Century Series" label="Century Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q531053" start="14490" end="14522" title="North American F-100 Super Sabre" label="North American F-100 Super Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170211" start="14545" end="14567" title="McDonnell F-101 Voodoo" label="McDonnell F-101 Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159881" start="14573" end="14599" title="Lockheed F-104 Starfighter" label="Lockheed F-104 Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q724763" start="14605" end="14632" title="Republic F-105 Thunderchief" label="Republic F-105 Thunderchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q753808" start="14641" end="14665" title="Convair F-106 Delta Dart" label="Convair F-106 Delta Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="14684" end="14696" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q58725" start="14698" end="14725" title="Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star" label="Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="14727" end="14752" title="North American F-86 Sabre" label="North American F-86 Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="14754" end="14786" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252275" start="14788" end="14811" title="Douglas F5D-1 Skylancer" label="Douglas F5D-1 Skylancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q467649" start="14840" end="14861" title="Boeing B-47 Stratojet" label="Boeing B-47 Stratojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q829092" start="14866" end="14892" title="Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker" label="Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030228" start="14944" end="14951" title="NASA Paresev" label="Paresev"/>
<link wikidata="Q849237" start="15080" end="15103" title="rocket-powered aircraft" label="rocket-powered aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="15135" end="15143" title="Bell X-1" label="Bell X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="15198" end="15215" title="Landing gear" label="nose landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="15304" end="15323" title="North American X-15" label="North American X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="15530" end="15575" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q617651" start="15928" end="15936" title="Gemini 8" label="Gemini 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="16120" end="16124" title="Mach number" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="16357" end="16372" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314544" start="16661" end="16674" title="Milton Orville Thompson" label="Milt Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395516" start="16754" end="16763" title="Bill Dana (pilot)" label="Bill Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="16930" end="16942" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q974431" start="16947" end="16958" title="William J. Knight" label="Pete Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604456" start="17237" end="17256" title="List of X-15 flights" label="flights in the X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q19803" start="17793" end="17805" title="Touch-and-go landing" label="touch-and-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656948" start="18254" end="18270" title="Delamar Dry Lake" label="Delamar Dry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425059" start="18613" end="18628" title="hydraulic fluid" label="hydraulic fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="18683" end="18704" title="Nellis Air Force Base" label="Nellis Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q969436" start="18828" end="18836" title="tailhook" label="tailhook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888510" start="19723" end="19743" title="Man in Space Soonest" label="Man in Space Soonest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="19761" end="19794" title="Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q52162" start="19888" end="19903" title="Project Mercury" label="Project Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15146" start="20170" end="20184" title="Boeing X-20 Dyna-Soar" label="X-20 Dyna-Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="20496" end="20510" title="Project Gemini" label="Project Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054478" start="20630" end="20655" title="Seattle World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="Seattle World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="20775" end="20782" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974968" start="21085" end="21106" title="Brooks Air Force Base" label="Brooks Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q336810" start="21294" end="21306" title="Deke Slayton" label="Deke Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869369" start="21404" end="21424" title="NASA Astronaut Corps" label="NASA Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409842" start="21468" end="21476" title="NASA Astronaut Group 2" label="New Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q621462" start="21797" end="21807" title="Elliot See" label="Elliot See"/>
<link wikidata="Q597154" start="21894" end="21907" title="Mercury Seven" label="Mercury Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q725849" start="22200" end="22208" title="Gemini 5" label="Gemini 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q312833" start="22268" end="22281" title="Gordon Cooper" label="Gordon Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q213076" start="22286" end="22297" title="Pete Conrad" label="Pete Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093759" start="22342" end="22358" title="space rendezvous" label="space rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q682628" start="22505" end="22513" title="Gemini 3" label="Gemini 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q747769" start="22518" end="22526" title="Gemini 4" label="Gemini 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q193401" start="22691" end="22703" title="Cape Kennedy" label="Cape Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="22722" end="22746" title="Manned Spacecraft Center" label="Manned Spacecraft Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="22830" end="22839" title="fuel cell" label="fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q278656" start="23196" end="23207" title="David Scott" label="David Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408073" start="23267" end="23292" title="NASA Astronaut Group 3" label="third group of astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q519533" start="23398" end="23406" title="Gemini 9" label="Gemini 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q502963" start="23598" end="23619" title="Richard F. Gordon Jr." label="Richard F. Gordon Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q44371" start="23687" end="23707" title="Valentina Tereshkova" label="Valentina Tereshkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23715" end="23727" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q269668" start="23808" end="23816" title="Vostok 6" label="Vostok 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572362" start="23933" end="23943" title="1966 NASA T-38 crash" label="T-38 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q704355" start="24002" end="24017" title="Charles Bassett" label="Charles Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q316417" start="24060" end="24072" title="Thomas P. Stafford" label="Tom Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="24077" end="24088" title="Gene Cernan" label="Gene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="24096" end="24106" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q752799" start="24156" end="24165" title="Gemini 10" label="Gemini 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q259770" start="24226" end="24235" title="Gemini 12" label="Gemini 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="24350" end="24358" title="uncrewed spacecraft" label="uncrewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094450" start="24359" end="24379" title="Agena target vehicle" label="Agena target vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="24413" end="24422" title="extravehicular activity" label="spacewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="24424" end="24427" title="extravehicular activity" label="EVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="24532" end="24535" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187238" start="24541" end="24549" title="Titan II GLV" label="Titan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100055" start="24977" end="25014" title="Orbit Attitude and Maneuvering System" label="Orbit Attitude and Maneuvering System"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="25210" end="25226" title="Spacecraft attitude control" label="attitude control"/>
<link wikidata="Q372215" start="25574" end="25591" title="Walter Cunningham" label="Walter Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q711493" start="25980" end="25990" title="Gene Kranz" label="Gene Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952406" start="26518" end="26548" title="NASA Exceptional Service Medal" label="NASA Exceptional Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="26586" end="26612" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="26644" end="26662" title="lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q836047" start="26895" end="26904" title="Gemini 11" label="Gemini 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q19242" start="27047" end="27061" title="William Anders" label="William Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563791" start="27213" end="27233" title="capsule communicator" label="capsule communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="27277" end="27294" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028610" start="27463" end="27473" title="George Low" label="George Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="27588" end="27595" title="Guarani language" label="Guarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="27675" end="27696" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q194082" start="27757" end="27770" title="Apollo 1 fire" label="Apollo 1 fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q335503" start="27838" end="27853" title="Scott Carpenter" label="Scott Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q256608" start="27892" end="27910" title="Outer Space Treaty" label="Outer Space Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="28161" end="28172" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q216726" start="28174" end="28182" title="Ed White (astronaut)" label="Ed White"/>
<link wikidata="Q345678" start="28187" end="28200" title="Roger B. Chaffee" label="Roger Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q203651" start="28893" end="28901" title="Apollo 9" label="Apollo 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="28940" end="28958" title="medium Earth orbit" label="medium Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65241362" start="28980" end="28992" title="lunar module" label="lunar module"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="28997" end="29023" title="command and service module" label="command and service module"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="29218" end="29226" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q815695" start="29714" end="29727" title="Bell Aircraft" label="Bell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877372" start="29741" end="29771" title="Lunar Landing Research Vehicle" label="Lunar Landing Research Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="29949" end="29957" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q639090" start="30114" end="30121" title="aircraft principal axes" label="rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q318965" start="31844" end="31854" title="Fred Haise" label="Fred Haise"/>
<link wikidata="Q735104" start="31889" end="31900" title="Chris Kraft" label="Chris Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q254785" start="31950" end="31961" title="Bob Gilruth" label="Bob Gilruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="32908" end="32916" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q24256513" start="32948" end="32966" title="Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39A" label="Launch Complex 39A"/>
<link wikidata="Q48821" start="32974" end="32994" title="Kennedy Space Center" label="Kennedy Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="33025" end="33028" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881874" start="33132" end="33144" title="Banana River" label="Banana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365937" start="33429" end="33443" title="space sickness" label="space sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q309067" start="33550" end="33565" title="motion sickness" label="motion sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="33598" end="33604" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q373557" start="33627" end="33637" title="aerobatics" label="aerobatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28101302" start="33872" end="33902" title="Lunar Module Eagle" label="Lunar Module &amp;quot;Eagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="34024" end="34029" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34112" end="34116" title="Jack Garman#1202" label="1202"/>
<link wikidata="Q112284" start="34260" end="34272" title="Charles Duke" label="Charles Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q138875" start="34387" end="34417" title="Apollo Guidance Computer" label="lunar module guidance computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732758" start="36353" end="36369" title="Tranquility Base" label="Tranquility Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086913" start="37112" end="37124" title="Central Time Zone (North America)" label="Houston time"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="37323" end="37335" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="37478" end="37481" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="37689" end="37696" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="37847" end="37854" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508079" start="37887" end="37902" title="George Plimpton" label="George Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440786" start="38396" end="38410" title="Andrew Chaikin" label="Andrew Chaikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658110" start="38465" end="38482" title="A Man on the Moon" label="A Man on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174036" start="39292" end="39308" title="Peter Shann Ford" label="Peter Shann Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q24636844" start="39543" end="39558" title="James R. Hansen" label="James R. Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279259" start="39769" end="39781" title="David Beaver" label="David Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9029278" start="39786" end="39799" title="Mark Liberman" label="Mark Liberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486660" start="39860" end="39872" title="Language Log" label="Language Log"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="40067" end="40083" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="40112" end="40115" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q131562013" start="40567" end="40574" title="Flag planting" label="planted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703666" start="40579" end="40604" title="Lunar Flag Assembly" label="flag of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="40893" end="40906" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64545" start="41261" end="41271" title="Hasselblad" label="Hasselblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14965" start="41309" end="41351" title="Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package" label="Early Apollo Scientific Experiment Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359326" start="41580" end="41590" title="List of cosmonauts" label="cosmonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327" start="41591" end="41603" title="Yuri Gagarin" label="Yuri Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865" start="41608" end="41624" title="Vladimir Komarov" label="Vladimir Komarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="41821" end="41830" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="41987" end="41997" title="space suit" label="space suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753536" start="42490" end="42498" title="Command module Columbia" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="42958" end="42976" title="ticker-tape parade" label="ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603676" start="43091" end="43103" title="state dinner" label="state dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="43203" end="43237" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="43344" end="43373" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="43414" end="43422" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="43435" end="43438" title="USO" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115753" start="43588" end="43615" title="Committee on Space Research" label="Committee on Space Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="43635" end="43644" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="43693" end="43700" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="43701" end="43715" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188513" start="43773" end="43787" title="Tupolev Tu-144" label="Tupolev Tu-144"/>
<link wikidata="Q730282" start="43816" end="43854" title="Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center" label="Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q753546" start="43998" end="44005" title="Soyuz 9" label="Soyuz 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q312474" start="44145" end="44163" title="Andriyan Nikolayev" label="Andriyan Nikolayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="44425" end="44429" title="DARPA" label="ARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="44588" end="44612" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q182252" start="46108" end="46117" title="Apollo 13" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337184" start="46167" end="46182" title="Edgar Cortright" label="Edgar Cortright"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="46714" end="46727" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105391289" start="46756" end="46773" title="Rogers Commission Report" label="Rogers Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q858145" start="46792" end="46837" title="Space Shuttle Challenger disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367762" start="47347" end="47362" title="Thomas O. Paine" label="Thomas O. Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="47800" end="47843" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="47884" end="47898" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="48071" end="48079" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336983" start="48579" end="48592" title="Gates Learjet" label="Gates Learjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120885" start="48759" end="48796" title="Cincinnati Gas &amp;amp; Electric Company" label="Cincinnati Gas &amp;amp; Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675027" start="48947" end="48964" title="Taft Broadcasting" label="Taft Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357348" start="49043" end="49050" title="Thiokol" label="Thiokol"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="49131" end="49144" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="49445" end="49460" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q48872" start="49480" end="49497" title="Eaton Corporation" label="Eaton Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322859" start="49657" end="49672" title="EDO Corporation" label="EDO Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33817" start="49908" end="49922" title="Edmund Hillary" label="Edmund Hillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174671" start="49924" end="49948" title="Peter Hillary" label="Hillary&amp;#x27;s son Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q311786" start="49950" end="49963" title="Steve Fossett" label="Steve Fossett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369716" start="49969" end="49983" title="Patrick Morrow" label="Patrick Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="50328" end="50338" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999662" start="50997" end="51004" title="Capital Beltway" label="Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976503" start="51306" end="51339" title="First Flights with Neil Armstrong" label="First Flights with Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q471043" start="51350" end="51366" title="aviation history" label="aviation history"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="51389" end="51396" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51466" end="51504" title="Quantum Quest: A Cassini Space Odyssey" label="Quantum Quest: A Cassini Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="51716" end="51719" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671825" start="51751" end="51773" title="station identification" label="station identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521910" start="51884" end="51898" title="Hallmark Cards" label="Hallmark Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q825187" start="52495" end="52510" title="first day cover" label="first day cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="52713" end="52722" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="52730" end="52746" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="52842" end="52852" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="52857" end="52867" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="52914" end="52933" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q43205865" start="52975" end="52997" title="Global policeman" label="world&amp;#x27;s policeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="53040" end="53049" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="53145" end="53150" title="deist" label="deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="53345" end="53358" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="53556" end="53561" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165494" start="53580" end="53594" title="adhan" label="call to prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="53864" end="53871" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="53967" end="53988" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q986776" start="54353" end="54366" title="Lebanon, Ohio" label="Lebanon, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014104" start="54417" end="54425" title="Langholm" label="Langholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="54489" end="54496" title="Freedom of the City" label="freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="54579" end="54599" title="Justice of the Peace" label="Justice of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q180173" start="54764" end="54771" title="Glider (sailplane)" label="gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667464" start="54850" end="54882" title="FAI Gliding Commission" label="International Gliding Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="55222" end="55242" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="55323" end="55338" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066373" start="55834" end="55850" title="San Ysidro Ranch" label="San Ysidro Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108585" start="55880" end="55897" title="Indian Hill, Ohio" label="Indian Hill, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="55965" end="55978" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973038" start="55995" end="56013" title="Brodie Van Wagenen" label="Brodie Van Wagenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="56538" end="56552" title="coronary artery bypass surgery" label="bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053169" start="56556" end="56586" title="Mercy Health (Ohio and Kentucky)" label="Mercy Faith–Fairfield Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002506" start="56590" end="56605" title="Fairfield, Ohio" label="Fairfield, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="56618" end="56641" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="56747" end="56759" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25011" start="58165" end="58179" title="Charles Bolden" label="Charles Bolden"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="58412" end="58441" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q155879" start="59054" end="59065" title="Diana Krall" label="Diana Krall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066479" start="59086" end="59104" title="Fly Me to the Moon" label="Fly Me to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862215" start="59620" end="59632" title="Bill Johnson (Ohio politician)" label="Bill Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603689" start="59726" end="59739" title="state funerals in the United States" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="59949" end="59959" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053885" start="60080" end="60090" title="half-mast" label="half-staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="60216" end="60234" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962673" start="60266" end="60285" title="Medical malpractice in the United States" label="medical malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="60499" end="60508" title="Artificial cardiac pacemaker" label="pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361887" start="60522" end="60538" title="internal bleeding" label="bleed internally"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="60611" end="60619" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="61854" end="61863" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q402425" start="62288" end="62313" title="Cullum Geographical Medal" label="Cullum Geographical Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156372" start="62323" end="62352" title="American Geographical Society" label="American Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="62362" end="62376" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970194" start="62386" end="62417" title="National Aeronautic Association" label="National Aeronautic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286902" start="62430" end="62462" title="NASA Distinguished Service Medal" label="NASA Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304351" start="62471" end="62508" title="Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy" label="Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311715" start="62521" end="62542" title="Sylvanus Thayer Award" label="Sylvanus Thayer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="62550" end="62580" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126046" start="62593" end="62627" title="Congressional Space Medal of Honor" label="Congressional Space Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="62643" end="62655" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038186" start="62668" end="62699" title="Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy" label="Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="62755" end="62779" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="62830" end="62861" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="63035" end="63065" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486246" start="63146" end="63164" title="Langley Gold Medal" label="Langley Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572360" start="63279" end="63295" title="Space Foundation" label="Space Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q381740" start="63432" end="63455" title="Aerospace Walk of Honor" label="Aerospace Walk of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010217" start="63461" end="63493" title="International Space Hall of Fame" label="International Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="63495" end="63525" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q742943" start="63535" end="63571" title="United States Astronaut Hall of Fame" label="United States Astronaut Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q120488367" start="63592" end="63613" title="Astronaut Badge" label="Naval Astronaut badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q689195" start="63740" end="63749" title="Armstrong (crater)" label="Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="63788" end="63796" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q583519" start="63797" end="63811" title="6469 Armstrong" label="6469 Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q689196" start="64055" end="64085" title="Armstrong Air and Space Museum" label="Armstrong Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982728" start="64165" end="64184" title="New Knoxville, Ohio" label="New Knoxville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623443" start="64219" end="64231" title="armstrongite" label="armstrongite"/>
<link wikidata="Q416983" start="64268" end="64279" title="armalcolite" label="armalcolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260988" start="64380" end="64414" title="Purdue University College of Engineering" label="Neil Armstrong Hall of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="" start="65273" end="65313" title="First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong" label="First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q443953" start="65413" end="65428" title="Stephen Ambrose" label="Stephen Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q361653" start="65433" end="65450" title="James A. Michener" label="James A. Michener"/>
<link wikidata="Q42708010" start="65766" end="65793" title="First Man (film)" label="film adaptation of the book"/>
<link wikidata="Q193815" start="65804" end="65816" title="Ryan Gosling" label="Ryan Gosling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350026" start="65833" end="65848" title="Damien Chazelle" label="Damien Chazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="66268" end="66280" title="Wright Flyer" label="Wright Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577908" start="66846" end="66852" title="Flying (magazine)" label="Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q51075" start="67028" end="67049" title="human mission to Mars" label="human mission to Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q392348" start="67176" end="67182" title="Ares I" label="Ares I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766751" start="67206" end="67240" title="Constellation program" label="Constellation Moon landing program"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807842" start="67711" end="67742" title="Meet the Future, Science &amp;amp; Technology Summit 2010" label="Science &amp;amp; Technology Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="67752" end="67774" title="the Hague, Netherlands" label="the Hague, Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736945" start="67881" end="67905" title="Altoona Area High School" label="Altoona Area High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q444210" start="67909" end="67930" title="Altoona, Pennsylvania" label="Altoona, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="67973" end="67983" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050460" start="68026" end="68051" title="Yawgoog Scout Reservation" label="Yawgoog Scout Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899405" start="68055" end="68078" title="Rockville, Rhode Island" label="Rockville, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889203" start="68158" end="68172" title="USAFA Class exemplar" label="class exemplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="68388" end="68412" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="68467" end="68485" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21255" wikidata="Q423" url="?curid=21255" title="North Korea">
<text>North Korea, officially the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea (DPRK), is a country in East Asia. It constitutes the northern half of the Korean Peninsula and borders China and Russia to the north at the Yalu (Amnok) and Tumen rivers, and South Korea to the south at the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ). The country&#x27;s western border is formed by the Yellow Sea, while its eastern border is defined by the Sea of Japan. North Korea, like its southern counterpart, claims to be the sole legitimate government of the entire peninsula and adjacent islands. Pyongyang is the capital and largest city.

The Korean Peninsula was first inhabited as early as the Lower Paleolithic period. Its first kingdom was noted in Chinese records in the early 7th century BCE. Following the unification of the Three Kingdoms of Korea into Silla and Balhae in the late 7th century, Korea was ruled by the Goryeo dynasty (918–1392) and the Joseon dynasty (1392–1897). The succeeding Korean Empire (1897–1910) was annexed in 1910 into the Empire of Japan. In 1945, after the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II, Korea was divided into two zones along the 38th parallel, with the north occupied by the Soviet Union and the south occupied by the United States. In 1948, separate governments were formed in Korea: the socialist and Soviet-aligned Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea in the north, and the capitalist, Western-aligned Republic of Korea in the south. The North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950 started the Korean War. In 1953, the Korean Armistice Agreement brought about a ceasefire and established a demilitarized zone (DMZ), but no formal peace treaty has ever been signed. Post-war North Korea benefited greatly from economic aid and expertise provided by other Eastern Bloc countries. However, Kim Il Sung, North Korea&#x27;s first leader, promoted his personal philosophy of &quot;Juche&quot; as the state ideology. Pyongyang&#x27;s international isolation sharply accelerated from the 1980s onwards as the Cold War came to an end. The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 then brought about a sharp decline to the North Korean economy. From 1994 to 1998, North Korea suffered a famine with the population continuing to suffer from malnutrition. In 2024, the DPRK formally abandoned efforts to peacefully reunify Korea.

North Korea is a totalitarian dictatorship with a comprehensive cult of personality around the Kim family. Amnesty International considers the country to have the worst human rights record in the world. Officially, North Korea is an &quot;independent socialist state&quot; which holds democratic elections; however, outside observers have described the elections as unfair, uncompetitive, and pre-determined, in a manner similar to elections in the Soviet Union. The Workers&#x27; Party of Korea is the ruling party of North Korea. According to Article 3 of the constitution, Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism is the official ideology of North Korea. The means of production are owned by the state through state-run enterprises and collectivized farms. Most servicessuch as healthcare, education, housing, and food productionare subsidized or state-funded.

North Korea follows &quot;Songun&quot;, a &quot;military first&quot; policy which prioritizes the Korean People&#x27;s Army in state affairs and the allocation of resources. It possesses nuclear weapons. Its active-duty army of 1.28 million soldiers is the fourth-largest in the world. In addition to being a member of the United Nations since 1991, North Korea is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, the G77, and the ASEAN Regional Forum.

== Etymology ==

The modern spelling of Korea first appeared in 1671 in the travel writings of the Dutch East India Company&#x27;s Hendrick Hamel.

After the division of the country into North and South Korea, the two sides used different terms to refer to Korea: &quot;Chosun&quot; or &quot;Joseon&quot; () in North Korea, and &quot;Hanguk&quot; () in South Korea. In 1948, North Korea adopted &quot;Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea&quot; (, &quot;Chosŏn Minjujuŭi Inmin Konghwaguk&quot;; ) as its official name. In the wider world, because its government controls the northern part of the Korean Peninsula, it is commonly called &quot;North Korea&quot; to distinguish it from South Korea, which is officially called the &quot;Republic of Korea&quot; in English. Both governments consider themselves to be the legitimate government of the whole of Korea. For this reason, the people do not consider themselves as &#x27;North Koreans&#x27; but as Koreans in the same divided country as their compatriots in the South, and foreign visitors are discouraged from using the former term.

== History ==
According to Korean mythology in 2333 BCE, the Gojoseon Kingdom was established by the god-king Dangun. Following the unification of the Three Kingdoms of Korea under the name Unified Silla in 668 AD, Korea was subsequently ruled by the Goryeo dynasty (918–1392) and the Joseon dynasty (1392–1897). In 1897, King Gojong proclaimed the Korean Empire, which was annexed by the Empire of Japan in 1910.

From 1910 to the end of World War II in 1945, Korea was under Japanese rule. Most Koreans were peasants engaged in subsistence farming. In the 1930s, Japan developed mines, hydro-electric dams, steel mills, and manufacturing plants in northern Korea and neighboring Manchuria. The Korean industrial working class expanded rapidly, and many Koreans went to work in Manchuria. As a result, 65% of Korea&#x27;s heavy industry was located in the north, but, due to the rugged terrain, only 37% of its agriculture.

Northern Korea had little exposure to modern, Western ideas. One partial exception was the penetration of religion. Since the arrival of missionaries in the late nineteenth century, the northwest of Korea, and Pyongyang in particular, had been a stronghold of Christianity. As a result, Pyongyang was called the &quot;Jerusalem of the East&quot;.

A Korean guerrilla movement emerged in the mountainous interior and in Manchuria, harassing the Japanese imperial authorities. One of the most prominent guerrilla leaders was the Communist Kim Il Sung.

===Founding===
After the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II in 1945, the Korean Peninsula was divided into two zones along the 38th parallel, with the northern half of the peninsula occupied by the Soviet Union and the southern half by the United States. Negotiations on reunification failed. Soviet general Terenty Shtykov recommended the establishment of the Soviet Civil Administration in October 1945, and supported Kim Il Sung as chairman of the Provisional People&#x27;s Committee of North Korea, established in February 1946. In September 1946, South Korean citizens rose up against the Allied Military Government. In April 1948, an uprising of the Jeju islanders was violently crushed. The South declared its statehood in May 1948 and two months later the ardent anti-communist Syngman Rhee became its ruler. The Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea was established in the North on 9 September 1948. Shtykov served as the first Soviet ambassador, while Kim Il Sung became premier.

Soviet forces withdrew from the North in 1948, and most American forces withdrew from the South in 1949. Ambassador Shtykov suspected Rhee was planning to invade the North and was sympathetic to Kim&#x27;s goal of Korean unification under socialism. The two successfully lobbied Soviet leader Joseph Stalin to support a quick war against the South, which culminated in the outbreak of the Korean War.

===Korean War===

The military of North Korea invaded the South on 25 June 1950, and swiftly overran most of the country. The United Nations Command (UNC) was subsequently established following the UN Security Council&#x27;s recognition of North Korean aggression against South Korea. The motion passed because the Soviet Union, a close ally of North Korea and a member of the UN Security Council, was boycotting the UN over its recognition of the Republic of China rather than the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The UNC, led by the United States, intervened to defend the South, and rapidly advanced into North Korea. As they neared the border with China, Chinese forces intervened on behalf of North Korea, shifting the balance of the war again. Fighting ended on 27 July 1953, with an armistice that approximately restored the original boundaries between North and South Korea, but no peace treaty was signed. Approximately 3 million people died in the Korean War, with a higher proportional civilian death toll than World War II or the Vietnam War. In both per capita and absolute terms, North Korea was the country most devastated by the war, which resulted in the death of an estimated 12–15% of the North Korean population ( 10 million), &quot;a figure close to or surpassing the proportion of Soviet citizens killed in World War II&quot;, according to Charles K. Armstrong. As a result of the war, almost every substantial building in North Korea was destroyed. Some have referred to the conflict as a civil war, with other factors involved.

A heavily guarded demilitarized zone (DMZ) still divides the peninsula, and an anti-communist and anti-North Korea sentiment remains in South Korea. Since the war, the United States has maintained a strong military presence in the South which is depicted by the North Korean government as an imperialist occupation force. It claims that the Korean War was caused by the United States and South Korea.

In October 2024, North Korea claims that 1.4 million people have joined its military after accusing South Korea of a drone intrusion. In response, South Korea is restricting leaflet launches near the border to prevent potential conflict, while both sides engage in psychological warfare, including disturbing broadcasts at the border.

=== Post-war developments ===
The post-war 1950s and 1960s saw an ideological shift in North Korea, as Kim Il Sung sought to consolidate his power. Kim Il Sung was highly critical of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev and his de-Stalinization policies and critiqued Khrushchev as revisionist. During the 1956 August Faction Incident, Kim Il Sung successfully resisted efforts by the Soviet Union and China to depose him in favor of Soviet Koreans or the pro-Chinese Yan&#x27;an faction. Some scholars believe that the 1956 August incident was an example of North Korea demonstrating political independence. However, most scholars consider the final withdrawal of Chinese troops from North Korea in October 1958 to be the latest date when North Korea became effectively independent. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, North Korea sought to distinguish itself internationally by becoming a leader of the Non-Aligned Movement and promoting the ideology of &quot;Juche&quot;. In United States policymaking, North Korea was considered among the Captive Nations. Despite its efforts to break out of the Soviet and Chinese spheres of influence, North Korea remained closely aligned with both countries throughout the Cold War.

Industry was the favored sector in North Korea. Industrial production returned to pre-war levels by 1957. In 1959, relations with Japan had improved somewhat, and North Korea began allowing the repatriation of Japanese citizens in the country. The same year, North Korea revalued the North Korean won, which held greater value than its South Korean counterpart. Until the 1960s, economic growth was higher than in South Korea, and North Korean GDP per capita was equal to that of its southern neighbor as late as 1976. However, by the 1980s, the economy had begun to stagnate; it started its long decline in 1987 and almost completely collapsed after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, when all Soviet aid was suddenly halted.

An internal CIA study acknowledged various achievements of the North Korean government post-war: compassionate care for war orphans and children in general, a radical improvement in the status of women, free housing, free healthcare, and health statistics particularly in life expectancy and infant mortality that were comparable to even the most advanced nations up until the North Korean famine. Life expectancy in the North was 72 before the famine which was only marginally lower than in the South. The country once boasted a comparatively developed healthcare system; pre-famine North Korea had a network of nearly 45,000 family practitioners with some 800 hospitals and 1,000 clinics.

The relative peace between the North and South following the armistice was interrupted by border skirmishes, celebrity abductions, and assassination attempts. The North failed in several assassination attempts on South Korean leaders, such as in 1968, 1974, and the Rangoon bombing in 1983; tunnels were found under the DMZ and tensions flared over the axe murder incident at Panmunjom in 1976. For almost two decades after the war, the two states did not seek to negotiate with one another. In 1971, secret, high-level contacts began to be conducted culminating in the 1972 July 4 South–North Joint Statement that established principles of working toward peaceful reunification. The talks ultimately failed because in 1973, South Korea declared its preference that the two Koreas should seek separate memberships in international organizations.

=== Leadership of Kim Jong Il ===
The Soviet Union was dissolved on 26 December 1991, ending its aid and support to North Korea. In 1992, as Kim Il Sung&#x27;s health began deteriorating, his son Kim Jong Il slowly began taking over various state tasks. Kim Il Sung died of a heart attack in 1994; Kim Jong Il declared a three-year period of national mourning, afterward officially announcing his position as the new leader.

North Korea promised to halt its development of nuclear weapons under the Agreed Framework, negotiated with U.S. president Bill Clinton and signed in 1994. Building on Nordpolitik, South Korea began to engage with the North as part of its Sunshine Policy. Kim Jong Il instituted a policy called &quot;Songun&quot;, or &quot;military first&quot;.

Flooding in the mid-1990s exacerbated the economic crisis, severely damaging crops and infrastructure and leading to widespread famine that the government proved incapable of curtailing, resulting in the deaths of between 240,000 and 420,000 people. Which led many North Koreans to flee into China, South Korea and neighboring countries. In China, these illegal North Korea child immigrants are called the Kotjebi. In 1996, the government accepted UN food aid.

The international environment changed once George W. Bush became U.S. President in 2001. His administration rejected South Korea&#x27;s Sunshine Policy and the Agreed Framework. Bush included North Korea in his axis of evil in his 2002 State of the Union Address. The U.S. government accordingly treated North Korea as a rogue state, while North Korea redoubled its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. On 9 October 2006, North Korea announced it had conducted its first nuclear weapons test.

U.S. President Barack Obama adopted a policy of &quot;strategic patience&quot;, resisting making deals with North Korea. Tensions with South Korea and the United States increased in 2010 with the sinking of the South Korean warship &quot;Cheonan&quot; and North Korea&#x27;s shelling of Yeonpyeong Island.

=== Leadership of Kim Jong Un ===
On 17 December 2011, Kim Jong Il died from a heart attack. His youngest son Kim Jong Un was announced as his successor. In the face of international condemnation, North Korea continued to develop its nuclear arsenal, possibly including a hydrogen bomb and a missile capable of reaching the United States.

Throughout 2017, following Donald Trump&#x27;s ascension to the US presidency, tensions between the United States and North Korea increased, and there was heightened rhetoric between the two, with Trump threatening &quot;fire and fury&quot; if North Korea ever attacked U.S. territory amid North Korean threats to test missiles that would land near Guam. The tensions substantially decreased in 2018, and a détente developed. A series of summits took place between Kim Jong Un of North Korea, President Moon Jae-in of South Korea, and President Trump.

On 10 January 2021, Kim Jong Un was formally elected as the General Secretary in 8th Congress of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea, a title previously held by Kim Jong Il. On 24 March 2022, North Korea conducted a successful ICBM test launch for the first time since the 2017 crisis. In September 2022, North Korea passed a law that declared itself a nuclear state.

On December 30, 2023, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un provocatively declared South Korea, under the leadership of Yoon Suk Yeol, a &quot;colonial vassal state&quot;, marking a significant departure from the longstanding position of mutual claims over the entire Korean Peninsula by both North and South Korea. This statement was followed by a call on January 15, 2024, for a constitutional amendment to redefine the boundary with South Korea as the &#x27;Southern National Borderline,&#x27; further intensifying the rhetoric against South Korea. Kim Jong-un also stated that in the event of a war, North Korea would seek to annex the entirety of South Korea. In 2024, North Korea has deployed a contingent of troops to Russia in support of Russia&#x27;s war against Ukraine.

==Geography==
North Korea occupies the northern portion of the Korean Peninsula, lying between latitudes 37° and 43°N, and longitudes 124° and 131°E. It covers an area of . To its west are the Yellow Sea and Korea Bay, and to its east lies Japan across the Sea of Japan.

Early European visitors to Korea remarked that the country resembled &quot;a sea in a heavy gale&quot; because of the many successive mountain ranges that crisscross the peninsula. Some 80 percent of North Korea is composed of mountains and uplands, separated by deep and narrow valleys. All of the Korean Peninsula&#x27;s mountains with elevations of or more are located in North Korea. The highest point in North Korea is Paektu Mountain, a volcanic mountain with an elevation of above sea level. Considered a sacred place by North Koreans, Mount Paektu holds significance in Korean culture and has been incorporated in the elaborate folklore and personality cult around the Kim family. For example, the song, &quot;We Will Go To Mount Paektu&quot; sings in praise of Kim Jong Un and describes a symbolic trek to the mountain. Other prominent ranges are the Hamgyong Range in the extreme northeast and the Rangrim Mountains, which are located in the north-central part of North Korea. Mount Kumgang in the Taebaek Range, which extends into South Korea, is famous for its scenic beauty.

The coastal plains are wide in the west and discontinuous in the east. A great majority of the population lives in the plains and lowlands. According to a United Nations Environmental Programme report in 2003, forest covers over 70 percent of the country, mostly on steep slopes. North Korea had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.02/10, ranking it 28th globally out of 172 countries. The longest river is the Amnok (Yalu) River which flows for . The country contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Central Korean deciduous forests, Changbai Mountains mixed forests, and Manchurian mixed forests.

===Climate===

North Korea experiences a humid continental climate within the Köppen climate classification scheme. Winters bring clear weather interspersed with snow storms as a result of northern and northwestern winds that blow from Siberia. Summer tends to be by far the hottest, most humid, and rainiest time of year because of the southern and southeastern monsoon winds that carry moist air from the Pacific Ocean. Approximately 60 percent of all precipitation occurs from June to September. Spring and autumn are transitional seasons between summer and winter. The daily average high and low temperatures for Pyongyang are in January and in August.
==Government and politics==

North Korea functions as a highly centralized, one-party totalitarian dictatorship. According to its constitution, it is a self-described revolutionary and socialist state &quot;guided in its building and activities only by great Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism&quot;. In addition to the constitution, North Korea is governed by the Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System (also known as the &quot;Ten Principles of the One-Ideology System&quot;) which establishes standards for governance and a guide for the behaviors of North Koreans. The Workers&#x27; Party of Korea (WPK), a communist party led by a member of the Kim family, has an estimated 6.5 million members and is in control of North Korean politics. It has two satellite parties, the Korean Social Democratic Party and the Chondoist Chongu Party.

Kim Jong Un of the Kim family is the current Supreme Leader or &quot;Suryeong&quot; of North Korea. He heads all major governing structures: he is the general secretary of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea and president of the State Affairs. His grandfather Kim Il Sung, the founder and leader of North Korea until his death in 1994, is the country&#x27;s &quot;eternal President&quot;, while his father Kim Jong Il who succeeded Kim Il Sung as the leader was announced &quot;Eternal General Secretary&quot; and &quot;Eternal Chairman of the National Defence Commission&quot; after his death in 2011.

According to the constitution, there are officially three main branches of government. The first of these is the State Affairs Commission (SAC), which acts as &quot;the supreme national guidance organ of state sovereignty&quot;. Its role is to deliberate and decide the work on defense building of the State, including major policies of the State, and to carry out the directions of the president of the commission, Kim Jong Un. The SAC also directly supervises the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of State Security and the Ministry of Social Security.

Legislative power is held by the unicameral Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly (SPA). Its 687 members are elected every five years by universal suffrage, though the elections have been described by outside observers as similar to elections in the Soviet Union. Elections in North Korea have also been described as a form of government census, due to the near 100% turnout. Although the elections are not pluralistic, North Korean state media describes the elections as &quot;an expression of the absolute support and trust of all voters in the DPRK government&quot;. Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly sessions are convened by the SPA Standing Committee, whose Chairman (Choe Ryong-hae since 2019) is the third-ranking official in North Korea. Deputies formally elect the chairman, the vice chairpersons and members of the Standing Committee and take part in the constitutionally appointed activities of the legislature: pass laws, establish domestic and foreign policies, appoint members of the cabinet, review and approve the state economic plan, among others. The SPA itself cannot initiate any legislation independently of party or state organs. It is unknown whether it has ever criticized or amended bills placed before it, and the elections are based around a single list of WPK-approved candidates who stand without opposition.

Executive power is vested in the Cabinet of North Korea, which has been headed by Premier Pak Thae-song since 29 December 2024, who is officially the second-ranking official after Kim Jong Un. The Premier represents the government and functions independently. His authority extends over two vice premiers, 30 ministers, two cabinet commission chairmen, the cabinet chief secretary, the president of the Central Bank, the director of the Central Bureau of Statistics and the president of the Academy of Sciences.

North Korea, like its southern counterpart, claims to be the legitimate government of the entire Korean Peninsula and adjacent islands. Despite its official title as the &quot;Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea&quot;, some observers have described North Korea&#x27;s political system as a &quot;hereditary dictatorship&quot;. It has also been described as a Stalinist dictatorship.

===Political ideology===
Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism is the official ideology of North Korea and the WPK, and is the cornerstone of party works and government operations. &quot;Juche&quot;, part of the larger Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism along with &quot;Songun&quot; under Kim Jong Un, is viewed by the official North Korean line as an embodiment of Kim Il Sung&#x27;s wisdom, an expression of his leadership, and an idea which provides &quot;a complete answer to any question that arises in the struggle for national liberation&quot;. &quot;Juche&quot; was pronounced in December 1955 in a speech called &quot;On Eliminating Dogmatism and Formalism and Establishing Juche in Ideological Work&quot; in order to emphasize a Korea-centered revolution. Its core tenets are economic self-sufficiency, military self-reliance and an independent foreign policy. The roots of &quot;Juche&quot; were made up of a complex mixture of factors, including the popularity of Kim Il Sung, the conflict with pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese dissenters, and Korea&#x27;s centuries-long struggle for independence. &quot;Juche&quot; was introduced into the constitution in 1972.

&quot;Juche&quot; was initially promoted as a &quot;creative application&quot; of Marxism–Leninism, but in the mid-1970s, it was described by state propaganda as &quot;the only scientific thought... and most effective revolutionary theoretical structure that leads to the future of communist society&quot;. &quot;Juche&quot; eventually replaced Marxism–Leninism entirely by the 1980s, and in 1992 references to the latter were omitted from the constitution. The 2009 constitution dropped references to communism and elevated the &quot;Songun&quot; military first policy while explicitly confirming the position of Kim Jong Il. However, the constitution retains references to socialism. The WPK reasserted its commitment to communism in 2021. &quot;Juche&quot;″s concepts of self-reliance have evolved with time and circumstances, but still provide the groundwork for the spartan austerity, sacrifice, and discipline demanded by the party.

===Kim family===
Since the founding of the nation, North Korea&#x27;s supreme leadership has stayed within the Kim family, which in North Korea is referred to as the &quot;Mount Paektu Bloodline&quot;. It is a three-generation lineage descending from the country&#x27;s first leader, Kim Il Sung, who developed North Korea around the &quot;Juche ideology&quot;, and stayed in power until his death. Kim developed a cult of personality closely tied to the state philosophy of Juche, which was later passed on to his successors: his son Kim Jong Il in 1994 and grandson Kim Jong Un in 2011. In 2013, Clause 2 of Article 10 of the newly edited &quot;Ten Fundamental Principles of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea&quot; stated that the party and revolution must be carried &quot;eternally&quot; by the &quot;Mount Paektu Bloodline&quot;.

According to &quot;New Focus International&quot;, the cult of personality, particularly surrounding Kim Il Sung, has been crucial for legitimizing the family&#x27;s hereditary succession. The control the North Korean government exercises over many aspects of the nation&#x27;s culture is used to perpetuate the cult of personality surrounding Kim Il Sung, and Kim Jong Il. While visiting North Korea in 1979, journalist Bradley Martin wrote that nearly all music, art, and sculpture that he observed glorified &quot;Great Leader&quot; Kim Il Sung, whose personality cult was then being extended to his son, &quot;Dear Leader&quot; Kim Jong Il.

Claims that the family has been deified are contested by B. R. Myers: &quot;Divine powers have never been attributed to either of the two Kims. In fact, the propaganda apparatus in Pyongyang has generally been careful &quot;not&quot; to make claims that run directly counter to citizens&#x27; experience or common sense.&quot; He further explains that the state propaganda painted Kim Jong Il as someone whose expertise lay in military matters and that the famine of the 1990s was partially caused by natural disasters out of Kim Jong Il&#x27;s control.
The song &quot;No Motherland Without You&quot;, sung by the North Korean army choir, was created especially for Kim Jong Il and is one of the most popular tunes in the country. Kim Il Sung is still officially revered as the nation&#x27;s &quot;Eternal President&quot;. Several landmarks in North Korea are named for Kim Il Sung, including Kim Il Sung University, Kim Il Sung Stadium, and Kim Il Sung Square. Defectors have been quoted as saying that North Korean schools deify both father and son. Kim Il Sung rejected the notion that he had created a cult around himself and accused those who suggested this of &quot;factionalism&quot;. Following the death of Kim Il Sung, North Koreans were prostrating and weeping to a bronze statue of him in an organized event; similar scenes were broadcast by state television following the death of Kim Jong Il.

Critics maintain that Kim Jong Il&#x27;s personality cult was inherited from his father. Kim Jong Il was often the center of attention throughout ordinary life. His birthday is one of the most important public holidays in the country. On his 60th birthday (based on his official date of birth), mass celebrations occurred throughout the country. Kim Jong Il&#x27;s personality cult, although significant, was not as extensive as his father&#x27;s. One point of view is that Kim Jong Il&#x27;s cult of personality was solely out of respect for Kim Il Sung or out of fear of punishment for failure to pay homage, while North Korean government sources consider it genuine hero worship.

=== Administrative divisions ===


===Foreign relations===

As a result of its isolation, North Korea is sometimes known as the &quot;hermit kingdom&quot;, a term that originally referred to the isolationism in the latter part of the Joseon Dynasty. Initially, North Korea had diplomatic ties only with other communist countries, and even today, most of the foreign embassies accredited to North Korea are located in Beijing rather than in Pyongyang. In the 1960s and 1970s, it pursued an independent foreign policy, established relations with many developing countries, and joined the Non-Aligned Movement. In the late 1980s and the 1990s its foreign policy was thrown into turmoil with the collapse of the Soviet Bloc. Suffering an economic crisis, it closed a number of its embassies. At the same time, North Korea sought to build relations with developed free market countries.

North Korea joined the United Nations in 1991 together with South Korea. North Korea is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, G77 and the ASEAN Regional Forum. , North Korea had diplomatic relations with 166 countries and embassies in 47 countries. North Korea does not have diplomatic relations with Argentina, Botswana, Estonia, France, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Taiwan, the United States, and Ukraine. Germany is unusual in maintaining a North Korean embassy. German Ambassador Friedrich Lohr says most of his time in North Korea involved facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid and agricultural assistance to a population plagued by food shortages.

North Korea enjoys a close relationship with China which is often called North Korea&#x27;s closest ally. Relations were strained beginning in 2006 because of China&#x27;s concerns about North Korea&#x27;s nuclear program. Relations improved after Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and Chinese President visited North Korea in June 2019. North Korea continues to have strong ties with several Southeast Asian countries such as Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Indonesia. Relations with Malaysia were strained in 2017 by the assassination of Kim Jong-nam. North Korea has a close relationship with Russia and has voiced support for the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

North Korea was previously designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. because of its alleged involvement in the 1983 Rangoon bombing and the 1987 bombing of a South Korean airliner. On 11 October 2008, the United States removed North Korea from its list of states that sponsor terrorism after Pyongyang agreed to cooperate on issues related to its nuclear program. North Korea was re-designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. under the administration of Donald Trump on 20 November 2017 after continued nuclear tests. The kidnapping of at least 13 Japanese citizens by North Korean agents in the 1970s and the 1980s has had a detrimental effect on North Korea&#x27;s relationship with Japan.

US President Trump met with Kim in Singapore on 12 June 2018. An agreement was signed between the two countries endorsing the 2017 Panmunjom Declaration signed by North and South Korea, pledging to work towards denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula. They met in Hanoi from 27 to 28 February 2019, but failed to achieve an agreement. On 30 June 2019, Trump met with Kim along with South Korean president Moon Jae-in at the Korean DMZ.

====South Korea====
The Korean Demilitarized Zone with South Korea remains the most heavily fortified border in the world. Inter-Korean relations are at the core of North Korean diplomacy and have seen numerous shifts in the last few decades. North Korea&#x27;s policy is to seek reunification without what it sees as outside interference, through a federal structure retaining each side&#x27;s leadership and systems. In 1972, the two Koreas agreed in principle to achieve reunification through peaceful means and without foreign interference. On 10 October 1980, the then North Korean leader Kim Il Sung proposed a federation between North and South Korea named the Democratic Federal Republic of Korea in which the respective political systems would initially remain. However, relations remained cool well until the early 1990s, with a brief period in the early 1980s when North Korea offered to provide flood relief to its southern neighbor. Although the offer was initially welcomed, talks over how to deliver the relief goods broke down and none of the promised aid ever crossed the border.
The two countries also organized a reunion of 92 separated families.

The Sunshine Policy instituted by South Korean president Kim Dae-jung in 1998 was a watershed in inter-Korean relations. It encouraged other countries to engage with the North, which allowed Pyongyang to normalize relations with a number of European Union states and contributed to the establishment of joint North-South economic projects. The culmination of the Sunshine Policy was the 2000 inter-Korean summit, when Kim Dae-jung visited Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang. Both North and South Korea signed the June 15th North–South Joint Declaration, in which both sides promised to seek peaceful reunification. On 4 October 2007, South Korean president Roh Moo-hyun and Kim Jong Il signed an eight-point peace agreement.
However, relations worsened when South Korean president Lee Myung-bak adopted a more hard-line approach and suspended aid deliveries pending the de-nuclearization of the North. In 2009, North Korea responded by ending all of its previous agreements with the South. It deployed additional ballistic missiles and placed its military on full combat alert after South Korea, Japan and the United States threatened to intercept a Unha-2 space launch vehicle. The next few years witnessed a string of hostilities, including the alleged North Korean involvement in the sinking of South Korean warship &quot;Cheonan&quot;, mutual ending of diplomatic ties, a North Korean artillery attack on Yeonpyeong Island, and growing international concern over North Korea&#x27;s nuclear program.

In May 2017, Moon Jae-in was elected president of South Korea with a promise to return to the Sunshine Policy. In February 2018, a détente developed at the Winter Olympics held in South Korea. In April, South Korean president Moon Jae-in and Kim Jong Un met at the DMZ, and, in the Panmunjom Declaration, pledged to work for peace and nuclear disarmament. In September, at a joint news conference in Pyongyang, Moon and Kim agreed upon turning the Korean Peninsula into a &quot;land of peace without nuclear weapons and nuclear threats&quot;.

In January 2024, North Korea officially announced through its leader Kim Jong Un that it would no longer seek reunification with South Korea. Kim instead called for &quot;completely occupying, subjugating and reclaiming&quot; South Korea if war breaks out. Kim Jong Un also announced to the Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly that the constitution should be changed such that South Korea would be considered the &quot;primary foe and invariable principal enemy&quot; of North Korea. Additionally, government agencies tasked with promoting reunification were closed.

===Military===


The North Korean armed forces, or the Korean People&#x27;s Army (KPA), is estimated to comprise 1,280,000 active and 6,300,000 reserve and paramilitary troops, making it one of the largest military institutions in the world. With an active duty army consisting of of its population, North Korea maintains the fourth largest active military force in the world behind China, India and the United States. About 20 percent of men aged 17–54 serve in the regular armed forces, and approximately one in every 25 citizens is an enlisted soldier.

The KPA is divided into five branches: Ground Force, Navy, Air and Anti-Air Force, Special Operations Force, and Rocket Force. Command of the KPA lies in both the Central Military Commission of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea and the independent State Affairs Commission, which controls the Ministry of Defence.

Of all the KPA&#x27;s branches, the Ground Force is the largest, comprising approximately one million personnel divided into 80 infantry divisions, 30 artillery brigades, 25 special warfare brigades, 20 mechanized brigades, 10 tank brigades and seven tank regiments. It is equipped with 3,700 tanks, 2,100 armored personnel carriers and infantry fighting vehicles, 17,900 artillery pieces, 11,000 anti-aircraft guns and some 10,000 MANPADS and anti-tank guided missiles. The Air Force is estimated to possess around 1,600 aircraft (with between 545 – 810 serving combat roles), while the Navy operates approximately 800 vessels, including the largest submarine fleet in the world. The KPA&#x27;s Special Operation Force is also the world&#x27;s largest special forces unit.
North Korea is a nuclear-armed state, though the nature and strength of the country&#x27;s arsenal is uncertain. , estimates of its size ranged between 40 and 116 assembled nuclear warheads. Delivery capabilities are provided by the Rocket Force, which has some 1,000 ballistic missiles with a range of up to .

According to a 2004 South Korean assessment, North Korea also possesses a stockpile of chemical weapons estimated to amount to between 2,500 and 5,000 tons, including nerve, blister, blood, and vomiting agents, as well as the ability to cultivate and produce biological weapons including anthrax, smallpox, and cholera. As a result of its nuclear and missile tests, North Korea has been sanctioned under United Nations Security Council resolutions 1695 of July 2006, 1718 of October 2006, 1874 of June 2009, 2087 of January 2013, and 2397 in December 2017.

The sale of weapons to North Korea by other states is prohibited by UN sanctions, and the KPA&#x27;s conventional capabilities are limited by a number of factors including obsolete equipment, insufficient fuel supplies and a shortage of digital command and control assets. To compensate for these deficiencies, the KPA has deployed a wide range of asymmetric warfare technologies including anti-personnel blinding lasers, GPS jammers, midget submarines and human torpedoes, stealth paint, and cyberwarfare units. In 2015, North Korea was reported to employ 6,000 sophisticated computer security personnel in a cyberwarfare unit operating out of China. KPA units were blamed for the 2014 Sony Pictures hack and have allegedly attempted to jam South Korean military satellites.

Much of the equipment in use by the KPA is engineered and manufactured by the domestic defense industry. Weapons are manufactured in roughly 1,800 underground defense industry plants scattered throughout the country, most of them located in Chagang Province. The defense industry is capable of producing a full range of individual and crew-operated weapons, artillery, armored vehicles, tanks, missiles, helicopters, submarines, landing and infiltration craft and Yak-18 trainers, and may even have limited jet aircraft manufacturing capacity. According to North Korean state media, military expenditure amounted to 15.8 percent of the state budget in 2010. The U.S. State Department has estimated that North Korea&#x27;s military spending averaged 23% of its GDP from 2004 to 2014, the highest level in the world. North Korea successfully tested a new type of submarine-launched ballistic missile on 19 October 2021.

===Law enforcement and internal security===

North Korea has a civil law system based on the Prussian model and influenced by Japanese traditions and communist legal theory. Judiciary procedures are handled by the Central Court (the highest court of appeal), provincial or special city-level courts, people&#x27;s courts, and special courts. People&#x27;s courts are at the lowest level of the system and operate in cities, counties and urban districts, while different kinds of special courts handle cases related to military, railroad, or maritime matters.

Judges are elected by their respective local people&#x27;s assemblies, but this vote tends to be overruled by the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea. The penal code is based on the principle of &quot;nullum crimen sine lege&quot; (no crime without a law), but remains a tool for political control despite several amendments reducing ideological influence. Courts carry out legal procedures related to not only criminal and civil matters, but also political cases as well. Political prisoners are sent to labor camps, while criminal offenders are incarcerated in a separate system.

The Ministry of Social Security maintains most law enforcement activities. It is one of the most powerful state institutions in North Korea and oversees the national police force, investigates criminal cases and manages non-political correctional facilities. It handles other aspects of domestic security like civil registration, traffic control, fire departments and railroad security. The Ministry of State Security was separated from the Ministry of Public Security in 1973 to conduct domestic and foreign intelligence, counterintelligence and manage the political prison system. Political camps can be short-term reeducation zones or &quot;kwalliso&quot; (total control zones) for lifetime detention. Camp 15 in Yodok and Camp 18 in Pukchang have been described in detailed testimonies.

The security apparatus is extensive, exerting strict control over residence, travel, employment, clothing, food and family life. Security forces employ mass surveillance. It is believed they tightly monitor cellular and digital communications.

North Korea has updated its constitution, labeling South Korea as a &quot;hostile state&quot; and abandoning its previous goal of peaceful reunification. This shift coincides with the destruction of inter-Korean connections and increased border defenses.

===Human rights===


The state of human rights in North Korea has been widely condemned. A 2014 UN inquiry into the DPRK&#x27;s human rights record found evidence for &quot;systematic, widespread and gross human rights violations&quot; and stated that &quot;the gravity, scale and nature of these violations reveal a state that does not have any parallel in the contemporary world&quot;, with Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch holding similar views. North Koreans have been referred to as &quot;some of the world&#x27;s most brutalized people&quot; by Human Rights Watch, because of the severe restrictions placed on their political and economic freedoms. The North Korean population is strictly managed by the state and all aspects of daily life are subordinated to party and state planning. According to US government reports, employment is managed by the party on the basis of political reliability, and travel is tightly controlled by the Ministry of People&#x27;s Security. The US State Department says that North Koreans do not have a choice in the jobs they work and are not free to change jobs at will.

There are restrictions on the freedom of association, expression and movement; arbitrary detention, torture and other ill-treatment result in death and execution. Citizens in North Korea are generally not permitted to leave the country at will and its government denies access to UN human rights observers.

The Ministry of State Security extrajudicially apprehends and imprisons those accused of political crimes without due process. People perceived as hostile to the government, such as Christians or critics of the leadership, are deported to labor camps without trial, often with their whole family and mostly without any chance of being released. Forced labor is part of an established system of political repression.

Based on satellite images and defector testimonies, an estimated 200,000 prisoners are held in six large prison camps, where they are made to work to right their wrongdoings. Supporters of the government who deviate from the government line are subject to reeducation in sections of labor camps set aside for that purpose. Those who are deemed politically rehabilitated may reassume responsible government positions on their release.

The United Nations Commission of Inquiry has accused North Korea of crimes against humanity. The International Coalition to Stop Crimes Against Humanity in North Korea (ICNK) estimates that over 10,000 people die in North Korean prison camps every year.

With 1,100,000 people in modern slavery (via forced labor), North Korea is ranked highest in the world in terms of the percentage of population in modern slavery, with 10.4 percent enslaved according to the Walk Free&#x27;s 2018 Global Slavery Index. North Korea is the only country in the world that has not explicitly criminalized any form of modern slavery. A United Nations report listed slavery among the crimes against humanity occurring in North Korea.

According to the US State Department, the North Korean government does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of human trafficking and is not making significant efforts to do so. North Korea has trafficked thousands of its own citizens allegedly as forced laborers to Russia, Poland, Malaysia, various parts of Africa and the Persian Gulf where most of the laborers&#x27; earnings are pocketed by Pyongyang.

The North Korean government rejects the human rights abuse claims, calling them a smear campaign and a human rights racket made to topple the government. In a 2014 report to the UN, North Korea dismissed accusations of atrocities as wild rumors. The official state media, KCNA, responded with an article that included homophobic insults against the author of the human rights report, Michael Kirby, calling him &quot;a disgusting old lecher with a 40-odd-year-long career of homosexuality ... This practice can never be found in the DPRK boasting of the sound mentality and good morals ... In fact, it is ridiculous for such gay to sponsor dealing with others&#x27; human rights issue.&quot; The government, however, admitted some human rights issues related to living conditions and stated that it is working to improve them.

==Economy==

North Korea has maintained one of the most closed and centralized economies in the world since the 1940s. For several decades, it followed the Soviet pattern of five-year plans with the ultimate goal of achieving self-sufficiency. Extensive Soviet and Chinese support allowed North Korea to rapidly recover from the Korean War and register very high growth rates. Systematic inefficiency began to arise around 1960, when the economy shifted from the extensive to the intensive development stage. The shortage of skilled labor, energy, arable land and transportation significantly impeded long-term growth and resulted in consistent failure to meet planning objectives. The major slowdown of the economy contrasted with South Korea, which surpassed the North in terms of absolute GDP and per capita income by the 1980s. North Korea declared the last seven-year plan unsuccessful in December 1993 and thereafter stopped announcing plans.

The loss of Eastern Bloc trading partners and a series of natural disasters throughout the 1990s caused severe hardships, including widespread famine. By 2000, the situation improved owing to a massive international food assistance effort, but the economy continues to suffer from food shortages, dilapidated infrastructure and a critically low energy supply. In an attempt to recover from the collapse, the government began structural reforms in 1998 that formally legalized private ownership of assets and decentralized control over production. A second round of reforms in 2002 led to an expansion of market activities, partial monetization, flexible prices and salaries, and the introduction of incentives and accountability techniques. Despite these changes, North Korea remains a command economy where the state owns almost all means of production and development priorities are defined by the government.

North Korea has the structural profile of a relatively industrialized country where nearly half of the gross domestic product is generated by industry and human development is at medium levels. Purchasing power parity (PPP) GDP is estimated at $40 billion, with a very low per capita value of $1,800. In 2012, gross national income per capita was $1,523, compared to $28,430 in South Korea. The North Korean won is the national currency, issued by the Central Bank of the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea. The economy has been developing dramatically in recent years despite sanctions. The Sejong Institute describes these changes as &quot;astonishing&quot;.

The economy is heavily nationalized. Food and housing are extensively subsidized by the state; education and healthcare are free; and the payment of taxes was officially abolished in 1974. A variety of goods are available in department stores and supermarkets in Pyongyang, though most of the population relies on small-scale &quot;jangmadang&quot; markets. In 2009, the government attempted to stem the expanding free market by banning jangmadang and the use of foreign currency, heavily devaluing the won and restricting the convertibility of savings in the old currency, but the resulting inflation spike and rare public protests caused a reversal of these policies. Private trade is dominated by women because most men are required to be present at their workplace, even though many state-owned enterprises are non-operational.

Industry and services employ 65% of North Korea&#x27;s 12.6 million labor force. Major industries include machine building, military equipment, chemicals, mining, metallurgy, textiles, food processing and tourism. Iron ore and coal production are among the few sectors where North Korea performs significantly better than its southern neighbor—it produces about 10 times more of each resource. Using ex-Romanian drilling rigs, several oil exploration companies have confirmed significant oil reserves in the North Korean shelf of the Sea of Japan, and in areas south of Pyongyang. The agricultural sector was shattered by the natural disasters of the 1990s. Its 3,500 cooperatives and state farms were moderately successful until the mid-1990s but now experience chronic fertilizer and equipment shortages. Rice, corn, soybeans and potatoes are some of the primary crops. A significant contribution to the food supply comes from commercial fishing and aquaculture. Smaller specialized farms, managed by the state, also produce high-value crops, including ginseng, honey, matsutake and herbs for traditional Korean and Chinese medicine. Tourism has been a growing sector for the past decade. North Korea has been aiming to increase the number of foreign visitors through projects like the Masikryong Ski Resort. On 22 January 2020, North Korea closed its borders to foreign tourists in response to the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea.

Foreign trade surpassed pre-crisis levels in 2005 and continues to expand. North Korea has a number of special economic zones (SEZs) and Special Administrative Regions where foreign companies can operate with tax and tariff incentives while North Korean establishments gain access to improved technology. Initially four such zones existed, but they yielded little overall success. The SEZ system was overhauled in 2013 when 14 new zones were opened and the Rason Special Economic Zone was reformed as a joint Chinese-North Korean project. The Kaesong Industrial Region is a special economic zone where more than 100 South Korean companies employ some 52,000 North Korean workers. , China is the biggest trading partner of North Korea outside inter-Korean trade, accounting for more than 84% of the total external trade ($5.3 billion) followed by India at 3.3% share ($205 million). In 2014, Russia wrote off 90% of North Korea&#x27;s debt and the two countries agreed to conduct all transactions in rubles. Overall, external trade in 2013 reached a total of $7.3 billion (the highest amount since 1990), while inter-Korean trade dropped to an eight-year low of $1.1 billion.

=== Transportation ===

Transport infrastructure in North Korea includes railways, highways, water and air routes, but rail transport is by far the most widespread. North Korea has some of railways mostly in standard gauge which carry 80% of annual passenger traffic and 86% of freight, but electricity shortages undermine their efficiency. Construction of a high-speed railway connecting Kaesong, Pyongyang and Sinuiju with speeds exceeding was approved in 2013. North Korea connects with the Trans-Siberian Railway through Rajin.

Road transport is very limited—only of the road network are paved, and maintenance on most roads is poor. Only 2% of the freight capacity is supported by river and sea transport, and air traffic is negligible. All port facilities are ice-free and host a merchant fleet of 158 vessels. Eighty-two airports and 23 helipads are operational and the largest serve the state-run airline, Air Koryo. Cars are relatively rare, but bicycles are common. There is only one international airport—Pyongyang International Airport—serviced by Russia and China (see List of public airports in North Korea)

=== Energy ===
North Korea&#x27;s energy infrastructure is obsolete and in disrepair. Power shortages are chronic and would not be alleviated even by electricity imports because the poorly maintained grid causes significant losses during transmission. Coal accounts for 70% of primary energy production, followed by hydroelectric power with 17%. The government under Kim Jong Un has increased emphasis on renewable energy projects like wind farms, solar parks, solar heating and biomass. A set of legal regulations adopted in 2014 stressed the development of geothermal, wind and solar energy along with recycling and environmental conservation. North Korea&#x27;s long-term objective is to curb fossil fuel usage and reach an output of 5 million kilowatts from renewable sources by 2044, up from its current total of 430,000 kilowatts from all sources. Wind power is projected to satisfy 15% of the country&#x27;s total energy demand under this strategy.

North Korea also strives to develop its own civilian nuclear program. These efforts are under much international dispute due to their military applications and concerns about safety.

=== Science and technology ===
R&amp;D efforts are concentrated at the State Academy of Sciences, which runs 40 research institutes, 200 smaller research centers, a scientific equipment factory and six publishing houses. The government considers science and technology to be directly linked to economic development. A five-year scientific plan emphasizing IT, biotechnology, nanotechnology, marine technology, and laser and plasma research was carried out in the early 2000s. A 2010 report by the South Korean Science and Technology Policy Institute identified polymer chemistry, single carbon materials, nanoscience, mathematics, software, nuclear technology and rocketry as potential areas of inter-Korean scientific cooperation. North Korean institutes are strong in these fields of research, although their engineers require additional training, and laboratories need equipment upgrades.

Under its &quot;constructing a powerful knowledge economy&quot; slogan, the state has launched a project to concentrate education, scientific research and production into a number of &quot;high-tech development zones&quot;. International sanctions remain a significant obstacle to their development. The &quot;Miraewon&quot; network of electronic libraries was established in 2014 under similar slogans.

Significant resources have been allocated to the national space program, which is managed by the National Aerospace Technology Administration (formerly managed by the Korean Committee of Space Technology until April 2013). Domestically produced launch vehicles and the Kwangmyŏngsŏng satellite class are launched from two spaceports, the Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground and the Sohae Satellite Launching Station. After four failed attempts, North Korea became the tenth spacefaring nation with the launch of Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 Unit 2 in December 2012, which successfully reached orbit but was believed to be crippled and non-operational. It joined the Outer Space Treaty in 2009 and has stated its intentions to undertake crewed and Moon missions. The government insisted the space program is for peaceful purposes, but the United States, Japan, South Korea and other countries maintained that it serves to advance North Korea&#x27;s ballistic missile program. On 7 February 2016, a statement broadcast on Korean Central Television said that a new Earth observation satellite, Kwangmyongsong-4, had successfully been put into orbit.

Usage of communication technology is controlled by the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications. An adequate nationwide fiber-optic telephone system with 1.18 million fixed lines and expanding mobile coverage is in place. Most phones are installed for senior government officials and installation requires written explanation why the user needs a telephone and how it will be paid for. Cellular coverage is available with a 3G network operated by Koryolink, a joint venture with Orascom Telecom Holding. The number of subscribers has increased from 3,000 in 2002 to almost two million in 2013. International calls through either fixed or cellular service are restricted, and mobile Internet is not available.

Internet access itself is limited to a handful of elite users and scientists. Instead, North Korea has a walled garden intranet system called Kwangmyong, which is maintained and monitored by the Korea Computer Center. Its content is limited to state media, chat services, message boards, an e-mail service and an estimated 1,000–5,500 websites. Computers employ the Red Star OS, an operating system derived from Linux, with a user shell visually similar to that of OS X. On 19 September 2016, a TLDR project noticed the North Korean Internet DNS data and top-level domain was left open which allowed global DNS zone transfers. A dump of the data discovered was shared on GitHub.

==Demographics==

North Korea&#x27;s population was 10.9 million in 1961. With the exception of a small Chinese community and a few ethnic Japanese, North Korea&#x27;s people are ethnically homogeneous. Demographic experts in the 20th century estimated that the population would grow to 25.5 million by 2000 and 28 million by 2010, but this increase never occurred due to the North Korean famine. The famine began in 1995, lasted for three years, and resulted in the deaths of between 240,000 and 420,000 North Koreans.

International donors led by the United States initiated shipments of food through the World Food Program in 1997 to combat the famine. Despite a drastic reduction of aid under the George W. Bush administration, the situation gradually improved: the number of malnourished children declined from 60% in 1998 to 37% in 2006 and 28% in 2013. Domestic food production almost recovered to the recommended annual level of 5.37 million tons of cereal equivalent in 2013, but the World Food Program reported a continuing lack of dietary diversity and access to fats and proteins. By the mid-2010s national levels of severe wasting, an indication of famine-like conditions, were lower than in other low-income countries and about on par with developing nations in the Pacific and East Asia. Children&#x27;s health and nutrition is significantly better on a number of indicators than in many other Asian countries.

The famine had a significant impact on the population growth rate, which declined to 0.9% annually in 2002. It was 0.5% in 2014. Late marriages after military service, limited housing space and long hours of work or political studies further exhaust the population and reduce growth. The national birth rate is 14.5 births per year per 1,000 population. Two-thirds of households consist of extended families mostly living in two-room units. Marriage is virtually universal and divorce is extremely rare.

=== Language ===

North Korea shares the Korean language with South Korea, although some dialectal differences exist within both Koreas. North Koreans refer to their Pyongan dialect as &quot;munhwaŏ&quot; (&quot;cultured language&quot;) as opposed to the dialects of South Korea, especially the Seoul dialect or &quot;p&#x27;yojun&#x27;ŏ&quot; (&quot;standard language&quot;), which are viewed as decadent because of its use of loanwords from Chinese and European languages (particularly English). Words of Chinese, Manchu or Western origin have been eliminated from &quot;munhwa&quot; along with the usage of Chinese hancha characters. Written language uses only the Chosŏn&#x27;gŭl (Hangul) phonetic alphabet, developed under Sejong the Great (1418–1450).

=== Religion ===

North Korea is officially an atheist state. Its constitution guarantees freedom of religion under Article 68, but this principle is limited by the requirement that religion may not be used as a pretext to harm the state, introduce foreign forces, or harm the existing social order. Religious practice is therefore restricted, despite nominal constitutional protections. Proselytizing is also prohibited due to concerns about foreign influence. The number of Christian churchgoers nonetheless more than doubled between the 1980s and the early 2000s due to the recruitment of Christians who previously worshipped privately or in small house churches. The Open Doors mission, a Protestant group based in the United States and founded during the Cold War era, claims the most severe persecution of Christians in the world occurs in North Korea.

There are no known official statistics of religions in North Korea. According to a 2020 study published by the Centre for the Study of World Christianity, 73% of the population are irreligious (58% agnostic, 15% atheist), 13% practice Chondoism, 12% practice Korean shamanism, 1.5% are Buddhist, and less than 0.5% practice another religion such as Christianity, Islam, or Chinese folk religion. Amnesty International has expressed concerns about religious persecution in North Korea. Pro-North groups such as the Paektu Solidarity Alliance deny these claims, saying that multiple religious facilities exist across the nation. Some religious places of worship are located in foreign embassies in the capital city of Pyongyang. Five Christian churches built with state funds stand in Pyongyang: three Protestant, one Roman Catholic, and one Russian Orthodox. Critics claim these are showcases for foreigners.

Buddhism and Confucianism still influence spirituality. Chondoism (&quot;Heavenly Way&quot;) is an indigenous syncretic belief combining elements of Korean shamanism, Buddhism, Taoism and Catholicism that is officially represented by the WPK-controlled Chondoist Chongu Party. Chondoism is recognized and favored by the government, being seen as an indigenous form of &quot;revolutionary religion&quot;.

=== Education ===
The 2008 census listed the entire population as literate. An 11-year free, compulsory cycle of primary and secondary education is provided in more than 27,000 nursery schools, 14,000 kindergartens, 4,800 four-year primary and 4,700 six-year secondary schools. 77% of males and 79% of females aged 30–34 have finished secondary school. An additional 300 universities and colleges offer higher education.

Most graduates from the compulsory program do not attend university but begin their obligatory military service or proceed to work in farms or factories instead. The main deficiencies of higher education are the heavy presence of ideological subjects, which comprise 50% of courses in social studies and 20% in sciences, and the imbalances in curriculum. The study of natural sciences is greatly emphasized while social sciences are neglected. Heuristics is actively applied to develop the independence and creativity of students throughout the system. The study of Russian and English was made compulsory in upper middle schools in 1978.

=== Health ===
North Korea has a life expectancy of 72.3 years in 2019, according to HDR 2020. While North Korea is classified as a low-income country, the structure of North Korea&#x27;s causes of death (2013) is unlike that of other low-income countries. Instead, it is closer to worldwide averages, with non-communicable diseases—such as cardiovascular disease and cancers—accounting for 84 percent of the total deaths in 2016.

According to the World Bank report of 2016 (based on WHO&#x27;s estimate), only 9.5% of the total deaths recorded in North Korea are attributed to communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and nutrition conditions, a figure which is slightly lower than that of South Korea (10.1%) and one fifth of other low-income countries (50.1%) but higher than that of high income countries (6.7%). Only one out of ten leading causes of overall deaths in North Korea is attributed to communicable diseases (lower respiratory infection), a disease which is reported to have declined by six percent since 2007.

In 2013, cardiovascular disease as a single disease group was reported as the largest cause of death in North Korea. The three major causes of death in North Korea are stroke, COPD and ischaemic heart disease. Non-communicable diseases risk factors in North Korea include high rates of urbanization, an aging society, and high rates of smoking and alcohol consumption amongst men.

Maternal mortality is lower than other low-income countries, but significantly higher than South Korea and other high income countries, at 89 per 100,000 live births. In 2008 child mortality was estimated to be 45 per 1,000, which is much better than other economically comparable countries. Chad for example had a child mortality rate of 120 per 1,000, despite the fact that Chad was most likely wealthier than North Korea at the time.

Healthcare Access and Quality Index, as calculated by IHME, was reported to stand at 62.3, much lower than that of South Korea.

According to a 2003 report by the United States Department of State, almost 100% of the population has access to water and sanitation. Further, 80% of the population had access to improved sanitation facilities in 2015.

North Korea has the highest number of doctors per capita amongst low-income countries, with 3.7 physicians per 1,000 people, a figure which is also significantly higher than that of South Korea, according to WHO&#x27;s data.

Conflicting reports between Amnesty and WHO have emerged, where the Amnesty report claimed that North Korea had an inadequate health care system, while the Director of the World Health Organization claimed that North Korea&#x27;s healthcare system was considered the envy of the developing world and had &quot;no lack of doctors and nurses&quot;.

A free universal insurance system is in place. Quality of medical care varies significantly by region and is often low, with severe shortages of equipment, drugs and anesthetics. According to WHO, expenditure on health per capita is one of the lowest in the world. Preventive medicine is emphasized through physical exercise and sports, nationwide monthly checkups and routine spraying of public places against disease. Every individual has a lifetime health card which contains a full medical record.

=== Songbun ===

According to North Korean documents and refugee testimonies, all North Koreans are sorted into groups according to their Songbun, an ascribed status system based on a citizen&#x27;s assessed loyalty to the government. Based on their own behavior and the political, social, and economic background of their family for three generations as well as behavior by relatives within that range, Songbun is allegedly used to determine whether an individual is trusted with responsibility or given certain opportunities.

Songbun allegedly affects access to educational and employment opportunities and particularly whether a person is eligible to join North Korea&#x27;s ruling party. There are 3 main classifications and about 50 sub-classifications. According to Kim Il Sung, speaking in 1958, the loyal &quot;core class&quot; constituted 25% of the North Korean population, the &quot;wavering class&quot; 55%, and the &quot;hostile class&quot; 20%. The highest status is accorded to individuals descended from those who participated with Kim Il Sung in the resistance against Japanese occupation before and during World War II and to those who were factory workers, laborers, or peasants in 1950.

While some analysts believe private commerce recently changed the Songbun system to some extent, most North Korean refugees say it remains a commanding presence in everyday life. The North Korean government claims all citizens are equal and denies any discrimination on the basis of family background.

==Culture==


Despite a historically strong Chinese influence, Korean culture has shaped its own unique identity. It came under attack during the Japanese rule from 1910 to 1945, when Japan enforced a cultural assimilation policy. Koreans were forced to learn and speak Japanese, adopt the Japanese family name system and Shinto religion, and were forbidden to write or speak the Korean language in schools, businesses, or public places.

After the peninsula was divided in 1945, two distinct cultures formed out of the common Korean heritage. North Koreans have little exposure to foreign influence. The revolutionary struggle and the brilliance of the leadership are some of the main themes in art. &quot;Reactionary&quot; elements from traditional culture have been discarded and cultural forms with a &quot;folk&quot; spirit have been reintroduced.

Korean heritage is protected and maintained by the state. Over 190 historical sites and objects of national significance are cataloged as National Treasures of North Korea, while some 1,800 less valuable artifacts are included in a list of Cultural Assets. The Historic Monuments and Sites in Kaesong and the Complex of Koguryo Tombs are UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The Goguryeo tombs are registered on UNESCO&#x27;s list of World Heritage Sites. These remains were registered as the first World Heritage property of North Korea in the UNESCO World Heritage Committee (WHC) in July 2004. There are 63 burial mounds on the site, with clear murals preserved. The burial customs of the Goguryeo culture have influenced Asian civilizations beyond Korea, including Japan.

===Art===
Visual arts are generally produced in the aesthetic of socialist realism. North Korean painting combines the influence of Soviet and Japanese visual expression to instill a sentimental loyalty to the system. All artists in North Korea are required to join the Artists&#x27; Union, and the best among them can receive an official license to portray the leaders. Portraits and sculptures depicting Kim Il Sung, Kim Jong Il and Kim Jong Un are classed as &quot;Number One works&quot;.

Most aspects of art have been dominated by Mansudae Art Studio since its establishment in 1959. It employs around 1,000 artists in what is likely the biggest art factory in the world where paintings, murals, posters and monuments are designed and produced. The studio has commercialized its activity and sells its works to collectors in a variety of countries including China, where it is in high demand. Mansudae Overseas Projects is a subdivision of Mansudae Art Studio that carries out construction of large-scale monuments for international customers. Some of the projects include the African Renaissance Monument in Senegal, and the Heroes&#x27; Acre in Namibia.

===Literature===

All publishing houses are owned by the government or the WPK because they are considered an important tool for agitprop. The Workers&#x27; Party of Korea Publishing House is the most authoritative among them and publishes all works of Kim Il Sung, ideological education materials and party policy documents. The availability of foreign literature is limited, examples being North Korean editions of Indian, German, Chinese and Russian fairy tales, &quot;Tales from Shakespeare&quot;, some works of Bertolt Brecht and Erich Kästner, and the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series.

Kim Il Sung&#x27;s personal works are considered &quot;classical masterpieces&quot; while the ones created under his instruction are labeled &quot;models of &quot;Juche&quot; literature&quot;. These include &quot;The Fate of a Self-Defense Corps Man&quot;, &quot;The Song of Korea&quot; and &quot;Immortal History&quot;, a series of historical novels depicting the suffering of Koreans under Japanese occupation. More than four million literary works were published between the 1980s and the early 2000s, but almost all of them belong to a narrow variety of political genres like &quot;army-first revolutionary literature&quot;.

Science fiction is considered a secondary genre because it somewhat departs from the traditional standards of detailed descriptions and metaphors of the leader. The exotic settings of the stories give authors more freedom to depict cyberwarfare, violence, sexual abuse, and crime, which are absent in other genres. Sci-fi works glorify technology and promote the &quot;Juche&quot; concept of anthropocentric existence through depictions of robotics, space exploration, and immortality.

===Music===

The government emphasized optimistic folk-based tunes and revolutionary music throughout most of the 20th century. Ideological messages are conveyed through massive orchestral pieces like the &quot;Five Great Revolutionary Operas&quot; based on traditional Korean &quot;ch&#x27;angguk&quot;. Revolutionary operas differ from their Western counterparts by adding traditional instruments to the orchestra and avoiding recitative segments. &quot;Sea of Blood&quot; is the most widely performed of the Five Great Operas: since its premiere in 1971, it has been played over 1,500 times, and its 2010 tour in China was a major success. Western classical music by Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Stravinsky and other composers is performed both by the State Symphony Orchestra and student orchestras.

Pop music appeared in the 1980s with the Pochonbo Electronic Ensemble and Wangjaesan Light Music Band. Improved relations with South Korea following the 2000 inter-Korean summit caused a decline in direct ideological messages in pop songs, but themes like comradeship, nostalgia and the construction of a powerful country remained. In 2014, the all-girl Moranbong Band was described as the most popular group in the country. North Koreans also listen to K-pop which spreads through illegal markets.

===Media===
Government policies towards film are no different from those applied to other arts—motion pictures serve to fulfill the targets of &quot;social education&quot;. Some of the most influential films are based on historic events (&quot;An Jung-geun shoots Itō Hirobumi&quot;) or folk tales (&quot;Hong Gildong&quot;). Most movies have predictable propaganda story lines which make cinema an unpopular entertainment; viewers only see films that feature their favorite actors. Western productions are only available at private showings to high-ranking Party members, although the 1997 film &quot;Titanic&quot; is frequently shown to university students as an example of Western culture. Access to foreign media products is available through smuggled DVDs and television or radio broadcasts in border areas. Western films like &quot;The Interview&quot;, &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;, and the aforementioned &quot;Titanic&quot; are just a few films that have been smuggled across the borders of North Korea, allowing for access to the North Korean citizens.

North Korean media are under some of the strictest government control in the world. The censorship in North Korea encompasses all the information produced by the media. Monitored heavily by government officials, the media is strictly used to reinforce ideals approved by the government. There is no freedom of press in North Korea as all the media is controlled and filtered through governmental censors. Freedom of the press in 2017 was 180th out of 180 countries in Reporters Without Borders&#x27; annual Press Freedom Index. According to Freedom House, all media outlets serve as government mouthpieces, all journalists are party members and listening to foreign broadcasts carries the threat of the death penalty. The main news provider is the Korean Central News Agency. All 12 major newspapers and 20 periodicals, including &quot;Rodong Sinmun&quot;, are published in the capital.

There are three state-owned TV stations. Two of them broadcast only on weekends and the Korean Central Television is on air every day in the evenings. Uriminzokkiri and its associated YouTube and Twitter accounts distribute imagery, news and video issued by government media. The Associated Press opened the first Western all-format, full-time bureau in Pyongyang in 2012.

Media coverage of North Korea has often been inadequate as a result of the country&#x27;s isolation. Stories like Kim Jong Un executing his ex-girlfriend or feeding his uncle to a pack of hungry dogs have been circulated by foreign media as truth despite the lack of a credible source. Many of the claims originate from the South Korean right-wing newspaper &quot;The Chosun Ilbo&quot;. Max Fisher of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; has written that &quot;almost any story [on North Korea] is treated as broadly credible, no matter how outlandish or thinly sourced&quot;. Occasional deliberate disinformation on the part of North Korean establishments further complicates the issue.

===Cuisine===
Korean cuisine has evolved through centuries of social and political change. Originating from ancient agricultural and nomadic traditions in southern Manchuria and the Korean Peninsula, it has gone through a complex interaction of the natural environment and different cultural trends. Rice dishes and kimchi are staple Korean food. In a traditional meal, they accompany both side dishes (&quot;panch&#x27;an&quot;) and main courses like &quot;juk&quot;, &quot;pulgogi&quot; or noodles. &quot;Soju&quot; liquor is the best-known traditional Korean spirit.

North Korea&#x27;s most famous restaurant, Okryu-gwan, located in Pyongyang, is known for its &quot;raengmyeon&quot; cold noodles. Other dishes served there include gray mullet soup with boiled rice, beef rib soup, green bean pancake, &quot;sinsollo&quot; and dishes made from terrapin. Okryu-gwan sends research teams into the countryside to collect data on Korean cuisine and introduce new recipes. Some Asian cities host branches of the Pyongyang restaurant chain where waitresses perform music and dance.

===Sports===

Most schools have daily practice in association football, basketball, table tennis, gymnastics, boxing and others. The DPR Korea League is popular inside the country and its games are often televised. The national football team, &quot;Chollima&quot;, competed in the FIFA World Cup in 2010, when it lost all three matches against Brazil, Portugal and Ivory Coast. Its 1966 appearance was much more successful, seeing a surprise 1–0 victory over Italy and a quarter final loss to Portugal by 3–5. A national team represents the nation in international basketball competitions as well. In December 2013, former American basketball professional Dennis Rodman visited North Korea to help train the national team after he developed a friendship with Kim Jong Un.

North Korea&#x27;s first appearance in the Olympics came in 1964. The 1972 Olympics saw its summer games debut and five medals, including one gold. With the exception of the boycotted Los Angeles and Seoul Olympics, North Korean athletes have won medals in all summer games since then. Weightlifter Kim Un-guk broke the world record of the Men&#x27;s 62 kg category at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. Successful Olympians receive luxury apartments from the state in recognition for their achievements.

The Arirang Mass Games has been recognized by the Guinness World Records as the biggest choreographic event in the world. Some 100,000 athletes perform rhythmic gymnastics and dances while another 40,000 participants create a vast animated screen in the background. The event is an artistic representation of the country&#x27;s history and pays homage to Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il. Rungrado 1st of May Stadium, the largest stadium in the world with its capacity of 150,000, hosts the Festival. The Pyongyang Marathon is another notable sports event. It is an IAAF Bronze Label Race where amateur runners from around the world can participate.
==See also==

* Bibliography of North Korea
* China–North Korea border
* Outline of North Korea
==Notes==

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited sources ===
* 
* 
* Armstrong, Charles K. &quot;North Korea in 2016.&quot; &quot;Asian Survey&quot; 57.1 (2017): 119–27. abstract 
* 
* Hayes, Peter, and Roger Cavazos. &quot;North Korea in 2015.&quot; &quot;Asian Survey&quot; 56.1 (2016): 68–77. abstract 
* Hayes, Peter, and Roger Cavazos. &quot;North Korea in 2014.&quot; &quot;Asian Survey&quot; 55.1 (2015): 119–31. abstract ; also full text online 
* , covers 1960s to 2010.
* Jackson, Van. &quot;Deterring a Nuclear-Armed Adversary in a Contested Regional Order: The &#x27;Trilemma&#x27; of US–North Korea Relations.&quot; &quot;Asia Policy&quot; 23.1 (2017): 97–103. online 
* Lee, Hong Yung. &quot;North Korea in 2013: Economy, Executions, and Nuclear Brinksmanship.&quot; &quot;Asian Survey&quot; 54.1 (2014): 89–100. Online .
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
=== Government websites ===
* KCNA () – website of the Korean Central News Agency
* Naenara () – the official North Korean governmental portal Naenara
* DPRK Foreign Ministry () – official North Korean foreign ministry website
* The Pyongyang Times – official foreign language newspaper of the DPRK (archived)

=== General websites ===
* Official website of the DPR of Korea – Administered by the Korean Friendship Association
* 38North 
* North Korea profile at BBC News
* North Korea – link collection (University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries GovPubs)
* NKnews – a news agency covering North Korean topics.
* Friend.com.kp – website of the Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries
* Korea Education Fund 
* &quot;Rodong Sinmun&quot; – the newspaper of the Central Committee of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea &quot;Rodong Sinmun&quot;
* Uriminzokkiri 
* DPRK Portal 
* United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights – Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="0" end="11" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="28" end="70" title="North Korea" label="Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="72" end="76" title="North Korea" label="DPRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="95" end="104" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="146" end="162" title="Korea" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="175" end="180" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="185" end="191" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="212" end="216" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="229" end="234" title="Tumen River" label="Tumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="247" end="258" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="279" end="310" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="363" end="373" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="418" end="430" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="450" end="474" title="South Korea" label="its southern counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891808" start="548" end="564" title="List of islands of North Korea" label="adjacent islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="566" end="575" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="614" end="630" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="667" end="684" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405" start="697" end="710" title="Gojoseon" label="first kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="803" end="826" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q715257" start="832" end="837" title="Unified Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28322" start="842" end="848" title="Balhae" label="Balhae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="897" end="911" title="Goryeo dynasty" label="Goryeo dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="931" end="945" title="Joseon dynasty" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="974" end="987" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q495558" start="1004" end="1019" title="Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910" label="annexed in 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1029" end="1044" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="1065" end="1083" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375854" start="1091" end="1110" title="End of World War II in Asia" label="end of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q498735" start="1122" end="1144" title="Division of Korea" label="divided into two zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q483102" start="1155" end="1168" title="38th parallel north" label="38th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242873" start="1179" end="1213" title="Soviet Civil Administration" label="north occupied by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q484104" start="1222" end="1257" title="United States Army Military Government in Korea" label="south occupied by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1329" end="1343" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet-aligned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="1421" end="1436" title="Western Bloc" label="Western-aligned"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1530" end="1540" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="1555" end="1581" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="Korean Armistice Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="1598" end="1607" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41691" start="1626" end="1644" title="demilitarized zone" label="demilitarized zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="1666" end="1678" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1790" end="1802" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="1823" end="1834" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="1911" end="1916" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197895" start="1930" end="1944" title="state ideology" label="state ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2037" end="2045" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="2066" end="2090" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="fall of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="2182" end="2211" title="North Korean famine" label="North Korea suffered a famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q482555" start="2331" end="2344" title="Korean reunification" label="reunify Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="2364" end="2376" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="2377" end="2389" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369391" start="2397" end="2430" title="North Korean cult of personality" label="comprehensive cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220705" start="2442" end="2452" title="Kim family (North Korea)" label="Kim family"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="2454" end="2475" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q715921" start="2516" end="2535" title="Human rights in North Korea" label="human rights record"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="2598" end="2613" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q269616" start="2626" end="2652" title="Elections in North Korea" label="holds democratic elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354913" start="2779" end="2808" title="elections in the Soviet Union" label="elections in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q113649307" start="2923" end="2948" title="Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism" label="Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="2994" end="3013" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="3045" end="3066" title="State-owned enterprise" label="state-run enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="3071" end="3090" title="Collective farming" label="collectivized farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082008" start="3113" end="3123" title="Socialized medicine" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="3125" end="3134" title="State school" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="3136" end="3143" title="public housing" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q396268" start="3149" end="3164" title="Agricultural subsidy" label="food production"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="3223" end="3229" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="3245" end="3259" title="Militarism" label="military first"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="3295" end="3320" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q65038587" start="3374" end="3399" title="North Korea and weapons of mass destruction" label="possesses nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="3583" end="3603" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="3609" end="3612" title="Group of 77" label="G77"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="3622" end="3642" title="ASEAN Regional Forum" label="ASEAN Regional Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="3744" end="3768" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191559" start="3776" end="3790" title="Hendrick Hamel" label="Hendrick Hamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="4246" end="4262" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="4504" end="4509" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702065" start="4766" end="4782" title="Korean mythology" label="Korean mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405" start="4800" end="4808" title="Gojoseon" label="Gojoseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q549567" start="4849" end="4855" title="Dangun" label="Dangun"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="4890" end="4913" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q715257" start="4929" end="4942" title="Unified Silla" label="Unified Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="5024" end="5038" title="Joseon dynasty" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q257425" start="5061" end="5072" title="Gojong of Korea" label="King Gojong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="5088" end="5101" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="5113" end="5120" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="5128" end="5143" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375854" start="5171" end="5190" title="End of World War II in Asia" label="end of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="5210" end="5229" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="under Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="5269" end="5288" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="5420" end="5429" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="5875" end="5884" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="6202" end="6213" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="6241" end="6259" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q498735" start="6296" end="6328" title="Division of Korea" label="the Korean Peninsula was divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q483102" start="6354" end="6367" title="38th parallel north" label="38th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242873" start="6409" end="6437" title="Soviet Civil Administration" label="occupied by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q484104" start="6460" end="6480" title="United States Army Military Government in Korea" label="by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527072" start="6535" end="6550" title="Terenty Shtykov" label="Terenty Shtykov"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242873" start="6588" end="6615" title="Soviet Civil Administration" label="Soviet Civil Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770428" start="6678" end="6728" title="Provisional People&amp;#x27;s Committee of North Korea" label="Provisional People&amp;#x27;s Committee of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q484437" start="6801" end="6847" title="Autumn Uprising of 1946" label="rose up against the Allied Military Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q483458" start="6867" end="6897" title="Jeju Uprising" label="uprising of the Jeju islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="7013" end="7025" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7516" end="7529" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="7647" end="7670" title="military of North Korea" label="military of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="7683" end="7688" title="South Korea" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q482864" start="7751" end="7773" title="United Nations Command" label="United Nations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="7823" end="7842" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7940" end="7952" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8073" end="8090" title="Taiwan" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8107" end="8138" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q488945" start="8284" end="8298" title="People&amp;#x27;s Volunteer Army" label="Chinese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="8412" end="8424" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="an armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8647" end="8659" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8667" end="8678" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374773" start="8928" end="8966" title="World War II casualties of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet citizens killed in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079641" start="8987" end="9007" title="Charles K. Armstrong" label="Charles K. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="9196" end="9214" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="demilitarized zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q491704" start="9384" end="9414" title="United States Forces Korea" label="military presence in the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="10114" end="10131" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="10140" end="10156" title="de-Stalinization" label="de-Stalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854408" start="10223" end="10246" title="August Faction Incident" label="August Faction Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="10297" end="10309" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276064" start="10346" end="10360" title="Soviet Koreans faction" label="Soviet Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q488774" start="10380" end="10399" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an faction" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="10816" end="10836" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="10873" end="10878" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036937" start="10954" end="10969" title="Captive Nations" label="Captive Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q106720" start="11419" end="11435" title="North Korean won" label="North Korean won"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="11790" end="11821" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="12250" end="12269" title="North Korean famine" label="North Korean famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q491182" start="12808" end="12815" title="Blue House raid" label="in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q494418" start="12831" end="12846" title="Rangoon bombing" label="Rangoon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="12885" end="12888" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="DMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q495739" start="12918" end="12937" title="Korean axe murder incident" label="axe murder incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q495167" start="12941" end="12950" title="Panmunjom" label="Panmunjom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854405" start="13140" end="13174" title="July 4 South–North Joint Statement" label="July 4 South–North Joint Statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13450" end="13462" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="13467" end="13476" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="13608" end="13619" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247270" start="13678" end="13708" title="Death and state funeral of Kim Il Sung" label="died of a heart attack in 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q352182" start="13912" end="13928" title="Agreed Framework" label="Agreed Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="13961" end="13973" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050858" start="14006" end="14017" title="Nordpolitik" label="Nordpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q489155" start="14077" end="14092" title="Sunshine Policy" label="Sunshine Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="14139" end="14145" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="14302" end="14319" title="North Korean famine" label="widespread famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q491061" start="14591" end="14598" title="Kotjebi" label="Kotjebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="14690" end="14704" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q340700" start="14858" end="14870" title="axis of evil" label="axis of evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600511" start="14878" end="14909" title="2002 State of the Union Address" label="2002 State of the Union Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q828218" start="14968" end="14979" title="rogue state" label="rogue state"/>
<link wikidata="Q499060" start="15107" end="15137" title="2006 North Korean nuclear test" label="its first nuclear weapons test"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="15155" end="15167" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q494058" start="15336" end="15391" title="ROKS Cheonan sinking" label="sinking of the South Korean warship &amp;quot;Cheonan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q243987" start="15415" end="15444" title="Bombardment of Yeonpyeong" label="shelling of Yeonpyeong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q703043" start="15514" end="15538" title="Death and state funeral of Kim Jong Il" label="died from a heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="15557" end="15568" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="15719" end="15732" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="15814" end="15826" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="16136" end="16140" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="16194" end="16201" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746325" start="16215" end="16232" title="2018–20 Korean peace process" label="series of summits"/>
<link wikidata="Q21001" start="16290" end="16301" title="Moon Jae-in" label="Moon Jae-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q707631" start="16400" end="16417" title="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q98517123" start="16421" end="16469" title="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="16690" end="16703" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="nuclear state"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="16748" end="16759" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong-un"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090635" start="16820" end="16833" title="Yoon Suk Yeol" label="Yoon Suk Yeol"/>
<link wikidata="Q130571252" start="17390" end="17431" title="North Korean involvement in the Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="deployed a contingent of troops to Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="17460" end="17479" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="war against Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="17545" end="17561" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="17587" end="17590" title="37th parallel north" label="37°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705080" start="17595" end="17599" title="43rd parallel north" label="43°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135269" start="17616" end="17620" title="124th meridian east" label="124°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134876" start="17625" end="17630" title="131st meridian east" label="131°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="17675" end="17685" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q52059" start="17690" end="17699" title="Korea Bay" label="Korea Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="17739" end="17751" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="17888" end="17902" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q107635" start="18178" end="18193" title="Paektu Mountain" label="Paektu Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644542" start="18614" end="18628" title="Hamgyong Mountains" label="Hamgyong Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q492785" start="18662" end="18679" title="Rangrim Mountains" label="Rangrim Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q495501" start="18741" end="18754" title="Mount Kumgang" label="Mount Kumgang"/>
<link wikidata="Q562098" start="18762" end="18775" title="Taebaek Mountains" label="Taebaek Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="18998" end="19036" title="United Nations Environmental Programme" label="United Nations Environmental Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="19146" end="19178" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="19274" end="19279" title="Amnok" label="Amnok"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512752" start="19362" end="19394" title="Central Korean deciduous forests" label="Central Korean deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512756" start="19396" end="19428" title="Changbai Mountains mixed forests" label="Changbai Mountains mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512753" start="19434" end="19458" title="Manchurian mixed forests" label="Manchurian mixed forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="19502" end="19527" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="19539" end="19568" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="19697" end="19704" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="19824" end="19831" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="19868" end="19881" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="20078" end="20087" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="20194" end="20203" title="One-party state" label="one-party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="20204" end="20216" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q707454" start="20248" end="20260" title="Constitution of North Korea" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="20303" end="20318" title="socialist state" label="socialist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975555" start="20474" end="20545" title="Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System" label="Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="20715" end="20743" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="20753" end="20768" title="communist party" label="communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220705" start="20792" end="20802" title="Kim family (North Korea)" label="Kim family"/>
<link wikidata="Q49624" start="20919" end="20949" title="Korean Social Democratic Party" label="Korean Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49626" start="20958" end="20980" title="Chondoist Chongu Party" label="Chondoist Chongu Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220705" start="21002" end="21012" title="Kim family (North Korea)" label="Kim family"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876342" start="21028" end="21042" title="Supreme Leader (North Korean title)" label="Supreme Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q707631" start="21134" end="21187" title="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="general secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q709616" start="21192" end="21222" title="President of the State Affairs of North Korea" label="president of the State Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q468325" start="21344" end="21361" title="eternal President" label="eternal President"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263528" start="21697" end="21721" title="State Affairs Commission of North Korea" label="State Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867436" start="22050" end="22069" title="Ministry of Defence (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q858054" start="22071" end="22097" title="Ministry of State Security (North Korea)" label="Ministry of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867439" start="22106" end="22133" title="Ministry of Social Security (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="22136" end="22153" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q714698" start="22180" end="22210" title="Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="22266" end="22284" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354913" start="22362" end="22391" title="elections in the Soviet Union" label="elections in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="22536" end="22547" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30944956" start="22789" end="22797" title="Chairman of the Standing Committee of the Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q714509" start="22799" end="22813" title="Choe Ryong-hae" label="Choe Ryong-hae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="23465" end="23480" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937145" start="23498" end="23520" title="Cabinet of North Korea" label="Cabinet of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240364" start="23547" end="23554" title="Premier of North Korea" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905281" start="23555" end="23568" title="Pak Thae-song" label="Pak Thae-song"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="23774" end="23783" title="Minister (government)" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141425" start="23868" end="23880" title="Central Bank of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942281" start="23902" end="23930" title="Central Bureau of Statistics (North Korea)" label="Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24864420" start="23956" end="23975" title="Academy of Sciences of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="24075" end="24091" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="24344" end="24353" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="24354" end="24366" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="24544" end="24549" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="24619" end="24625" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q99690988" start="24976" end="25057" title="On Eliminating Dogmatism and Formalism and Establishing Juche in Ideological Work" label="On Eliminating Dogmatism and Formalism and Establishing Juche in Ideological Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="25135" end="25160" title="economic self-sufficiency" label="economic self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="25601" end="25617" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q107635" start="26631" end="26643" title="Paektu Mountain" label="Mount Paektu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369391" start="27605" end="27624" title="North Korean cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q61544" start="28508" end="28533" title="No Motherland Without You" label="No Motherland Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962020" start="28799" end="28820" title="List of things named after Kim Il Sung" label="named for Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q39920" start="28832" end="28854" title="Kim Il Sung University" label="Kim Il Sung University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137515" start="28856" end="28875" title="Kim Il Sung Stadium" label="Kim Il Sung Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q72218" start="28881" end="28899" title="Kim Il Sung Square" label="Kim Il Sung Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="29111" end="29123" title="Political faction" label="factionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702346" start="29549" end="29579" title="Public holidays in North Korea" label="public holidays in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309121" start="30164" end="30178" title="hermit kingdom" label="hermit kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="30264" end="30278" title="Joseon Dynasty" label="Joseon Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="30447" end="30454" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="30470" end="30479" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="30616" end="30636" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="30738" end="30749" title="Soviet Bloc" label="Soviet Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="30936" end="30950" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="30973" end="30984" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="31022" end="31042" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q477328" start="31044" end="31047" title="Group of 77" label="G77"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="31056" end="31076" title="ASEAN Regional Forum" label="ASEAN Regional Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="31219" end="31228" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892103" start="31230" end="31238" title="Botswana–North Korea relations" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="31240" end="31247" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424155" start="31249" end="31255" title="France–North Korea relations" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16672454" start="31257" end="31261" title="Iraq–North Korea relations" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577156" start="31263" end="31269" title="Israel–North Korea relations" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424157" start="31271" end="31276" title="Japan–North Korea relations" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909939" start="31278" end="31284" title="North Korea–Taiwan relations" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078137" start="31290" end="31303" title="North Korea–United States relations" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q64157127" start="31309" end="31316" title="North Korea–Ukraine relations" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="31318" end="31325" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q129947894" start="31394" end="31408" title="Friedrich Lohr" label="Friedrich Lohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q705574" start="31594" end="31623" title="China–North Korea relations" label="close relationship with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="31821" end="31831" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="31833" end="31881" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="31886" end="31903" title="President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese President"/>
<link wikidata="Q10809953" start="32027" end="32034" title="North Korea–Vietnam relations" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="32036" end="32040" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025205" start="32042" end="32050" title="Cambodia–North Korea relations" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15137869" start="32056" end="32065" title="Indonesia–North Korea relations" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15949058" start="32067" end="32090" title="Malaysia–North Korea relations" label="Relations with Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836436" start="32120" end="32149" title="assassination of Kim Jong-nam" label="assassination of Kim Jong-nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624278" start="32169" end="32199" title="North Korea–Russia relations" label="close relationship with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="32231" end="32258" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195557" start="32301" end="32327" title="State Sponsors of Terrorism (U.S. list)" label="state sponsor of terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q494418" start="32382" end="32402" title="Rangoon bombing" label="1983 Rangoon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q495953" start="32411" end="32450" title="Korean Air Flight 858" label="1987 bombing of a South Korean airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="32734" end="32746" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q715450" start="32798" end="32845" title="North Korean abductions of Japanese citizens" label="The kidnapping of at least 13 Japanese citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q52222422" start="33104" end="33125" title="Panmunjom Declaration" label="Panmunjom Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q60455116" start="33221" end="33238" title="2019 North Korea–United States Hanoi Summit" label="They met in Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21001" start="33374" end="33385" title="Moon Jae-in" label="Moon Jae-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="33430" end="33455" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarized Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q482555" start="34074" end="34110" title="Democratic Federal Republic of Korea" label="Democratic Federal Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q489155" start="34577" end="34592" title="Sunshine Policy" label="Sunshine Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45785" start="34630" end="34642" title="Kim Dae-jung" label="Kim Dae-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580295" start="34960" end="34984" title="2000 inter-Korean summit" label="2000 inter-Korean summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q487775" start="35076" end="35115" title="June 15th North–South Joint Declaration" label="June 15th North–South Joint Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q14345" start="35220" end="35232" title="Roh Moo-hyun" label="Roh Moo-hyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q14342" start="35344" end="35357" title="Lee Myung-bak" label="Lee Myung-bak"/>
<link wikidata="Q496193" start="35713" end="35719" title="Unha-2" label="Unha-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q494058" start="35850" end="35901" title="ROKS Cheonan sinking" label="sinking of South Korean warship &amp;quot;Cheonan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q243987" start="35962" end="35989" title="Bombardment of Yeonpyeong" label="attack on Yeonpyeong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21001" start="36080" end="36091" title="Moon Jae-in" label="Moon Jae-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q52222422" start="36349" end="36370" title="Panmunjom Declaration" label="Panmunjom Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="36515" end="36531" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="37229" end="37254" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="37372" end="37414" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="largest military institutions in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="37507" end="37536" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="largest active military force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358152" start="37770" end="37782" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army Ground Force" label="Ground Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363476" start="37784" end="37788" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q698296" start="37790" end="37812" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army Air and Anti-Air Force" label="Air and Anti-Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419317" start="37814" end="37838" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army Special Operations Forces" label="Special Operations Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056855" start="37844" end="37856" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army Strategic Force" label="Rocket Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q712482" start="37894" end="37957" title="Central Military Commission of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Central Military Commission of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867436" start="38023" end="38042" title="Ministry of Defence (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="38182" end="38191" title="division (military)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="38206" end="38214" title="brigade (military)" label="brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="38301" end="38309" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="38351" end="38376" title="armored personnel carrier" label="armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="38382" end="38407" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465101" start="38477" end="38484" title="MANPADS" label="MANPADS"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="38489" end="38513" title="anti-tank guided missile" label="anti-tank guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="38836" end="38855" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="nuclear-armed state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="38992" end="39008" title="nuclear warheads" label="nuclear warheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="39087" end="39104" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="39218" end="39233" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="39390" end="39408" title="biological agent" label="biological weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="39419" end="39426" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="39428" end="39436" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="39442" end="39449" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907359" start="39518" end="39578" title="List of United Nations Security Council resolutions concerning North Korea" label="sanctioned under United Nations Security Council resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q988133" start="39579" end="39583" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q589320" start="39598" end="39602" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718" label="1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q717051" start="39620" end="39624" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327738" start="39639" end="39643" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2087" label="2087"/>
<link wikidata="Q46576935" start="39665" end="39669" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2397" label="2397"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="39934" end="39953" title="command and control" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="40037" end="40055" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="40111" end="40114" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q634415" start="40124" end="40140" title="midget submarine" label="midget submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816356" start="40146" end="40159" title="human torpedo" label="human torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q339042" start="40163" end="40170" title="stealth technology" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="40182" end="40194" title="cyberwarfare" label="cyberwarfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642279" start="40376" end="40394" title="Sony Pictures hack" label="Sony Pictures hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q973887" start="40444" end="40462" title="military satellite" label="military satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251443" start="40540" end="40569" title="Defense industry of North Korea" label="the domestic defense industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q272406" start="40707" end="40723" title="Chagang Province" label="Chagang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q507476" start="40930" end="40936" title="Yak-18" label="Yak-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="41448" end="41457" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q647943" start="41478" end="41492" title="General State Laws for the Prussian States" label="Prussian model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178401" start="41599" end="41612" title="Central Court (North Korea)" label="Central Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="41626" end="41641" title="court of appeal" label="court of appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19705" start="42093" end="42103" title="penal code" label="penal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q928834" start="42139" end="42162" title="Nulla poena sine lege" label="nullum crimen sine lege"/>
<link wikidata="Q628505" start="42443" end="42453" title="labor camp" label="labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867439" start="42525" end="42552" title="Ministry of Social Security (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q858054" start="42912" end="42938" title="Ministry of State Security (North Korea)" label="Ministry of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732566" start="43165" end="43173" title="kwalliso" label="kwalliso"/>
<link wikidata="Q32284" start="43226" end="43242" title="Yodok concentration camp" label="Camp 15 in Yodok"/>
<link wikidata="Q549941" start="43247" end="43266" title="Pukchang concentration camp" label="Camp 18 in Pukchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009624" start="43465" end="43482" title="Mass surveillance in North Korea" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="43848" end="43860" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="44207" end="44228" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="44233" end="44251" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="44377" end="44395" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="44448" end="44457" title="Political freedom" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="44462" end="44478" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793854" start="45639" end="45659" title="political repression in North Korea" label="political repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271479" start="45918" end="45929" title="reeducation through labor" label="reeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q628505" start="45945" end="45955" title="labor camp" label="labor camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q150357" start="46006" end="46031" title="Political rehabilitation" label="politically rehabilitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719111" start="46101" end="46137" title="Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="United Nations Commission of Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="46165" end="46188" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742291" start="46194" end="46264" title="International Coalition to Stop Crimes Against Humanity in North Korea" label="International Coalition to Stop Crimes Against Humanity in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369955" start="46377" end="46391" title="modern slavery" label="modern slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21523772" start="46559" end="46568" title="Walk Free" label="Walk Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639280" start="46581" end="46601" title="Global Slavery Index" label="Global Slavery Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="46951" end="46968" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="47164" end="47176" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q326804" start="47519" end="47523" title="Korean Central News Agency" label="KCNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831895" start="47631" end="47644" title="Michael Kirby (judge)" label="Michael Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003217" start="48538" end="48547" title="extensive growth" label="extensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="48555" end="48576" title="intensive growth" label="intensive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="48867" end="48870" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="49037" end="49049" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="49168" end="49174" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="49501" end="49518" title="private property" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q289845" start="49656" end="49668" title="monetization" label="monetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="49811" end="49826" title="command economy" label="command economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="50041" end="50063" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="50080" end="50088" title="Industrial sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="50093" end="50110" title="Human Development Index" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="50132" end="50155" title="Purchasing power parity" label="Purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="50248" end="50269" title="gross national income" label="gross national income"/>
<link wikidata="Q106720" start="50333" end="50349" title="North Korean won" label="North Korean won"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141425" start="50390" end="50452" title="Central Bank of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Central Bank of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447098" start="50538" end="50554" title="Sejong Institute" label="Sejong Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808162" start="50940" end="50950" title="jangmadang" label="jangmadang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="51200" end="51209" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621485" start="51646" end="51653" title="Tourism in North Korea" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="51655" end="51663" title="Iron ore" label="Iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="51668" end="51672" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="51767" end="51784" title="South Korea" label="southern neighbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996615" start="52109" end="52121" title="agricultural cooperative" label="cooperatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="52212" end="52222" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13444750" start="52273" end="52281" title="Potato production in North Korea" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="52393" end="52404" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="52496" end="52503" title="ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="52505" end="52510" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q509308" start="52512" end="52521" title="matsutake" label="matsutake"/>
<link wikidata="Q710679" start="52536" end="52554" title="traditional Korean medicine" label="traditional Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="52559" end="52575" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621485" start="52577" end="52584" title="Tourism in North Korea" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602030" start="52729" end="52750" title="Masikryong Ski Resort" label="Masikryong Ski Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q86675924" start="52856" end="52888" title="COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea" label="COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574798" start="53028" end="53058" title="Special cities of North Korea" label="Special Administrative Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295151" start="53348" end="53375" title="Rason Special Economic Zone" label="Rason Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q495424" start="53434" end="53459" title="Kaesong Industrial Region" label="Kaesong Industrial Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="53737" end="53742" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="53890" end="53896" title="Russian ruble" label="rubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="54275" end="54289" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="54426" end="54441" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q156243" start="54479" end="54486" title="Sinuiju" label="Sinuiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="54561" end="54583" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958699" start="54592" end="54597" title="Rajin station" label="Rajin"/>
<link wikidata="Q257502" start="54982" end="54991" title="Air Koryo" label="Air Koryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="55062" end="55083" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q491767" start="55084" end="55115" title="Pyongyang International Airport" label="Pyongyang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55150" end="55188" title="List of airports in North Korea#Public airports" label="List of public airports in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="55443" end="55447" title="Coal" label="Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="55507" end="55526" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="55670" end="55677" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="55795" end="55804" title="recycling" label="recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="55938" end="55946" title="kilowatt" label="kilowatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q750446" start="56893" end="56910" title="polymer chemistry" label="polymer chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="56937" end="56948" title="nanoscience" label="nanoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="57265" end="57282" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212805" start="57561" end="57581" title="electronic library" label="electronic libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17124852" start="57727" end="57771" title="National Aerospace Technology Administration" label="National Aerospace Technology Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q707725" start="57797" end="57833" title="Korean Committee of Space Technology" label="Korean Committee of Space Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q697175" start="57875" end="57890" title="space launch vehicle" label="launch vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018027" start="57899" end="57929" title="Kwangmyŏngsŏng program" label="Kwangmyŏngsŏng satellite class"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="57952" end="57961" title="spaceport" label="spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q496204" start="57968" end="58002" title="Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground" label="Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q377158" start="58011" end="58044" title="Sohae Satellite Launching Station" label="Sohae Satellite Launching Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039031" start="58097" end="58121" title="Timeline of first orbital launches by country" label="tenth spacefaring nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862204" start="58141" end="58164" title="Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 Unit 2" label="Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 Unit 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q256608" start="58283" end="58301" title="Outer Space Treaty" label="Outer Space Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="58353" end="58359" title="human spaceflight" label="crewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064739" start="58364" end="58377" title="Exploration of the Moon" label="Moon missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22668125" start="58708" end="58724" title="Kwangmyŏngsŏng-4" label="Kwangmyongsong-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010275" start="58820" end="58859" title="Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Post and Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="58884" end="58895" title="fiber-optic communication" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="58896" end="58912" title="telephony" label="telephone system"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="59188" end="59190" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047618" start="59211" end="59220" title="Koryolink" label="Koryolink"/>
<link wikidata="Q921716" start="59243" end="59266" title="Orascom Telecom Holding" label="Orascom Telecom Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043805" start="59439" end="59454" title="Mobile Web" label="mobile Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q139859" start="59579" end="59592" title="Closed platform" label="walled garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="59593" end="59601" title="intranet" label="intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q714008" start="59616" end="59626" title="Kwangmyong (network)" label="Kwangmyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q707579" start="59669" end="59690" title="Korea Computer Center" label="Korea Computer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q646983" start="59840" end="59851" title="Red Star OS" label="Red Star OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="59886" end="59891" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="59900" end="59910" title="Shell (computing)" label="user shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="59939" end="59943" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="60145" end="60151" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
<link wikidata="Q491290" start="60258" end="60275" title="Chinese people in Korea" label="Chinese community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158932" start="60293" end="60301" title="Japanese people in North Korea" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="60530" end="60549" title="North Korean famine" label="North Korean famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="60761" end="60779" title="World Food Program" label="World Food Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="60855" end="60884" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q721790" start="61971" end="61988" title="extended family" label="extended families"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="62022" end="62030" title="Marriage" label="Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="62058" end="62065" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="62127" end="62142" title="Korean language" label="Korean language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076590" start="62175" end="62196" title="North–South differences in the Korean language" label="dialectal differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263142" start="62252" end="62267" title="Pyongan dialect" label="Pyongan dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q18784" start="62277" end="62284" title="munhwaŏ" label="munhwaŏ"/>
<link wikidata="Q485492" start="62381" end="62394" title="Seoul dialect" label="Seoul dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="62529" end="62536" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="62541" end="62559" title="European languages" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="62574" end="62581" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="62704" end="62710" title="hancha" label="hancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="62754" end="62769" title="Chosŏn&amp;#x27;gŭl" label="Chosŏn&amp;#x27;gŭl"/>
<link wikidata="Q37682" start="62814" end="62830" title="Sejong the Great" label="Sejong the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q864936" start="62892" end="62905" title="atheist state" label="atheist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500785" start="62935" end="62954" title="Freedom of religion in North Korea" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196789" start="63516" end="63526" title="Open Doors" label="Open Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q554482" start="63642" end="63667" title="persecution of Christians" label="persecution of Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877028" start="63816" end="63858" title="Centre for the Study of World Christianity" label="Centre for the Study of World Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="63886" end="63897" title="irreligion" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="63903" end="63911" title="agnostic" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="63917" end="63924" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q513638" start="63940" end="63949" title="Cheondoism" label="Chondoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q699747" start="63964" end="63980" title="Korean shamanism" label="Korean shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q593427" start="63991" end="63999" title="Korean Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q703007" start="64054" end="64066" title="Christianity in Korea" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q493850" start="64068" end="64073" title="Islam in Korea" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="64078" end="64099" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195567" start="64627" end="64639" title="Korean Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="64724" end="64740" title="syncretism" label="syncretic belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372085" start="64791" end="64797" title="Taoism in Korea" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="64802" end="64813" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49626" start="64867" end="64889" title="Chondoist Chongu Party" label="Chondoist Chongu Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823059" start="65041" end="65052" title="2008 North Korea census" label="2008 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="65196" end="65210" title="nursery school" label="nursery school"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="65220" end="65232" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="65422" end="65438" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="65885" end="65895" title="Heuristics" label="Heuristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="66007" end="66014" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="66019" end="66026" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="66566" end="66569" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631290" start="67011" end="67038" title="Lower respiratory tract infection" label="lower respiratory infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="67123" end="67145" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="67282" end="67288" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="67290" end="67294" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="COPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="67299" end="67322" title="Coronary artery disease" label="ischaemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130436" start="67450" end="67457" title="Smoking in North Korea" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="67462" end="67469" title="Alcoholic beverage" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="67788" end="67792" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039400" start="67988" end="67992" title="Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation" label="IHME"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="68097" end="68130" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007834" start="68243" end="68262" title="improved sanitation" label="improved sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="68492" end="68495" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="69123" end="69142" title="Preventive healthcare" label="Preventive medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q705820" start="69499" end="69506" title="Songbun" label="Songbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074223" start="69511" end="69526" title="ascribed status" label="ascribed status"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="71019" end="71032" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="71074" end="71095" title="cultural assimilation" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="71195" end="71201" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q704983" start="71865" end="71898" title="National Treasures of North Korea" label="National Treasures of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193261" start="71967" end="71982" title="Cultural assets of North Korea" label="Cultural Assets"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726137" start="71988" end="72027" title="Historic Monuments and Sites in Kaesong" label="Historic Monuments and Sites in Kaesong"/>
<link wikidata="Q277525" start="72036" end="72060" title="Complex of Koguryo Tombs" label="Complex of Koguryo Tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="72065" end="72071" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="72072" end="72091" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q277525" start="72098" end="72112" title="Goguryeo tombs" label="Goguryeo tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="72131" end="72137" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="72153" end="72172" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147477" start="72271" end="72295" title="World Heritage Committee" label="World Heritage Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q180902" start="72561" end="72578" title="socialist realism" label="socialist realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045171" start="73032" end="73051" title="Mansudae Art Studio" label="Mansudae Art Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="73189" end="73194" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q429785" start="73197" end="73203" title="poster" label="poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q747845" start="73394" end="73420" title="Mansudae Overseas Projects" label="Mansudae Overseas Projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q470763" start="73578" end="73606" title="African Renaissance Monument" label="African Renaissance Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="73610" end="73617" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743019" start="73627" end="73644" title="Heroes&amp;#x27; Acre (Namibia)" label="Heroes&amp;#x27; Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="73648" end="73655" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q374278" start="73787" end="73795" title="agitprop" label="agitprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11517821" start="73801" end="73846" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea Publishing House" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386551" start="73902" end="73922" title="Kim Il Sung bibliography" label="works of Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q589197" start="74130" end="74152" title="Tales from Shakespeare" label="Tales from Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="74174" end="74188" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q76546" start="74193" end="74206" title="Erich Kästner" label="Erich Kästner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="74216" end="74247" title="Harry Potter series" label="&amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="74880" end="74895" title="Science fiction" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q849340" start="75112" end="75124" title="cyberwarfare" label="cyberwarfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="75126" end="75134" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="75136" end="75148" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="75154" end="75159" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q191624" start="75272" end="75297" title="Anthropocentrism" label="anthropocentric existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="75320" end="75328" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="75330" end="75347" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="75353" end="75364" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q196077" start="75578" end="75609" title="Korean revolutionary opera" label="Five Great Revolutionary Operas"/>
<link wikidata="Q717080" start="75650" end="75664" title="Changgeuk" label="ch&amp;#x27;angguk"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="75796" end="75806" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354979" start="75823" end="75835" title="Sea of Blood" label="Sea of Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="76018" end="76033" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="76037" end="76043" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="76045" end="76056" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="76058" end="76068" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q705499" start="76114" end="76138" title="State Symphony Orchestra of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="State Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="76164" end="76173" title="Pop music" label="Pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q708556" start="76205" end="76233" title="Pochonbo Electronic Ensemble" label="Pochonbo Electronic Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q705327" start="76238" end="76265" title="Wangjaesan Light Music Band" label="Wangjaesan Light Music Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580295" start="76317" end="76341" title="2000 inter-Korean summit" label="2000 inter-Korean summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="76509" end="76517" title="All-female band" label="all-girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561874" start="76518" end="76532" title="Moranbong Band" label="Moranbong Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="76618" end="76623" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="76704" end="76708" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911972" start="76969" end="76981" title="Hong Gildong jeon" label="Hong Gildong"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="77266" end="77273" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="77420" end="77423" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524911" start="77502" end="77515" title="The Interview" label="The Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q229599" start="77529" end="77550" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (2000 film)" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148232" start="77820" end="77845" title="censorship in North Korea" label="censorship in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="78200" end="78225" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="78239" end="78258" title="Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="78273" end="78286" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q326804" start="78480" end="78506" title="Korean Central News Agency" label="Korean Central News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426143" start="78521" end="78531" title="Newspapers in North Korea" label="newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q387054" start="78568" end="78581" title="Rodong Sinmun" label="Rodong Sinmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q697648" start="78708" end="78733" title="Korean Central Television" label="Korean Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q705688" start="78771" end="78784" title="Uriminzokkiri" label="Uriminzokkiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="78804" end="78811" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="78816" end="78823" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="78900" end="78916" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001397" start="78994" end="79023" title="Media coverage of North Korea" label="Media coverage of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="79331" end="79341" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q483924" start="79358" end="79373" title="The Chosun Ilbo" label="The Chosun Ilbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="79401" end="79420" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q702092" start="79794" end="79829" title="Prehistoric Korea" label="agricultural and nomadic traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="79842" end="79851" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="79860" end="79876" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="79978" end="79982" title="Rice" label="Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q141898" start="79994" end="80000" title="kimchi" label="kimchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q716245" start="80087" end="80100" title="Banchan" label="panch&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q878624" start="80136" end="80139" title="Juk (food)" label="juk"/>
<link wikidata="Q683682" start="80153" end="80160" title="Bulgogi" label="pulgogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="80170" end="80177" title="noodles" label="noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q696105" start="80185" end="80189" title="Soju" label="Soju"/>
<link wikidata="Q708628" start="80292" end="80302" title="Okryu-gwan" label="Okryu-gwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715084" start="80349" end="80359" title="Naengmyeon" label="raengmyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42237" start="80414" end="80425" title="Mullet (fish)" label="gray mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037853" start="80449" end="80462" title="Galbitang" label="beef rib soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q727198" start="80490" end="80498" title="sinseollo" label="sinsollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q569170" start="80526" end="80534" title="diamondback terrapin" label="terrapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="80608" end="80622" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263145" start="80689" end="80715" title="Pyongyang (restaurant chain)" label="Pyongyang restaurant chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="80809" end="80829" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="80831" end="80841" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="80843" end="80855" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="80857" end="80867" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="80869" end="80875" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q75236516" start="80892" end="80908" title="DPR Korea League" label="DPR Korea League"/>
<link wikidata="Q14132" start="81008" end="81016" title="Korea DPR national football team" label="Chollima"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="81040" end="81054" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="81058" end="81062" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="81103" end="81109" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="81111" end="81119" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175145" start="81124" end="81135" title="Ivory Coast national football team" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="81141" end="81156" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="81218" end="81223" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448559" start="81271" end="81284" title="North Korea national basketball team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q201608" start="81415" end="81428" title="Dennis Rodman" label="Dennis Rodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q827575" start="81551" end="81567" title="North Korea at the Olympics" label="first appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="81575" end="81583" title="Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636" start="81589" end="81596" title="1964 Winter Olympics" label="in 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="81602" end="81615" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="81716" end="81727" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="81732" end="81746" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="Seoul Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q114397581" start="81818" end="81830" title="Weightlifter" label="Weightlifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q698243" start="81831" end="81841" title="Kim Un-guk" label="Kim Un-guk"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="81852" end="81864" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139399" start="81872" end="81888" title="Weightlifting at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s 62 kg" label="Men&amp;#x27;s 62 kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="81905" end="81925" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="81929" end="81935" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q602771" start="82043" end="82061" title="Arirang Mass Games" label="Arirang Mass Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="82089" end="82111" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q61465" start="82191" end="82210" title="rhythmic gymnastics" label="rhythmic gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211618" start="82423" end="82450" title="Rungrado 1st of May Stadium" label="Rungrado 1st of May Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q586638" start="82456" end="82484" title="List of stadiums by capacity" label="largest stadium in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097800" start="82539" end="82557" title="Pyongyang Marathon" label="Pyongyang Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008904" start="82600" end="82622" title="IAAF Road Race Label Events" label="IAAF Bronze Label Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q100741953" start="82700" end="82727" title="Bibliography of North Korea" label="Bibliography of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060616" start="82730" end="82754" title="China–North Korea border" label="China–North Korea border"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112390" start="82757" end="82779" title="Outline of North Korea" label="Outline of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q326804" start="83716" end="83742" title="Korean Central News Agency" label="Korean Central News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q710942" start="83804" end="83811" title="Naenara" label="Naenara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="84124" end="84132" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="84166" end="84199" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado at Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181455" start="84307" end="84362" title="Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries" label="Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q387054" start="84498" end="84511" title="Rodong Sinmun" label="Rodong Sinmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719111" start="84618" end="84719" title="Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21256" wikidata="Q693277" url="?curid=21256" title="History of North Korea">
<text>The history of North Korea began with the end of World War II in 1945. The surrender of Japan led to the division of Korea at the 38th parallel, with the Soviet Union occupying the north, and the United States occupying the south. The Soviet Union and the United States failed to agree on a way to unify the country, and in 1948, they established two separate governments — the Soviet-aligned Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea and the American-aligned Republic of Korea — each claiming to be the legitimate government of all of Korea.

In 1950, the Korean War broke out. After much destruction, the war ended with a stalemate. The division at the 38th parallel was replaced by the Korean Demilitarized Zone. Tension between the two sides continued. Out of the rubble North Korea built an industrialized command economy.

Kim Il Sung led North Korea until his death in 1994. He developed a pervasive personality cult and steered the country on an independent course in accordance with the principle of &quot;Juche&quot; (self-reliance). However, with natural disasters and the collapse of the Soviet Bloc in 1991, North Korea went into a severe economic crisis. Kim Il Sung&#x27;s son, Kim Jong Il, succeeded him, and was in turn succeeded by his grandson, Kim Jong Un.

== Before the division ==

From 1910 to the end of World War II in 1945, Korea was under Japanese rule. Most Koreans were peasants engaged in subsistence farming. In the 1930s, Japan developed mines, hydro-electric dams, steel mills, and manufacturing plants in northern Korea and neighboring Manchuria. The Korean industrial working class expanded rapidly, and many Koreans went to work in Manchuria. As a result, 65% of Korea&#x27;s heavy industry was located in the north, but, due to the rugged terrain, only 37% of its agriculture.

Northern Korea had little exposure to modern, Western ideas. One partial exception was the penetration of religion. Since the arrival of missionaries in the late nineteenth century, the northwest of Korea, and Pyongyang in particular, had been a stronghold of Christianity. As a result, Pyongyang was called the &quot;Jerusalem of the East&quot;.

A Korean guerrilla movement emerged in the mountainous interior and in Manchuria, harassing the Japanese imperial authorities. One of the most prominent guerrilla leaders was the Communist Kim Il Sung.

== Division of Korea (1945–1950) ==
At the Tehran Conference in November 1943 and the Yalta Conference in February 1945, the Soviet Union promised to join its allies in the Pacific War within three months of victory in Europe. On 8 August 1945, after three months to the day, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan. Soviet troops advanced rapidly, and the US government became anxious that they would occupy the whole of Korea. On 10 August, the US government decided to propose the 38th parallel as the dividing line between a Soviet occupation zone in the north and a US occupation zone in the south. The parallel was chosen as it would place the capital, Seoul, under American control. To the surprise of the Americans, the Soviet Union immediately accepted the division. The agreement was incorporated into General Order No. 1 (approved on 17 August 1945) for the surrender of Japan. The division placed sixteen million Koreans in the American zone and nine million in the Soviet zone.

Soviet forces began amphibious landings in Korea by 14 August and rapidly took over the northeast, and on 16 August they landed at Wonsan. On 24 August, the Red Army reached Pyongyang. US forces did not arrive in the south until 8 September.

Throughout August 1945, People&#x27;s Committees sprang up across Korea, affiliated with the Committee for the Preparation of Korean Independence, which in September founded the People&#x27;s Republic of Korea. When Soviet troops entered Pyongyang, they found a local People&#x27;s Committee established there, led by veteran Christian nationalist Cho Man-sik. Unlike their American counterparts, the Soviet authorities recognized and worked with the People&#x27;s Committees. By some accounts, Cho Man-sik was the Soviet government&#x27;s first choice to lead North Korea.

On 19 September, Kim Il Sung and 66 other Korean Red Army officers arrived in Wonsan. They had fought the Japanese in Manchuria in the 1930s but had lived in the USSR and trained in the Red Army since 1941. On 14 October, Soviet authorities introduced Kim to the North Korean public as a guerrilla hero.

In December 1945, at the Moscow Conference, the Soviet Union agreed to a US proposal for a trusteeship over Korea for up to five years in the lead-up to independence. Most Koreans demanded independence immediately, but Kim and the other Communists supported the trusteeship under pressure from the Soviet government. Cho Man-sik opposed the proposal at a public meeting on 4 January 1946, and disappeared into house arrest. On 8 February 1946, the People&#x27;s Committees were reorganized as Interim People&#x27;s Committees dominated by Communists. The new regime instituted popular policies of land redistribution, industry nationalization, labor law reform, and equality for women.

Meanwhile, existing Communist groups were reconstituted as a party under Kim Il Sung&#x27;s leadership. On 18 December 1945, local Communist Party committees were combined into the North Korean Communist Party. In August 1946, this party merged with the New People&#x27;s Party to form the Workers&#x27; Party of North Korea. In December, a popular front led by the Workers&#x27; Party dominated elections in the North. In 1949, the Workers&#x27; Party of North Korea merged with its southern counterpart to become the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea with Kim as party chairman.
In 1946, a sweeping series of laws transformed North Korea on Soviet-style Communist lines. The &quot;land to the tiller&quot; reform redistributed the bulk of agricultural land to the poor and landless peasant population, effectively breaking the power of the landed class. This was followed by a &quot;Labor Law&quot;, a &quot;Sexual Equality Law&quot;, and a &quot;Nationalisation of Industry, Transport, Communications and Banks Law&quot;.

Kim established the Korean People&#x27;s Army (KPA) aligned with the Communists, formed from a cadre of guerrillas and former soldiers who had gained combat experience in battles against the Japanese and later Nationalist Chinese troops. From their ranks, using Soviet advisers and equipment, Kim constructed a large army skilled in infiltration tactics and guerrilla warfare. Before the outbreak of the Korean War, Joseph Stalin equipped the KPA with modern medium tanks, trucks, artillery, and small arms. Kim also formed an air force, equipped at first with ex-Soviet propeller-driven fighter and attack aircraft. Later, North Korean pilot candidates were sent to the Soviet Union and China to train in MiG-15 jet aircraft at secret bases.

=== Establishment of the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea ===
As negotiations with the Soviet Union on the future of Korea failed to make progress, the US took the issue to the United Nations in September 1947. In response, the UN established the United Nations Temporary Commission on Korea to hold elections in Korea. The Soviet Union opposed this move. In the absence of Soviet cooperation, it was decided to hold UN-supervised elections in the south only. In April 1948, a conference of organizations from the North and the South met in Pyongyang, but the conference produced no results. The southern politicians Kim Koo and Kim Kyu-sik attended the conference and boycotted the elections in the South. Both men were posthumously awarded the National Reunification Prize by North Korea. The elections were held in South Korea on 10 May 1948. On 15 August, the Republic of Korea formally came into existence. A parallel process occurred in North Korea. A new Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly was elected in August 1948, and on 3 September a new constitution was promulgated. The Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea (DPRK) was proclaimed on 9 September, with Kim as Premier. On 12 December 1948, the United Nations General Assembly accepted the report of UNTCOK and declared the Republic of Korea to be the &quot;only lawful government in Korea&quot;.

By 1949, North Korea was a full-fledged Communist state. All parties and mass organizations joined the Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland, ostensibly a popular front but in reality dominated by the Communists. The government moved rapidly to establish a political system that was partly styled on the Soviet system, with political power monopolised by the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea (WPK).

== Korean War (1950–1953) ==


The consolidation of Syngman Rhee&#x27;s government in the South with American military support and the suppression of the October 1948 insurrection ended North Korean hopes that a revolution in the South could reunify Korea, and from early 1949 Kim Il Sung sought Soviet and Chinese support for a military campaign to reunify the country by force. The withdrawal of most U.S. forces from South Korea in June 1949 left the southern government defended only by a weak and inexperienced South Korean army. The southern régime also had to deal with a citizenry of uncertain loyalty. The North Korean army, by contrast, had benefited from the Soviet Union&#x27;s WWII-era equipment, and had a core of hardened veterans who had fought either as anti-Japanese guerrillas or alongside the Chinese Communists. In 1949 and 1950, Kim traveled to Moscow with the South Korean Communist leader Pak Hon-yong to raise support for a war of reunification.

Initially Joseph Stalin rejected Kim Il Sung&#x27;s requests for permission to invade the South, but in late 1949 the Communist victory in China and the development of Soviet nuclear weapons made him re-consider Kim&#x27;s proposal. In January 1950, after China&#x27;s Mao Zedong indicated that the People&#x27;s Republic of China would send troops and other support to Kim, Stalin approved an invasion. The Soviets provided limited support in the form of advisers who helped the North Koreans as they planned the operation, and Soviet military instructors to train some of the Korean units. However, from the very beginning Stalin made it clear that the Soviet Union would avoid a direct confrontation with the U.S. over Korea and would not commit ground forces even in case of major military crisis. The stage was set for a civil war between the two rival governments on the Korean peninsula. For over a year before the outbreak of war, the two sides had engaged in a series of bloody clashes along the 38th parallel, especially in the Ongjin area on the west coast. On 25 June 1950, claiming to be responding to a South Korean assault on Ongjin, the Northern forces launched an amphibious offensive all along the parallel. Due to a combination of surprise and military superiority, the Northern forces quickly captured the capital Seoul, forcing Syngman Rhee and his government to flee. By mid-July North Korean troops had overwhelmed the South Korean and allied American units and forced them back to a defensive line in south-east South Korea known as the Pusan Perimeter. During its brief occupation of southern Korea, the DPRK regime initiated radical social change, which included the nationalisation of industry, land reform, and the restoration of the People&#x27;s Committees. According to the captured US General William F. Dean, &quot;the civilian attitude seemed to vary between enthusiasm and passive acceptance&quot;.

The United Nations condemned North Korea&#x27;s actions and approved an American-led intervention force to defend South Korea. In September, UN forces landed at Inchon and retook Seoul. Under the leadership of US General Douglas MacArthur, UN forces pushed north, reaching the Chinese border. According to Bruce Cumings, the North Korean forces were not routed, but managed a strategic retreat into the mountainous interior and into neighboring Manchuria. Kim Il Sung&#x27;s government re-established itself in a stronghold in Chagang Province. In late November, Chinese forces entered the war and pushed the UN forces back, retaking Pyongyang in December 1950 and Seoul in January 1951. According to American historian Bruce Cumings, the Korean People&#x27;s Army played an equal part in this counterattack. UN forces managed to retake Seoul for South Korea. The war essentially became a bloody stalemate for the next two years. American bombing included the use of napalm against populated areas and the destruction of dams and dykes, which caused devastating floods. China and North Korea also alleged the US was deploying biological weapons. As a result of the bombing, almost every substantial building and much of the infrastructure in North Korea was destroyed. The North Koreans responded by building homes, schools, hospitals, and factories underground. Economic output in 1953 had fallen by 75-90% compared with 1949.

While the bombing continued, armistice negotiations, which had commenced in July 1951, wore on. North Korea&#x27;s lead negotiator was General Nam Il. The Korean Armistice Agreement was signed on 27 July 1953. A ceasefire followed, but there was no peace treaty, and hostilities continued at a lower intensity.

== Post-war redevelopment (1953–1970s) ==
=== Internal politics ===
Kim began gradually consolidating his power. Up to this time, North Korean politics were represented by four factions: the Yan&#x27;an faction, made up of returnees from China; the &quot;Soviet Koreans&quot; who were ethnic Koreans from the USSR; native Korean communists led by Pak Hon-yong; and Kim&#x27;s Kapsan group who had fought guerrilla actions against Japan in the 1930s.

Pak Hon-yong, party vice chairman and Foreign Minister of the DPRK, was blamed for the failure of the southern population to support North Korea during the war, was dismissed from his positions in 1953, and was executed after a show trial in 1955.

The Party Congress in 1956 indicated the transformation that the party had undergone. Most members of other factions had lost their positions of influence. More than half the delegates had joined after 1950, most were under 40 years old, and most had limited formal education.

In February 1956, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev made a sweeping denunciation of Stalin, which sent shock waves throughout the Communist world. Encouraged by this, members of the party leadership in North Korea began to criticize Kim&#x27;s dictatorial leadership, personality cult, and Stalinist economic policies. Kim consequently purged them in the August Faction Incident. By 1960, 70 per cent of the members of the 1956 Central Committee were no longer in politics.

Kim Il Sung had initially been criticized by the Soviets during a previous 1955 visit to Moscow for practicing Stalinism and a cult of personality, which was already growing enormous. The Korean ambassador to the USSR, Li Sangjo, a member of the Yan&#x27;an faction, reported that it had become a criminal offense to so much as write on Kim&#x27;s picture in a newspaper and that he had been elevated to the status of Marx, Lenin, Mao, and Stalin in the communist pantheon. He also charged Kim with rewriting history to appear as if his guerrilla faction had single-handedly liberated Korea from the Japanese, completely ignoring the assistance of the Chinese People&#x27;s Volunteers. In addition, Li stated that in the process of agricultural collectivization, grain was being forcibly confiscated from the peasants, leading to &quot;at least 300 suicides&quot; and that Kim made nearly all major policy decisions and appointments himself. Li reported that over 30,000 people were in prison for completely unjust and arbitrary reasons as trivial as not printing Kim Il Sung&#x27;s portrait on sufficient quality paper or using newspapers with his picture to wrap parcels. Grain confiscation and tax collection were also conducted forcibly with violence, beatings, and imprisonment.

In late 1968, known military opponents of North Korea&#x27;s &quot;Juche&quot; (or self-reliance) ideology such as Kim Chang-bong (minister of National Security), Huh Bong-hak (chief of the Division for Southern Intelligence) and Lee Young-ho (commander in chief of the DPRK Navy) were purged as anti-party/counter-revolutionary elements, despite their credentials as anti-Japanese guerrilla fighters in the past.

Kim&#x27;s personality cult was modeled on Stalinism and his regime originally acknowledged Stalin as the supreme leader. After Stalin&#x27;s death in 1953, however, Kim was described as the &quot;Great Leader&quot; or &quot;Suryong&quot;. As his personality cult grew, the doctrine of &quot;Juche&quot; began to displace Marxism–Leninism. At the same time the cult extended beyond Kim himself to include his family in a revolutionary blood line.
In 1972, to celebrate Kim Il Sung&#x27;s birthday, the Mansu Hill Grand Monument was unveiled, including a 22-meter bronze statue of him.

=== International relations ===

Like Mao in China, Kim Il Sung refused to accept Khrushchev&#x27;s denunciation of Stalin and continued to model his regime on Stalinist norms. At the same time, he increasingly stressed Korean independence, as embodied in the concept of &quot;Juche&quot;. Kim told Alexei Kosygin in 1965 that he was not anyone&#x27;s puppet and &quot;We... implement the purest Marxism and condemn as false both the Chinese admixtures and the errors of the CPSU&quot;.

Relations with China had worsened during the war. Mao Zedong criticized Kim for having started the whole &quot;idiotic war&quot; and for being an incompetent military commander who should have been removed from power. PLA commander Peng Dehuai was equally contemptuous of Kim&#x27;s skills at waging war.

By some analysis, Kim Il Sung remained in power partially because the Soviets turned their attention to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 that fall. The Soviets and Chinese were unable to stop the inevitable purge of Kim&#x27;s domestic opponents or his move towards a one-man Stalinist autocracy and relations with both countries deteriorated in the former&#x27;s case because of the elimination of the pro-Soviet Koreans and the latter because of the regime&#x27;s refusal to acknowledge Chinese assistance in either liberation from the Japanese or the war in 1950–1953.

Beginning in the late 1950s, North Korea and China began renegotiating their border, culminating in the 1962 Sino–North Korean Border Treaty and a 1964 companion that established the modern border between the two countries. 

Tensions between North and South escalated in the late 1960s with a series of low-level armed clashes known as the Korean DMZ Conflict. In 1966, Kim declared &quot;liberation of the south&quot; to be a &quot;national duty&quot;. In 1968, North Korean commandos launched the Blue House Raid, an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate the South Korean President Park Chung Hee. Shortly after, the US spy ship Pueblo was captured by the North Korean navy. The crew were held captive throughout the year despite American protests that the vessel was in international waters, and they were finally released in December after a formal US apology was issued. In April 1969 a North Korean fighter jet shot down an EC-121 aircraft, killing all 31 crewmen on board. The Nixon administration found itself unable to react at all, since the US was heavily committed in the Vietnam War and had no troops to spare if the situation in Korea escalated. However, the &quot;Pueblo&quot; capture and EC-121 shootdown did not find approval in Moscow, as the Soviet Union did not want a second major war to erupt in Asia. China&#x27;s response to the USS &quot;Pueblo&quot; crisis is less clear.

After Khrushchev was replaced by Leonid Brezhnev as Soviet Leader in 1964, and with the incentive of Soviet aid, North Korea strengthened its ties with the USSR. Kim condemned China&#x27;s Cultural Revolution as &quot;unbelievable idiocy&quot;. In turn, China&#x27;s Red Guards labelled him a &quot;fat revisionist&quot;.

In 1972, the first formal summit meeting between Pyongyang and Seoul was held, but the cautious talks did not lead to a lasting change in the relationship.

With the fall of South Vietnam to the North Vietnamese on 30 April 1975, Kim Il Sung felt that the US had shown its weakness and that reunification of Korea under his regime was possible. Kim visited Beijing in May 1975 in the hope of gaining political and military support for this plan to invade South Korea again, but Mao Zedong refused. Despite public proclamations of support, Mao privately told Kim that China would be unable to assist North Korea because of the lingering after-effects of the Cultural Revolution throughout China, and because Mao had recently decided to restore diplomatic relations with the US.

Meanwhile, North Korea emphasized its independent orientation by joining the Non-Aligned Movement in 1975. It promoted &quot;Juche&quot; as a model for developing countries to follow. It developed strong ties with the regimes of Bokassa in the Central African Republic, Macias Nguema in Equatorial Guinea, Idi Amin in Uganda, Pol Pot in Cambodia, Gaddafi in Libya, and Ceausescu in Romania.

=== Economic development ===

Reconstruction of the country after the war proceeded with extensive Chinese and Soviet assistance. Koreans with experience in Japanese industries also played a significant part. Land was collectivized between 1953 and 1958. Many landlords had been eliminated by the earlier reforms or during the war.

Recovery from the war was slowed by a massive famine in 1954–55. Local officials had exaggerated the size of the harvest by 50–70%. After the central government took its share, starvation threatened many peasants; about 800,000 died. In addition collectivization was resisted; many farmers killed their livestock rather than turn them over to the collective farm.

Although developmental debates took place within the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea in the 1950s, North Korea, like all the postwar communist states, undertook massive state investment in heavy industry, state infrastructure and military strength, neglecting the production of consumer goods.

The first Three Year Plan (1954–1956) introduced the concept of &quot;Juche&quot; or self-reliance. The first Five Year Plan (1957–1961) consolidated the collectivization of agriculture and initiated mass mobilizations campaigns: the Chollima Movement, the Chongsan-ni system in agriculture and the Taean Work System in industry. The Chollima Movement was influenced by China&#x27;s Great Leap Forward, but did not have its disastrous results. Industry was fully nationalized by 1959. Taxation on agricultural income was abolished in 1966.

North Korea was placed on a semi-war footing, with equal emphasis being given to the civilian and military economies. This was expressed in the 1962 Party Plenum by the slogan, &quot;Arms in one hand and a hammer and sickle in the other! &quot; At a special party conference in 1966, members of the leadership who opposed the military build-up were removed.

On the ruins left by the war, North Korea had built an industrialized command economy. The regime reached out to the Third World in the hope of developing strong trade relations. Che Guevara, then a Cuban government minister, visited North Korea in 1960, and proclaimed it a model for Cuba to follow. In 1965, the British economist Joan Robinson described North Korea&#x27;s economic development as a &quot;miracle&quot;. As late as the 1970s, its GDP per capita was estimated to be equivalent to South Korea&#x27;s. By 1968, all homes had electricity, though the supply was unreliable. By 1972, all children from age 5 to 16 were enrolled in school, and over 200 universities and specialized colleges had been established. By the early 1980s, 60–70% of the population was urbanized.

== Later years of Kim Il Sung (1970s–1994) ==

In the 1970s, expansion of North Korea&#x27;s economy, with the accompanying rise in living standards, came to an end. Compounding this was a decision to borrow foreign capital and invest heavily in military industries. North Korea&#x27;s desire to lessen its dependence on aid from China and the Soviet Union prompted the expansion of its military power, which had begun in the second half of the 1960s. The government believed such expenditures could be covered by foreign borrowing and increased sales of its mineral wealth in the international market. North Korea invested heavily in its mining industries and purchased a large quantity of mineral extraction infrastructure from abroad. It also purchased entire petrochemical, textile, concrete, steel, pulp and paper manufacturing plants from the developed capitalist world. This included a Japanese-Danish venture that provided North Korea with the largest cement factory in the world. However, following the world 1973 oil crisis, international prices for many of North Korea&#x27;s native minerals fell, leaving the country with large debts and an inability to pay them off and still provide a high level of social welfare to its people. North Korea began to default in 1974 and halted almost all repayments in 1985. As a result, it was unable to pay for foreign technology.

By the mid to late 1970s some parts of the capitalist world, including South Korea, were creating new industries based around computers, electronics, and other advanced technology in contrast to North Korea&#x27;s Stalinist economy of mining and steel production. Migration to urban areas stalled.

In October 1980, Kim Jong Il was introduced to the public at the Sixth Party Congress as the successor to Kim Il Sung. In 1972, Kim Jong Il had established himself as a leading theoretician with the publication of &quot;On the Juche Idea&quot;. and in 1974, he had been officially confirmed as his father&#x27;s successor.

In 1983, North Korea carried out the Rangoon bombing, a failed assassination attempt against South Korean President Chun Doo-hwan while he was visiting Burma. This attack on neutral soil led many Third World countries to reconsider their diplomatic ties with North Korea.

In 1984, Kim visited Moscow during a grand tour of the USSR where he met Soviet leader Konstantin Chernenko. Kim also made public visits to East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. Soviet involvement in the North Korean economy increased, until 1988 when bilateral trade peaked at US$2.8 billion (). In 1986, Kim met the incoming Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow and received a pledge of support.

The bombing of Korean Air Flight 858 in 1987, in the lead up to the Seoul Olympics, led to the US government placing North Korea on its list of terrorist countries.
Despite the emerging economic problems, the regime invested heavily in prestigious projects, such as the &quot;Juche&quot; Tower, the Nampo Dam, and the Ryugyong Hotel. In 1989, as a response to the 1988 Seoul Olympics, it held the 13th World Festival of Youth and Students in Pyongyang. In fact, the grandiosity associated with the regime and its personality cult, as expressed in monuments, museums, and events, has been identified as a factor in the economic decline.

However, Gorbachev&#x27;s reforms and diplomatic initiatives, the Chinese economic reforms starting in 1979, and the collapse of the Eastern Bloc from 1989 to 1991 increased North Korea&#x27;s isolation. The leadership in Pyongyang responded by proclaiming that the collapse of the Eastern Bloc communist governments demonstrated the correctness of the policy of &quot;Juche&quot;.

The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 deprived North Korea of its main source of economic aid, leaving China as the isolated regime&#x27;s only major ally. Without Soviet aid, North Korea&#x27;s economy went into a free-fall. By this time, in the early 1990s, Kim Jong Il was already conducting most of the day-to-day activities of running of the state, being appointed Supreme Commander of the Korean Peoples&#x27; Army in December 1991 and Chairman of the National Defence Commission in 1993. Meanwhile, international tensions were rising over North Korea&#x27;s quest for nuclear weapons. Former US president Jimmy Carter made a visit to Pyongyang in June 1994 in which he met with Kim, and returned proclaiming that he had resolved the crisis.

== Era of Kim Jong Il (1994–2011) ==

Kim Il Sung died from a sudden heart attack on 8 July 1994. The politics in the last years of Kim Il Sung closely resemble those of the beginning of the Kim Jong Il era.

Beginning as early as 1990, the economy began a steep decline. From 1990 to 1995, foreign trade was cut in half, with the loss of subsidized Soviet oil being particularly keenly felt. The crisis came to a head in 1995 with widespread flooding that destroyed crops and infrastructure, leading to a famine that lasted until 1998. At the same time, there appeared to be little significant internal opposition to the regime. A great many of the North Koreans fleeing to China because of famine still showed significant support for the government as well as pride in their homeland. Many of these people reportedly returned to North Korea after earning sufficient money.

In September 1998, Kim Il Sung was proclaimed &quot;eternal President of the Republic&quot; with the office of the presidency being abolished. According to Ashley J. Tellis and Michael Wills, this amendment was an indication of the unique North Korean characteristic of being a theocratic state based on the personality cult surrounding Kim Il Sung, granting leaders titles with &quot;legal&quot; power after their deaths. The functions and powers previously belonging to the President were divided between three officials: the head of government, the Premier of North Korea; the Chairman of the Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly, the head of state, President of the Presidium of the Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly; and the head of the military, the Chairman of the National Defence Commission and Supreme Commander of the Korean People&#x27;s Army. Exercising his power through his militaristic posts, which he essentially controlled even whilst his father was still alive, with his elevation to the Supreme Commander of the KPA and Chairman of the NDC in the early 90s, Kim Jong Il placed emphasis on the military to boast and elevate his power. In addition to this, after the collapse of global Communism in the early 1990s and the economic crisis and mass famine that continued, North Korea found itself in a very precarious international position. In this sense, Songun is perceived as an aggressive, threatening move to increase the strength of the North Korean military at the expense of other parts of society.

In 1998, the government announced a new policy called &quot;Songun&quot;, or &quot;Military First&quot;. In essence, Songun politics gives great priority to military affairs and ensuring the Korean People&#x27;s Army (KPA) as the main force in construction and development.

After his election in 1998, President Kim Dae-jung of South Korea actively attempted to reduce tensions between the two Koreas under the Sunshine Policy. After the election of George W. Bush as the President of the United States in 2000, North Korea faced renewed pressure over its nuclear program. On 9 October 2006, North Korea announced that it had successfully detonated a nuclear bomb underground. Additionally, North Korea was developing ICBMs.

On 13 February 2007, North Korea signed into an agreement with South Korea, the United States, Russia, China, and Japan, which stipulated North Korea would shut down its Yongbyon nuclear reactor in exchange for economic and energy assistance. However, in 2009 the North continued its nuclear test program.

In 2010, the sinking of a South Korean naval ship, the Cheonan, allegedly by a North Korean torpedo, and North Korea&#x27;s shelling of Yeonpyeong Island escalated tensions between North and South.

== Era of Kim Jong Un (2011–present) ==
Kim Jong Il died on 17 December 2011 and was succeeded by his son, Kim Jong Un. In late 2013, Kim Jong Un&#x27;s uncle Jang Song-thaek was arrested and executed after a trial. According to the South Korean spy agency, Kim may have purged some 300 people after taking power. In 2014, the United Nations Commission of Inquiry accused the government of crimes against humanity.

In 2015, North Korea adopted Pyongyang Standard Time (UTC+08.30), reversing the change to Japan Standard Time (UTC+9.00) which had been imposed by the Japanese Empire when it annexed Korea. As a result, North Korea was in a different time zone to South Korea. In 2016, 7th Congress of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea was held in Pyongyang, the first party congress since 1980.

On 30 October 2015, the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea announced through the Korean Central News Agency that it had decided to convene the 7th Congress of the Workers&#x27; Party in early May 2016. In May 2016, North Korea held the Seventh Congress of the WPK, the first gathering of its kind in over 35 years. By revealing the 5-year national economic development strategy, the mid-term economic development plan was announced for the first time in 24 years.

In 2017, North Korea tested the Hwasong-15, an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of striking anywhere in the United States of America. Estimates of North Korea&#x27;s nuclear arsenal at that time ranged between 15 and 60 bombs, probably including hydrogen bombs.
In February 2018, North Korea sent an unprecedented high-level delegation to the Winter Olympics in South Korea, headed by Kim Yo Jong, sister of Kim Jong Un, and President Kim Yong-nam, which passed on an invitation to South Korean President Moon to visit the North. In April the two Korean leaders met at the Joint Security Area where they announced their governments would work towards a denuclearized Korean Peninsula and formalize peace between the two states. North Korea announced it would change its time zone to realign with the South. This time zone change was enacted in May 2018.

On 12 June 2018, Kim met American President Donald Trump at a summit in Singapore and signed a declaration, again affirming a commitment to peace and denuclearization. Trump announced that he would halt military exercises with South Korea and foreshadowed withdrawing American troops entirely. In September, South Korean President Moon visited Pyongyang for a summit with Kim. In February 2019 in Hanoi, a second summit between Kim and Trump broke down without an agreement. On 30 June 2019, Trump, Moon, and Kim met at the DMZ. Talks in Stockholm began in October between US and North Korean negotiating teams, but broke down after one day.

Starting in January 2020, the North Korean government took extensive measures to block the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, including quarantines and travel restrictions. In April, the US analyst website 38 North said this appeared to have been successful.

The 8th Congress of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea, held in early January 2021, restored the operative functions of the General Secretary of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea, a title previously awarded &quot;eternally&quot; to Kim Jong Il in 2012, and elected Kim Jong Un to it.

== See also ==

* History of Asia
* History of East Asia
* History of Korea
* Prehistoric Korea
* Korean independence movement
* Korean nationalist historiography
* Communism in Korea
* Korean conflict
* Korean War
* Government of North Korea
* Human rights in North Korea
* Juche
* Politics of North Korea
* Prisons in North Korea
* Songbun
* Supreme Leader (North Korean title)
* Women in the North Korean Revolution

== References==
== Further reading ==
* Cha, Victor, and Ramon Pacheco Pardo. &quot;Korea: A New History of South and North&quot; (Yale UP, 2023).
*Cumings, Bruce, et al.. &quot;Inventing the Axis of Evil&quot;. The New Press. 2004. 
*
*
*–– (2020) &quot;Trouble Brewing: The North Korean Famine of 1954–1955 and Soviet Attitudes toward North Korea.&quot; &quot;Journal of Cold War Studies&quot; 22:2 (Spring 2020) pp:3–25. online
*O&#x27;Hanlon, Michael; Mochizuki, Mike. &quot;Crisis on the Korean Peninsula&quot;. McGraw-Hill. 2003. 
*

== External links ==
* Speak Out About Human Rights In North Korea (a commentary from Human Rights Watch, published in &quot;The Asian Wall Street Journal&quot;, 16 April 2004)
* &quot;On North Korea&#x27;s streets, pink and tangerine buses&quot;, &quot;The Christian Science Monitor&quot;, 2 June 2005
* The North Korea International Documentation Project (Primary source documents concerning DPRK history)
* Time Line of North Korean History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q693277" start="4" end="26" title="History of North Korea" label="history of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="49" end="61" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q498735" start="105" end="122" title="division of Korea" label="division of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q483102" start="130" end="143" title="38th parallel north" label="38th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="154" end="166" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="196" end="209" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="378" end="384" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="393" end="435" title="North Korea" label="Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="444" end="452" title="Western Bloc" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="461" end="478" title="South Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="558" end="568" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="690" end="715" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarized Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="830" end="841" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="908" end="924" title="Cult of personality" label="personality cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="1016" end="1021" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="1146" end="1168" title="North Korean famine" label="severe economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="1194" end="1205" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="1265" end="1276" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1330" end="1342" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="1362" end="1381" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="under Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="1421" end="1440" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="1572" end="1581" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="2027" end="2036" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="2354" end="2365" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="2411" end="2428" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="2454" end="2470" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2493" end="2505" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2527" end="2533" title="Allies of World War II" label="allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="2541" end="2552" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="2576" end="2593" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="victory in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="2661" end="2682" title="Soviet–Japanese War" label="declared war on Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483102" start="2851" end="2864" title="38th parallel north" label="38th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="3026" end="3031" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532082" start="3179" end="3198" title="General Order No. 1" label="General Order No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q109374" start="3490" end="3496" title="Wonsan" label="Wonsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="3533" end="3542" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q484370" start="3780" end="3811" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q488304" start="3950" end="3961" title="Cho Man-sik" label="Cho Man-sik"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="4194" end="4205" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="4295" end="4304" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q912215" start="4507" end="4524" title="Moscow Conference (1945)" label="Moscow Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q985073" start="4573" end="4584" title="United Nations Trust Territories" label="trusteeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q488304" start="4799" end="4810" title="Cho Man-sik" label="Cho Man-sik"/>
<link wikidata="Q486579" start="5423" end="5446" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Party (Korea)" label="New People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276064" start="5459" end="5493" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of North Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49632" start="5510" end="5523" title="Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q49621" start="5653" end="5673" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of South Korea" label="southern counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="5688" end="5716" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="6210" end="6235" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="6400" end="6419" title="Nationalist Chinese" label="Nationalist Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="6606" end="6619" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="6896" end="6902" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="7121" end="7135" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865409" start="7187" end="7235" title="UNTCOK" label="the United Nations Temporary Commission on Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="7485" end="7494" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q215737" start="7561" end="7568" title="Kim Koo" label="Kim Koo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214259" start="7573" end="7584" title="Kim Kyu-sik" label="Kim Kyu-sik"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616595" start="7690" end="7718" title="National Reunification Prize" label="National Reunification Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="7808" end="7825" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q714698" start="7906" end="7936" title="Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q707454" start="7986" end="8002" title="Constitution of North Korea" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12613371" start="8074" end="8088" title="Day of the Foundation of the Republic (North Korea)" label="was proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240364" start="8117" end="8124" title="Premier of North Korea" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49632" start="8407" end="8463" title="Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland" label="Democratic Front for the Reunification of the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="8478" end="8491" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154838" start="8580" end="8596" title="Politics of North Korea" label="political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q462214" start="8627" end="8640" title="Politics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet system"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="8682" end="8710" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="8771" end="8783" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q483458" start="8886" end="8898" title="Jeju Uprising" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9026" end="9033" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9389" end="9401" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q334297" start="9632" end="9644" title="Pak Hon-yong" label="Pak Hon-yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="9701" end="9714" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="9809" end="9818" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="9960" end="9970" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9990" end="10021" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q483530" start="10729" end="10735" title="Ongjin, South Hwanghae" label="Ongjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="11025" end="11030" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q488483" start="11516" end="11531" title="William F. Dean" label="William F. Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="11787" end="11793" title="Inchon" label="Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="11847" end="11864" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q483927" start="11932" end="11945" title="Bruce Cumings" label="Bruce Cumings"/>
<link wikidata="Q272406" start="12153" end="12169" title="Chagang Province" label="Chagang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="12260" end="12269" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="12593" end="12599" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731243" start="12723" end="12770" title="Allegations of biological warfare in the Korean War" label="alleged the US was deploying biological weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q492895" start="13198" end="13204" title="Nam Il" label="Nam Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="13210" end="13236" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="Korean Armistice Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="13558" end="13569" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q334297" start="13714" end="13726" title="Pak Hon-yong" label="Pak Hon-yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q334297" start="13818" end="13830" title="Pak Hon-yong" label="Pak Hon-yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="14377" end="14394" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854408" start="14698" end="14721" title="August Faction Incident" label="August Faction Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="16170" end="16175" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16987" end="17014" title="Kim Il Sung&amp;#x27;s birthday" label="Kim Il Sung&amp;#x27;s birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325633" start="17020" end="17045" title="Mansu Hill Grand Monument" label="Mansu Hill Grand Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="17403" end="17417" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="17642" end="17652" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="17824" end="17835" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="18006" end="18034" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097457" start="18580" end="18611" title="Sino–North Korean Border Treaty" label="Sino–North Korean Border Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431825" start="18812" end="18831" title="Korean DMZ Conflict (1966–1969)" label="Korean DMZ Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q491182" start="18971" end="18986" title="Blue House Raid" label="Blue House Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14356" start="19054" end="19068" title="Park Chung Hee" label="Park Chung Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q712703" start="19101" end="19107" title="USS Pueblo (AGER-2)" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573536" start="19387" end="19396" title="1969 EC-121 shootdown incident" label="shot down"/>
<link wikidata="Q862435" start="19400" end="19406" title="EC-121" label="EC-121"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="19554" end="19565" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="19902" end="19917" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="20058" end="20077" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="21047" end="21067" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="21095" end="21100" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="21214" end="21238" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="21257" end="21274" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="21288" end="21294" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="21328" end="21333" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="21352" end="21359" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="22190" end="22206" title="communist states" label="communist states"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="22422" end="22427" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q705131" start="22586" end="22603" title="Chollima Movement" label="Chollima Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22609" end="22620" title="Economy of North Korea#Ch&amp;#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method" label="Chongsan-ni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22651" end="22668" title="Economy of North Korea#Taean work system" label="Taean Work System"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="22735" end="22753" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="23369" end="23380" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="23431" end="23442" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q234793" start="23584" end="23597" title="Joan Robinson" label="Joan Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="25055" end="25070" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786062" start="25782" end="25802" title="6th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Sixth Party Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005871" start="25937" end="25954" title="On the Juche Idea" label="On the Juche Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q494418" start="26078" end="26093" title="Rangoon bombing" label="Rangoon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14362" start="26157" end="26170" title="Chun Doo-hwan" label="Chun Doo-hwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127442" start="26401" end="26421" title="Konstantin Chernenko" label="Konstantin Chernenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="26698" end="26715" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q495953" start="26776" end="26797" title="Korean Air Flight 858" label="Korean Air Flight 858"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="26829" end="26843" title="Seoul Olympics" label="Seoul Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q321697" start="27031" end="27054" title="Juche Tower" label="&amp;quot;Juche&amp;quot; Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q224717" start="27060" end="27069" title="Nampo Dam" label="Nampo Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29272" start="27079" end="27093" title="Ryugyong Hotel" label="Ryugyong Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187038" start="27158" end="27199" title="13th World Festival of Youth and Students" label="13th World Festival of Youth and Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="27531" end="27543" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="28396" end="28408" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="29037" end="29045" title="North Korean famine" label="a famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468325" start="29461" end="29494" title="Eternal leaders of North Korea" label="eternal President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="29687" end="29703" title="Theocracy" label="theocratic state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29717" end="29757" title="North Korean cult of personality#Kim Il Sung" label="personality cult surrounding Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="29937" end="29955" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240364" start="29961" end="29983" title="Premier of North Korea" label="Premier of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418064" start="29989" end="30035" title="Chairman of the Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="Chairman of the Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="30041" end="30054" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q30944956" start="30056" end="30120" title="President of the Presidium of the Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="President of the Presidium of the Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q698289" start="30156" end="30199" title="National Defence Commission of North Korea" label="Chairman of the National Defence Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330651" start="30204" end="30254" title="Supreme Commander of the Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Supreme Commander of the Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="30986" end="30992" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q45785" start="31239" end="31251" title="Kim Dae-jung" label="Kim Dae-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q489155" start="31338" end="31353" title="Sunshine Policy" label="Sunshine Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="31377" end="31391" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="31645" end="31649" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q499004" start="31823" end="31847" title="Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center" label="Yongbyon nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q483933" start="31923" end="31957" title="2009 North Korean nuclear test" label="continued its nuclear test program"/>
<link wikidata="Q494058" start="31960" end="32022" title="ROKS Cheonan sinking" label="In 2010, the sinking of a South Korean naval ship, the Cheonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243987" start="32084" end="32113" title="Bombardment of Yeonpyeong" label="shelling of Yeonpyeong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="32266" end="32277" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q496004" start="32318" end="32333" title="Jang Song-thaek" label="Jang Song-thaek"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719111" start="32486" end="32522" title="Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="United Nations Commission of Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="32549" end="32572" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q20757515" start="32604" end="32627" title="Pyongyang Standard Time" label="Pyongyang Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q909085" start="32665" end="32684" title="Japan Standard Time" label="Japan Standard Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q21351725" start="32844" end="32892" title="7th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="7th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210127" start="32978" end="33012" title="Politburo of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Politburo of the Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q44047105" start="33487" end="33497" title="Hwasong-15" label="Hwasong-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="33502" end="33536" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="33711" end="33725" title="hydrogen bombs" label="hydrogen bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41510590" start="33808" end="33838" title="North Korea at the 2018 Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330912" start="33850" end="33861" title="Kim Yo Jong" label="Kim Yo Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="33873" end="33884" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q110456" start="33900" end="33912" title="Kim Yong-nam" label="Kim Yong-nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q493835" start="34038" end="34057" title="Joint Security Area" label="Joint Security Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="34364" end="34376" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q50396434" start="34382" end="34401" title="2018 North Korea–United States Singapore Summit" label="summit in Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q56121160" start="34680" end="34695" title="September 2018 inter-Korean summit" label="summit with Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q60455116" start="34726" end="34739" title="2019 North Korea–United States Hanoi Summit" label="second summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q86675924" start="35068" end="35085" title="COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001061" start="35167" end="35175" title="38 North" label="38 North"/>
<link wikidata="Q98517123" start="35225" end="35273" title="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q707631" start="35343" end="35396" title="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q627531" start="35521" end="35536" title="History of Asia" label="History of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831198" start="35539" end="35559" title="History of East Asia" label="History of East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713414" start="35562" end="35578" title="History of Korea" label="History of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702092" start="35581" end="35598" title="Prehistoric Korea" label="Prehistoric Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q707483" start="35601" end="35629" title="Korean independence movement" label="Korean independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432011" start="35632" end="35665" title="Korean nationalist historiography" label="Korean nationalist historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154264" start="35668" end="35686" title="Communism in Korea" label="Communism in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21422559" start="35689" end="35704" title="Korean conflict" label="Korean conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="35707" end="35717" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375957" start="35720" end="35745" title="Government of North Korea" label="Government of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q715921" start="35748" end="35775" title="Human rights in North Korea" label="Human rights in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="35778" end="35783" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154838" start="35786" end="35809" title="Politics of North Korea" label="Politics of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200831" start="35812" end="35834" title="Prisons in North Korea" label="Prisons in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q705820" start="35837" end="35844" title="Songbun" label="Songbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876342" start="35847" end="35882" title="Supreme Leader (North Korean title)" label="Supreme Leader (North Korean title)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20010802" start="35885" end="35921" title="Women in the North Korean Revolution" label="Women in the North Korean Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="36549" end="36567" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773316" start="36588" end="36617" title="The Asian Wall Street Journal" label="The Asian Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="36717" end="36746" title="The Christian Science Monitor" label="The Christian Science Monitor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21257" wikidata="Q1423763" url="?curid=21257" title="Geography of North Korea">
<text>North Korea is located in East Asia in the Northern half of Korea, partially on the Korean Peninsula. It borders three countries: China along the Yalu (Amnok) River, Russia along the Tumen River, and South Korea to the south.

==Topography and drainage==
The terrain consists mostly of hills and mountains separated by deep, narrow valleys. The coastal plains are wide in the west and discontinuous in the east.

Early European visitors to Korea remarked that the country resembled &quot;a sea in a heavy gale&quot; because of the many successive mountain ranges that crisscross the peninsula. Some 80 percent of North Korea&#x27;s land area is composed of mountains and uplands, with all of the peninsula&#x27;s mountains with elevations of or more located in North Korea. The great majority of the population lives in the plains and lowlands.

Paektu Mountain, the highest point in North Korea at , is a volcanic mountain near Manchuria with basalt lava plateau with elevations between and above sea level. The Hamgyong Range, located in the extreme northeastern part of the peninsula, has many high peaks, including Kwanmobong at approximately .

Other major ranges include the Rangrim Mountains, which are located in the north-central part of North Korea and run in a north-south direction, making communication between the eastern and western parts of the country rather difficult; and the Kangnam Range, which runs along the North Korea–China border. Kumgangsan, or Diamond Mountain, (approximately ) in the Thaebaek Range, which extends into South Korea, is famous for its scenic beauty.

For the most part, the plains are small. The most extensive are the Pyongyang and Chaeryong plains, each covering about 500 km2. Because the mountains on the east coast drop abruptly to the sea, the plains are even smaller there than on the west coast.

The mountain ranges in the northern and eastern parts of North Korea form the watershed for most of its rivers, which run in a westerly direction and empty into the Yellow Sea and Korea Bay. The longest is the Amnok River, which is navigable for 678 km of its . The Tuman River, one of the few major rivers to flow into the Sea of Japan, is the second longest at but is navigable for only because of the mountainous topography.

The third longest river, the Taedong River, flows through Pyongyang and is navigable for 245 of its 397 km. Lakes tend to be small because of the lack of glacial activity and the stability of the Earth&#x27;s crust in the region. Unlike neighboring Japan or northern China, North Korea experiences few severe earthquakes. The country has a number of natural spas and hot springs, which number 124 according to one North Korean source.

==Climate==

Most of North Korea is classified as being of a humid continental climate within the Köppen climate classification scheme, with warm summers and cold, dry winters. In summer, there is a short rainy season called &quot;changma&quot;.

Long winters bring bitter cold and clear weather interspersed with snowstorms as a result of northern and northwestern winds that blow from Siberia. The daily average high and low temperatures for Pyongyang in January are . On average, it snows thirty-seven days during the winter. Winter can be particularly harsh in the northern, mountainous regions.

Summer tends to be short, hot, humid, and rainy because of the southern and southeastern monsoon winds that bring moist air from the Pacific Ocean. Spring and autumn are transitional seasons marked by mild temperatures and variable winds and bring the most pleasant weather. The daily average high and low temperatures for Pyongyang in August are .

On average, approximately 60% of all precipitation occurs from June to September. Natural hazards include late spring droughts which are often followed by severe flooding. Typhoons affect the peninsula on an average of at least once every summer or early autumn. The drought that started in June 2015, according to the Korean Central News Agency, has been the worst seen in 100 years.

===Examples===





===Climate change===
==Environment==
The environment of North Korea is diverse, encompassing alpine, forest, farmland, freshwater, and marine ecosystems.

Cultivation, logging, and natural disasters have all put pressure on North Korea&#x27;s forests. During the economic crisis of the 1990s, deforestation accelerated, as people turned to the woodlands to provide firewood and food. This in turn has led to soil erosion, soil depletion, and increased risk of flooding. In response, the government has promoted a tree planting program. Based on satellite imagery, it was estimated in 2013 that 40% of forest cover had been lost since 1985. A forest restoration policy was adopted in 2012.

==Boundaries, coastline, and islands==

North Korea has an area of 120,538 km², of which 120,408 km² is land and 130 km² is water. It has of land boundaries; of these, are with China, are with South Korea, and are with Russia.

The Korean Peninsula extends about southward from the northeast Asian continental landmass. The coastline of Korea is highly irregular, and North Korea accounts for of this, roughly one-third. Some 3579 islands lie adjacent to the Korean Peninsula, mostly along the south and west coasts.

The southern stretch of its east coast forms the northern side of the East Korea Bay. At the headland Musu Dan, this ends and the coast turns sharply northward.

A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,483 km² of tidal flats in North Korea, making it the 21st ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.

===Maritime claims===

The North Korean government claims territorial waters extending from shore. It also claims an exclusive economic zone from shore. In addition, a maritime military boundary that lies offshore in the Sea of Japan and offshore in the Yellow Sea demarcates the waters and airspace into which foreign ships and planes are prohibited from entering without permission.

Waters of the Yellow Sea are demarcated between North Korea and South Korea by the disputed Northern Limit Line drawn by the United Nations Command in early 1950s and not officially recognized by North Korea. Disputes between North and South Korean naval vessels have occurred in this area. A total of five disputes were noteworthy enough to have been reported in the news (three in 2009 and two in 2010).

==Resources and land use==
Natural resources include coal, petroleum, lead, tungsten, zinc, graphite, magnesite, iron ore, copper, gold, pyrites, salt, fluorspar and hydropower.

===Land use===
===Irrigated land===
*14,600 km² (2003)

===Total renewable water resources===
*778.15 km3 (2011)

===Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural)===
*total: 8.66 km3/yr (10%/13%/76%)
*per capita: 360.6 m3/yr (2005)

==See also==

* Administrative divisions of North Korea
* Geography of South Korea
* &quot;North Korea Uncovered&quot;

Lists:
* List of cities in North Korea
* List of islands of North Korea
* List of lakes in Korea
* List of national parks of Korea
* List of rivers of Korea
* List of mountains in Korea

==References==
===Works cited===

==Further reading==
*Dormels, Rainer. North Korea&#x27;s Cities: Industrial facilities, internal structures and typification. Jimoondang, 2014. 

==External links==

*North Korea Uncovered, (North Korea Google Earth), a comprehensive mapping of North Korea on Google Earth</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="0" end="11" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="26" end="35" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="84" end="100" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="130" end="135" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="146" end="164" title="Amnok River" label="Yalu (Amnok) River"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="166" end="172" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="183" end="194" title="Tumen River" label="Tumen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="200" end="211" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="286" end="290" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="296" end="304" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="332" end="338" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="353" end="358" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="419" end="425" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="547" end="561" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q107635" start="846" end="861" title="Paektu Mountain" label="Paektu Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="906" end="923" title="Volcano" label="volcanic mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="929" end="938" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="944" end="950" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="951" end="955" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="956" end="963" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644542" start="1013" end="1027" title="Hamgyong Mountains" label="Hamgyong Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q492785" start="1181" end="1198" title="Rangrim Mountains" label="Rangrim Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064446" start="1395" end="1408" title="Kangnam Mountains" label="Kangnam Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060616" start="1431" end="1455" title="North Korea–China border" label="North Korea–China border"/>
<link wikidata="Q495501" start="1457" end="1467" title="Kumgangsan" label="Kumgangsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q562098" start="1514" end="1522" title="Taebaek Mountains" label="Thaebaek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="1664" end="1673" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q705265" start="1678" end="1687" title="Chaeryong" label="Chaeryong"/>
<link wikidata="Q330618" start="2308" end="2321" title="Taedong River" label="Taedong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="2588" end="2598" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="2776" end="2801" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2813" end="2842" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="3102" end="3109" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="3405" end="3412" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="3449" end="3462" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="3639" end="3648" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16880525" start="3803" end="3836" title="North Korea flooding (disambiguation)" label="often followed by severe flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q326804" start="3985" end="4011" title="Korean Central News Agency" label="Korean Central News Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149452" start="4165" end="4171" title="alpine tundra" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890135" start="4191" end="4201" title="freshwater ecosystems" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="4207" end="4224" title="marine ecosystems" label="marine ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="4335" end="4363" title="North Korean famine" label="economic crisis of the 1990s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469194" start="4714" end="4732" title="forest restoration" label="forest restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="5099" end="5104" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="5193" end="5199" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q52060" start="5350" end="5364" title="East Korea Bay" label="East Korea Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16168056" start="5382" end="5390" title="Musu Dan" label="Musu Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="5458" end="5472" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375957" start="5640" end="5663" title="North Korean government" label="North Korean government"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="5671" end="5689" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790785" start="5720" end="5753" title="Exclusive economic zone of North Korea" label="claims an exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q482854" start="6091" end="6110" title="Northern Limit Line" label="Northern Limit Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q482864" start="6124" end="6146" title="United Nations Command" label="United Nations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="6459" end="6463" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="6465" end="6474" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="6476" end="6480" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="6482" end="6490" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="6492" end="6496" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="6498" end="6506" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q425450" start="6508" end="6517" title="magnesite" label="magnesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="6519" end="6527" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="6529" end="6535" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="6537" end="6541" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="6543" end="6550" title="pyrites" label="pyrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="6552" end="6556" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="6558" end="6567" title="fluorspar" label="fluorspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="6572" end="6582" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q41386" start="6845" end="6884" title="Administrative divisions of North Korea" label="Administrative divisions of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q718476" start="6887" end="6911" title="Geography of South Korea" label="Geography of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055811" start="6920" end="6941" title="North Korea Uncovered" label="North Korea Uncovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q322777" start="6958" end="6987" title="List of cities in North Korea" label="List of cities in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891808" start="6990" end="7020" title="List of islands of North Korea" label="List of islands of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624782" start="7023" end="7045" title="List of lakes in Korea" label="List of lakes in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630205" start="7048" end="7079" title="List of national parks of Korea" label="List of national parks of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q706979" start="7082" end="7105" title="List of rivers of Korea" label="List of rivers of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q498264" start="7108" end="7134" title="List of mountains in Korea" label="List of mountains in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="7430" end="7442" title="Google Earth" label="Google Earth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21258" wikidata="Q2354694" url="?curid=21258" title="Demographics of North Korea">
<text>The demographics of North Korea are determined through national censuses and international estimates. The Central Bureau of Statistics of North Korea conducted the most recent census in 2008, where the population reached 24 million inhabitants. The population density is 199.54 inhabitants per square kilometre, and the 2014 estimated life expectancy is 69.81 years. In 1980, the population rose at a near consistent, but low, rate (0.84% from the two censuses). Since 2000, North Korea&#x27;s birth rate has exceeded its death rate; the natural growth is positive. In terms of age structure, the population is dominated by the 15–64-year-old segment (68.09%). The median age of the population is 32.9 years, and the gender ratio is 0.95 males to 1.00 female. Since the early 1990s, the birth rate has been fairly stable, with an average of 2 children per woman, down from an average of 3 in the early 1980s.

According to &quot;The World Factbook&quot;, North Korea is racially homogeneous and contains a small Chinese community and a few ethnic Japanese. The 2008 census listed two ethnicities: Korean (%) and Other (%). Korea was annexed by the Empire of Japan in 1910, in which the Korean Peninsula was occupied by Japanese. In 1945, when Japan was defeated in World War II, Korea was divided into two occupied zones: north occupied by the Soviet Union and the south by the United States. Negotiations on unification failed, and in 1948 two separate countries were formed: North and South Korea.

Korean is the official language of North Korea. &quot;The World Factbook&quot; states &quot;traditionally Buddhist and Confucianist, some Christian and syncretic Chondogyo&quot; in regards to religion, but also states &quot;autonomous religious activities now almost nonexistent; government-sponsored religious groups exist to provide illusion of religious freedom&quot;. , 8.86% of the population older than 5 years old have attained academic degrees. In 2000, North Korea spent 38.2% of its expenditures on education, social insurance, and social security. Estimates show that, in 2012, gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was $1,800. The most significant sources of employment were machine building and manufacturing of metallurgical products, military products, and textiles. In 2006, the unemployment rate was between 14.7% and 36.5%. The 2008 census enumerated 5,887,471 households, averaging 3.9 persons per house. Average urbanization rate was 60.3% in 2011.

During the North Korean famine of 1994–1998 somewhere between 240,000 and 3,500,000 North Koreans died from starvation or hunger-related illnesses, with the deaths peaking in 1997. A 2011 U.S. Census Bureau report put the likely number of excess deaths during 1993 to 2000 at from 500,000 to 600,000.

==History of reporting demographics==
Until the release of official data in 1989, the 1963 edition of the North Korea Central Yearbook was the last official publication to disclose population figures. After 1963, demographers used varying methods to estimate the population. They either totaled the number of delegates elected to the Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly (each delegate representing 50,000 people before 1962 and 30,000 people afterward) or relied on official statements that a certain number of persons, or percentage of the population, was engaged in a particular activity. Thus, on the basis of remarks made by President Kim Il Sung in 1977 concerning school attendance, the population that year was calculated at 17.2 million persons. During the 1980s, health statistics, including life expectancy and causes of mortality, were gradually made available to the outside world.

In 1989, the Central Bureau of Statistics released demographic data to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) to secure the UNFPA&#x27;s assistance in holding North Korea&#x27;s first nationwide census since the establishment of the DPRK in 1946. Although the figures given to the United Nations (UN) might have been purposely distorted, it appears that in line with other attempts to open itself to the outside world, the North Korean regime has also opened somewhat in the demographic realm. Although the country lacks trained demographers, accurate data on household registration, migration, and births and deaths are available to North Korean authorities.

According to the United States scholar Nicholas Eberstadt and demographer Judith Banister, vital statistics and personal information on residents are kept by agencies on the &quot;ri&quot;, or &quot;ni&quot; (: village, the local administrative unit) level in rural areas and the &quot;dong&quot; (: district or block) level in urban areas.

The next census was scheduled for 2018, but was cancelled.

==Size and growth rate==
In their 1992 monograph, &quot;The Population of North Korea&quot;, Eberstadt and Banister use the data given to the UNFPA and make their own assessments. They place the total population at 21.4 million persons in mid-1990, consisting of 10.6 million males and 10.8 million females. This figure is close to an estimate of 21.9 million persons for mid-1988 cited in the 1990 edition of the &quot;Demographic Yearbook&quot; published by the UN. &quot;Korean Review&quot;, a book by Pang Hwan-ju published by the Foreign Languages Publishing House in 1987, gives a figure of 19.1 million persons for 1986.

===Male-female ratio===

The figures disclosed by the government reveal an unusually low proportion of males to females: in 1980 and 1987, the male-to-female ratios were 86.2 to 100, and 84.2 to 100, respectively. Low male-to-female ratios are usually the result of a war, but these figures were lower than the sex ratio of 88.3 males per 100 females recorded for 1953, the last year of the Korean War. The male-to-female ratio would be expected to rise to a normal level with the passage of years, as happened between 1953 and 1970, when the figure was 95.1 males per 100 females. After 1970, however, the ratio declined. Eberstadt and Banister suggest that before 1970 male and female population figures included the whole population, yielding ratios in the ninetieth percentile, but that after that time the male military population was excluded from population figures.

Based on the figures provided by the Central Statistics Bureau, Eberstadt and Banister estimate that the actual size of the &quot;hidden&quot; male North Korean military had reached 1.2 million by 1986 and that the actual male-to-female ratio was 97.1 males to 100 females in 1990. If their estimates are correct, 6.1 percent of North Korea&#x27;s total population was in the military, numerically the world&#x27;s fourth largest active military force as of 2021.

A survey in 2017 found that the famine had skewed North Korea&#x27;s demography, impacting particularly on male infants. Women aged 20–24 made up 4% of the population, while men in the same age group made up only 2.5%.

===Growth rate===
The annual population growth rate in 1960 was 2.7 percent, rising to a high of 3.6 percent in 1970, and falling to 1.9 percent in 1975. This fall reflected a dramatic decline in the fertility rate: the average number of children born to women decreased from 6.5 in 1966 to 2.5 in 1988. Assuming the data is reliable, reasons for falling growth rates and fertility rates probably include late marriage, urbanization, limited housing space, and the expectation that women would participate equally in work hours in the labor force. The experience of other socialist countries suggests that widespread labor force participation by women often goes hand-in-hand with more traditional role expectations; in other words, they are still responsible for housework and childrearing. The high percentage of males age 17 to 26 may have contributed to the low fertility rate.

According to Eberstadt and Banister&#x27;s data, the annual population growth rate in 1991 was 1.9 percent. However, the CIA &quot;World Factbook&quot; estimated that North Korea&#x27;s annual population growth rate was 1.0% in 1991 and that it has since declined to 0.4% by 2009.

===Promoting population growth===
The North Korean government seems to perceive its population as too small in relation to that of South Korea. In its public pronouncements, Pyongyang has called for accelerated population growth and encouraged large families. According to one Korean American scholar who visited North Korea in the early 1980s, the country has no birth control policies; parents are encouraged to have as many as six children. The state provides &quot;tagaso&quot; (nurseries) to lessen the burden of childrearing for parents and offers a 77-day paid leave after childbirth.

Eberstadt and Banister suggest, however, that authorities at the local level make contraceptive information readily available to parents and that intrauterine devices are the most commonly adopted birth control method. An interview with a former North Korean resident in the early 1990s revealed that such devices are distributed free at clinics.

==Population structure and projections==

Demographers determine the age structure of a given population by dividing it into five-year age-groups and arranging them chronologically in a pyramid-like structure that &quot;bulges&quot; or recedes in relation to the number of persons in a given age cohort. Many poor, developing countries have a broad base and steadily tapering higher levels, which reflects a large number of births and young children but much smaller age cohorts in later years as a result of relatively short life expectancies. North Korea does not entirely fit this pattern; data reveal a &quot;bulge&quot; in the lower ranges of adulthood. In 1991, life expectancy at birth was approximately 66 years for males, almost 73 for females.

It is likely that annual population growth rates will increase, as well as difficulties in employing the many young men and women entering the labor force in a socialist economy already suffering from stagnant growth. Eberstadt and Banister project that the population will stabilize (that is, cease to grow) at 34 million persons in 2045 and will then experience a gradual decline.

==Settlement patterns and urbanization==
North Korea&#x27;s population is concentrated in the plains and lowlands. The least populated regions are the mountainous Chagang and Yanggang provinces adjacent to the Chinese border. The largest concentrations of population are in North Pyongan and South Pyongan provinces, in the municipal district of Pyongyang, and in South Hamgyong Province, which includes the Hamhung-Hungnam urban area. Eberstadt and Banister calculate the average population density at 167 persons per square kilometer, ranging from 1,178 persons per square kilometer in Pyongyang Municipality to 44 persons per square kilometer in Yanggang Province. By contrast, South Korea had an average population density of 425 persons per square kilometer in 1989.

Like South Korea, North Korea has experienced significant urban migration since the end of the Korean War. Official statistics reveal that 59.6 percent of the total population was classified as urban in 1987. This figures compares with only 17.7 percent in 1953. It is not entirely clear, however, what standards are used to define urban populations. Eberstadt and Banister suggest that although South Korean statisticians do not classify settlements of under 50,000 as urban, their North Korean counterparts include settlements as small as 20,000 in this category. And, in North Korea, people who engage in agricultural pursuits inside municipalities sometimes are not counted as urban.

Urbanization in North Korea seems to have proceeded most rapidly between 1953 and 1960, when the urban population grew between 12 and 20 percent annually. Subsequently, the increase slowed to about 6 percent annually in the 1960s and between 1 and 3 percent from 1970 to 1987.

In 1987, North Korea&#x27;s largest cities were Pyongyang, with approximately 2.3 million inhabitants; Hamhung, 701,000; Chongjin, 520,000; Nampo, 370,000; Sunchon, 356,000; and Sinuiju, 289,000. In 1987, the total national population living in Pyongyang was 11.5 percent. The government restricts and monitors migration to cities and ensures a relatively balanced distribution of population in provincial centers in relation to Pyongyang.

==Vital statistics==
Source: Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
==Total and percent distribution of population by single year of age (census 2008)==
Source: Central Bureau of Statistics



==Koreans living overseas==
Large-scale emigration from Korea began around 1904 and continued until the end of World War II. During the Japanese colonial occupation (1910–1945), many Koreans emigrated to: China (particularly Northeast China), the Soviet Union, Hawaii, and the contiguous United States. People from Korea&#x27;s northern provinces went primarily to Manchuria, China, and Siberia; many of those from the southern provinces went to Japan. Most emigrants left for economic reasons because employment opportunities were scarce; many Korean farmers had lost their land after the Japanese colonial government introduced a system of private land tenure, imposed higher land taxes, and promoted the growth of an absentee landlord class charging exorbitant rents.

In the 1980s, more than 4 million ethnic Koreans lived outside the peninsula. The largest group, about 1.7 million people, lived in China (&quot;see Koreans in China&quot;); most had assumed Chinese citizenship. Approximately 1 million Koreans, almost exclusively from South Korea, lived in North America (&quot;see Korean Americans&quot;). About 389,000 ethnic Koreans resided in the former Soviet Union (&quot;see Koryosaram and Sakhalin Koreans&quot;). One observer noted that Koreans have been so successful in running collective farms in Soviet Central Asia that being Korean is often associated by other citizens with being rich. As a result, there is growing antagonism against Koreans. Smaller groups of Koreans are found in Central America and South America (85,000), the Middle East (62,000), Europe (40,000), Asia (27,000), and Africa (25,000).

Many of Japan&#x27;s approximately 680,000 Koreans have below average standards of living. This is partly because of discrimination by the Japanese. Many resident Koreans, loyal to North Korea, remain separate from, and often hostile to, the Japanese social mainstream. The pro-North Korean Chongryon (General Association of Korean Residents in Japan) initially was more successful than the pro-South Korean Mindan (Association for Korean Residents in Japan) in attracting adherents. However, the widening disparity between the political and economic conditions of the two Koreas has since made Mindan the larger and certainly the less politically controversial faction. In addition, third- and fourth-generation Zainichi Chosenjin have largely given up active participation or loyalty to the Chongryon ideology. Reasons stated for this increased disassociation include widespread mainstream tolerance of Koreans by Japanese in recent years, greatly reducing the need to rely on Chongryon and the increasing unpopularity of Kim Jong Il even among loyal members of Chongryon.

Between 1959 and 1982, Chongryon encouraged the repatriation of Korean residents in Japan to North Korea. More than 93,000 Koreans left Japan, the majority (80,000 persons) in 1960 and 1961. Thereafter, the number of repatriates declined, apparently because of reports of hardships suffered by their compatriots. Approximately 6,637 Japanese wives accompanied their husbands to North Korea, of whom about 1,828 retained Japanese citizenship in the early 1990s. Pyongyang had originally promised that the wives could return home every two or three years to visit their relatives. In fact, however, they are not allowed to do so, and few have had contact with their families in Japan. In normalization talks between North Korean and Japanese officials in the early 1990s, the latter urged unsuccessfully that the wives be allowed to make home visits. According to a defector, himself a former returnee, many petitioned to be returned to Japan and in response were sent to political prison camps. Japanese research puts the number of Zainichi Korean returnees condemned to prison camps at around 10,000.

==CIA World Factbook demographic statistics==

The following demographic statistics are from the &quot;CIA World Factbook&quot;, unless otherwise indicated:

Population: 25,115,311 (July 2016 est.)

Age structure&lt;br&gt;
&quot;0–14 years:&quot;
20.97% (male 2,678,638/female 2,588,744)
&quot;15–24 years:&quot;
15.88% (male 2,009,360/female 1,977,942)
&quot;25–54 years:&quot;
44.22% (male 5,567,682/female 5,537,077)
&quot;55–64 years:&quot;
9.19% (male 1,090,739/female 1,218,406)
&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
9.74% (male 840,003/female 1,606,720) (2016 est.)

Population growth rate&lt;br&gt;
1.02% (1991 est.)&lt;br&gt;
0.31% (1996 est.)&lt;br&gt;
0.87% (2006 est.)&lt;br&gt;
0.42% (2009 est.)&lt;br&gt;
0.53% (2016 est.)

Birth rate&lt;br&gt;
20.01 births/1,000 population (1991 est.)&lt;br&gt;
17.58 births/1,000 population (1996 est.)&lt;br&gt;
14.61 births/1,000 population (2006 est.)&lt;br&gt;
14.61 births/1,000 population (2008 est.)&lt;br&gt;
14.60 births/1,000 population (2016 est.)

Death rate&lt;br&gt;
8.94 deaths/1,000 population (1991 est.)&lt;br&gt;
9.52 deaths/1,000 population (1996 est.)&lt;br&gt;
7.29 deaths/1,000 population (2006 est.)&lt;br&gt;
7.29 deaths/1,000 population (2008 est.)&lt;br&gt;
9.30 deaths/1,000 population (2016 est.)

Net migration rate:
0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2016 est.)

Sex ratio&lt;br&gt;
&quot;at birth:&quot;
1.05 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;0–14 years:&quot;
1.03 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;15–24 years:&quot;
1.02 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;25–54 years:&quot;
1.01 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;55–64 years:&quot;
0.9 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;65 years and over:&quot;
0.53 male(s)/female
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total population:&quot;
0.94 male(s)/female (2016 est.)

Infant mortality rate&lt;br&gt;
total: 22.9 deaths/1,000 live births (2016 est.)

Life expectancy at birth&lt;br&gt;
&quot;total population:&quot;
70.4 years
&lt;br&gt;&quot;male:&quot;
66.6 years
&lt;br&gt;&quot;female:&quot;
74.5 years (2016 est.)

Total fertility rate&lt;br&gt;
2.09 children born/woman (2006 est.)&lt;br&gt;
1.94 children born/woman (2010 est.)&lt;br&gt;
1.96 children born/woman (2016 est.)&lt;br&gt;
1.91 children born/woman (2021 est.)

Nationality&lt;br&gt;
&quot;noun:&quot; Korean(s)&lt;br&gt;
&quot;adjective:&quot; Korean

Ethnic groups&lt;br&gt;
racially homogeneous: Koreans; small Chinese community, a few ethnic Russians, ethnic Japanese, Singaporeans, ethnic Thai, Indian, African, Americans and ethnic Vietnamese

Religion:
no statistics available; predominantly Buddhism, Shamanism, Confucianism, and Cheondoism (see &quot;religion in North Korea&quot;)

Language: Korean

Literacy&lt;br&gt;
&quot;definition:&quot;
age 15 and over can read and write Korean using the Korean script Hangul
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total population:&quot; 100%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;male:&quot; 100%
&lt;br&gt;&quot;female:&quot; 100% (2015 est.)

==See also==

* 1993 North Korea Census
* 2008 North Korea Census
* Ethnic minorities in North Korea
* Demographics of South Korea

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
*
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2354694" start="4" end="31" title="Demographics of North Korea" label="demographics of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="64" end="70" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942281" start="106" end="134" title="Central Bureau of Statistics (North Korea)" label="Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="138" end="149" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823059" start="164" end="190" title="2008 North Korea Census" label="most recent census in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="335" end="350" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="494" end="504" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="522" end="532" title="death rate" label="death rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="929" end="947" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301888" start="970" end="990" title="Monoethnicity" label="racially homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="1012" end="1019" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="1047" end="1055" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="1133" end="1163" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="annexed by the Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="1186" end="1202" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="1243" end="1261" title="Victory over Japan" label="Japan was defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1265" end="1277" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1344" end="1356" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1378" end="1391" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="1501" end="1507" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="1936" end="1952" title="academic degrees" label="academic degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="2298" end="2315" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q698323" start="2484" end="2503" title="North Korean famine" label="North Korean famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="3409" end="3420" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942281" start="3678" end="3706" title="Central Bureau of Statistics (North Korea)" label="Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4519" end="4533" title="Administrative divisions of North Korea#Third-level divisions" label="&amp;quot;ri&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q108131094" start="4707" end="4725" title="2018 North Korea Census" label="scheduled for 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531161" start="5282" end="5316" title="Foreign Languages Publishing House (North Korea)" label="Foreign Languages Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5767" end="5777" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="6623" end="6635" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="6666" end="6702" title="List of countries by number of active troops" label="fourth largest active military force"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="7356" end="7368" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="7802" end="7811" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="7879" end="7896" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="8378" end="8393" title="Korean American" label="Korean American"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="8776" end="8789" title="contraceptive" label="contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="9357" end="9377" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9513" end="9520" title="Demographics#Generational cohorts" label="cohorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272406" start="10344" end="10351" title="Chagang" label="Chagang"/>
<link wikidata="Q110171" start="10356" end="10364" title="Ryanggang Province" label="Yanggang"/>
<link wikidata="Q109348" start="10455" end="10468" title="North Pyongan" label="North Pyongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109380" start="10473" end="10486" title="South Pyongan" label="South Pyongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109368" start="10545" end="10559" title="South Hamgyong" label="South Hamgyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q109356" start="10589" end="10596" title="Hamhung" label="Hamhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="11969" end="11978" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q109356" start="12024" end="12031" title="Hamhung" label="Hamhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q109336" start="12042" end="12050" title="Chongjin" label="Chongjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109386" start="12061" end="12066" title="Nampo" label="Nampo"/>
<link wikidata="Q715946" start="12077" end="12084" title="Sunchon" label="Sunchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156243" start="12099" end="12106" title="Sinuiju" label="Sinuiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="12736" end="12764" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese colonial occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="12825" end="12840" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12847" end="12859" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="12861" end="12867" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="12877" end="12901" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="12987" end="12994" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16171951" start="13521" end="13537" title="Koreans in China" label="Koreans in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="13688" end="13704" title="Korean Americans" label="Korean Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q711083" start="13788" end="13798" title="Koryosaram" label="Koryosaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q713003" start="13803" end="13819" title="Sakhalin Koreans" label="Sakhalin Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058121" start="14520" end="14529" title="Chongryon" label="Chongryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485973" start="14637" end="14643" title="Mindan" label="Mindan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485973" start="14824" end="14830" title="Mindan" label="Mindan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="15253" end="15264" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q533312" start="15369" end="15394" title="Zainichi Korean" label="Korean residents in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158932" start="15638" end="15694" title="Japanese people in North Korea" label="Japanese wives accompanied their husbands to North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q491271" start="16011" end="16044" title="Japan-Korea relations" label="between North Korean and Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16275" end="16297" title="Human rights in North Korea#Internment camps for political prisoners" label="political prison camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="16510" end="16528" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="18752" end="18759" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="18767" end="18774" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="18792" end="18807" title="ethnic Russians" label="ethnic Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373538" start="18809" end="18824" title="Japanese diaspora" label="ethnic Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840821" start="18826" end="18838" title="Singaporeans" label="Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="18840" end="18851" title="Thai people" label="ethnic Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="18853" end="18859" title="Indian people" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="18861" end="18868" title="African diaspora" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="18870" end="18879" title="Americans" label="Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233666" start="18884" end="18901" title="Việt Kiều" label="ethnic Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q593427" start="18952" end="18960" title="Korean Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q699747" start="18962" end="18971" title="Korean shamanism" label="Shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="18973" end="18985" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q513638" start="18991" end="19001" title="Cheondoism" label="Cheondoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394518" start="19013" end="19036" title="religion in North Korea" label="religion in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="19055" end="19061" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="19172" end="19178" title="Hangul" label="Hangul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16822203" start="19321" end="19344" title="1993 North Korea Census" label="1993 North Korea Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823059" start="19347" end="19370" title="2008 North Korea Census" label="2008 North Korea Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130415" start="19373" end="19405" title="Ethnic minorities in North Korea" label="Ethnic minorities in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q489145" start="19408" end="19435" title="Demographics of South Korea" label="Demographics of South Korea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21259" wikidata="Q1154838" url="?curid=21259" title="Politics of North Korea">
<text>The politics of North Korea (officially the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea or DPRK) takes place within the framework of the official state philosophy, Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism. &quot;Juche&quot;, which is a part of Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism, is the belief that only through self-reliance and a strong independent state, can true socialism be achieved.

North Korea&#x27;s political system is built upon the principle of centralization. The constitution defines North Korea as &quot;a dictatorship of people&#x27;s democracy&quot; under the leadership of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea (WPK), which is given legal supremacy over other political parties. WPK General Secretary is typically the supreme leader, who controls the WPK Presidium, the WPK Politburo, the WPK Secretariat and the WPK Central Military Commission, making the officeholder the most powerful person in North Korea.

The WPK is the ruling party of North Korea. It has been in power since its creation in 1948. Other minor political parties also exist, but are legally bound to accept the ruling role of the WPK. Elections occur only in single-candidate races where the candidate is effectively selected beforehand by the WPK. In addition to the parties, there are over 100 mass organizations controlled by the WPK. Those who are not WPK members are required to join one of these organizations. Of these, the most important ones are the Socialist Patriotic Youth League, Socialist Women&#x27;s Union of Korea, General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea, and Union of Agricultural Workers of Korea.

Outside observers generally view North Korea as a totalitarian dictatorship particularly noting the elaborate cult of personality around Kim Il-sung and his family. The WPK, led by a member of the ruling family, holds power in the state. The government has formally replaced all references to Marxism–Leninism in its constitution with the locally developed concept of &quot;Juche&quot;, or self-reliance. Kim Jong Il placed emphasis on the &quot;Songun&quot; or &quot;military-first&quot; philosophy, and all references to communism were removed from the North Korean constitution in 2009. Under Kim Jong Un, terminology such as communism and the socialist economy is again in common use. He additionally made Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism the main ideology of the country.

== History ==
Kim Il Sung ruled the country from 1948 until his death in July 1994, holding the offices of General Secretary of the WPK from 1949 to 1994 (titled as chairman from 1949 to 1972), Premier of North Korea from 1948 to 1972 and President from 1972 to 1994. He was succeeded by his son, Kim Jong Il. While the younger Kim had been his father&#x27;s designated successor since the 1980s, it took him three years to consolidate his power. He was named to his father&#x27;s old post of general secretary in 1997, and in 1998 became chairman of the National Defence Commission (NDC), which gave him command of the armed forces. The constitution was amended to make the NDC chairmanship &quot;the highest post in the state.&quot; At the same time, the presidential post was written out of the constitution, and Kim Il Sung was designated &quot;Eternal leader of Juche Korea&quot; in order to honor his memory forever. Most analysts believe the title to be a product of the cult of personality he cultivated during his life.

== Political parties and elections ==

According to the Constitution of North Korea, the country is a democratic republic and the Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly (SPA) and Provincial People&#x27;s Assemblies (PPA,도 인민회의) are elected by direct universal suffrage and secret ballot. Suffrage is guaranteed to all citizens aged 17 and over. In reality, these elections are for show and feature single-candidate races only. Those who want to vote against the sole candidate on the ballot must go to a special booth—in the presence of an electoral official—to cross out the candidate&#x27;s name before dropping it into the ballot box—an act which, according to many North Korean defectors, is far too risky to even contemplate.

All elected candidates are members of the Democratic Front for the Reunification of Korea (DFRK), a popular front dominated by the ruling Workers&#x27; Party of Korea (WPK). The two minor parties are the Chondoist Chongu Party and the Korean Social Democratic Party, who also have a few elected officials. The WPK exercises direct control over the candidates selected for election by members of the other two parties. In the past, elections were contested by other minor parties as well, including the Korea Buddhist Federation, Democratic Independent Party, Dongro People&#x27;s Party, Gonmin People&#x27;s Alliance, and People&#x27;s Republic Party.

==Political ideology==

Originally a close ally of Joseph Stalin&#x27;s Soviet Union, North Korea has increasingly emphasized &quot;Juche&quot;, an adoption of socialist self-reliance, which roots from Marxism–Leninism, its adoption of a certain ideological form of Marxism–Leninism is specific to the conditions of North Korea. &quot;Juche&quot; was enshrined as the official ideology when the country adopted a new constitution in 1972. In 2009, the constitution was amended again, quietly removing the brief references to communism (). However, North Korea continues to see itself as part of a worldwide leftist movement. The Workers&#x27; Party maintains a relationship with other leftist parties, sending a delegation to the International Meeting of Communist and Workers&#x27; Parties. North Korea has a strong relationship with Cuba; in 2016, the North Korean government declared three days of mourning after Fidel Castro&#x27;s death.

==Political developments==

For much of its history, North Korean politics have been dominated by its adversarial relationship with South Korea. During the Cold War, North Korea aligned with the Soviet Union and the People&#x27;s Republic of China. The North Korean government invested heavily in its military, hoping to develop the capability to reunify Korea by force if possible and also preparing to repel any attack by South Korea or the United States. Following the doctrine of &quot;Juche&quot;, North Korea aimed for a high degree of economic independence and the mobilization of all the resources of the nation to defend Korean sovereignty against foreign powers.

In the wake of the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s and the loss of Soviet aid, North Korea faced a long period of economic crisis, including severe agricultural and industrial shortages. North Korea&#x27;s main political issue has been to find a way to sustain its economy without compromising the internal stability of its government or its ability to respond to perceived external threats. Recently, North Korean efforts to improve relations with South Korea to increase trade and to receive development assistance have been mildly successful. North Korea has tried to improve its relations with South Korea by participating in the Pyeongchang Olympics, when Kim Jong Un sent his band and a few officials to visit South Korea. But North Korea&#x27;s determination to develop nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles has prevented stable relations with both South Korea and the United States. North Korea has also experimented with market economics in some sectors of its economy, but these have had limited impact.

Although there are occasional reports of signs of opposition to the government, these appear to be isolated, and there is no evidence of major internal threats to the current government. Some foreign analysts have pointed to widespread starvation, increased emigration through North Korea-China border, and new sources of information about the outside world for ordinary North Koreans as factors pointing to an imminent collapse of the regime. However, North Korea has remained stable in spite of more than a decade of such predictions. The Workers&#x27; Party of Korea maintains a monopoly on political power and Kim Jong Il remained the leader of the country until 2011, ever since he first gained power following the death of his father.

After the death of Kim Il Sung in 1994, his son, Kim Jong Il became the new leader, which marked the closure of one chapter of North Korean politics. Combined with external shocks and the less charismatic personality of Kim Jong Il, the transition of the leadership moved North Korea toward less centralized control. There are three key institutions: the Korean People&#x27;s Army (KPA), the Workers’ Party of Korea (WPK), and the cabinet. Rather than dominate a unified system as his father had, each party has their own enduring goals, therefore providing checks and balances to the government. No one party could claim victory and power over the other ones. With changing internal situation, combined with external pressure, the cabinet started to endorse policies it had rejected for years. North Korea politics is gradually becoming more open and negotiable with foreign countries.

Under Kim Jong Il the status of the military was enhanced, and appeared to occupy the center of the North Korean political system; all the social sectors were forced to follow the military spirit and adopt military methods. Kim Jong Il&#x27;s public activity focused heavily on &quot;on-the-spot guidance&quot; of places and events related to the military. The enhanced status of the military and military-centered political system was confirmed in 1998 at the first session of the 10th Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly (SPA) by the promotion of NDC members into the official power hierarchy. All ten NDC members were ranked within the top twenty on 5 September, and all but one occupied the top twenty at the fiftieth anniversary of the Day of the Foundation of the Republic on 9 September. Under Kim Jong Un there has been an increased emphasis on economic matters, with major defence spending needing support from an economic standpoint.

While the commonly accepted view is that no dissent can be expressed in North Korea, the notionally academic economic journal Kyo&#x27;ngje Yo&#x27;ngu and the philosophical and economic journals of Kim Il Sung University permit the presentation and discussion of the different views of various parts of the government.

===Protests===
In 2005, a riot began at Kim Il-sung Stadium during a World Cup qualification match, after a dispute between a Korean player and a Syrian referee and the subsequent disqualification of the player.

Between 2006–2007, &quot;market riots&quot; erupted in the countryside when the government &quot;unsuccessfully tried to restart&quot; the Public Distribution System. Andrei Lankov goes on to say that the &quot;outbreak of public discontent usually happens at the markets when vendors believe that their right to make money is being unfairly infringed by some decision of the authorities&quot;.

In June 2011, it was reported that the government had ordered universities to cancel most classes until April 2012, sending students to work on construction projects, presumably for fear of similar developments as in North Africa. In the previous months, the regime had ordered riot gear from China. However, &quot;as soon as universities were reopened, graffiti appeared again. Perhaps the succession is not the real reason, but greater awareness among North Koreans could lead to changes.&quot;

== Transition of power to Kim Jong Un ==

=== Political power ===
After the death of Kim Jong Il on 17 December 2011, his youngest son, Kim Jong Un, inherited the political leadership of the DPRK. The succession of power was immediate: Kim Jong Un became Supreme Commander of the Korean People&#x27;s Army on 30 December 2011, was appointed first secretary of the Workers’ Party of Korea (WPK) on 11 April 2012, and was entitled first chairman of the National Defense Commission (NDC) two days later. To gain complete political power, he became the military rank of Marshal of the KPA.

=== Differences from the Kim Jong Il regime ===
Up until his death, Kim Jong Il maintained a strong national military-first political system that equated stability with military power. Kim Jong Un continues to carry on the militarized political style of his father, but with less commitment to complete military rule. Since he took power, Kim Jong Un has attempted to move political power away from the KPA and has divided it among the WPK and the cabinet. Because of his political lobbying, the WPK&#x27;s Central Committee has vastly shifted power in April 2012: out of 17 members and 15 alternates of the Committee, only five members and six alternates derive from military and security sectors. Ever since, the economic power of the WPK, the cabinet, and the KPA has been in a tense balance. The KPA has lost a significant amount of economic influence because of the current regime, which continually shifts from what Kim Jong Il built his regime on, and may cause later internal issues.

== Foreign relations ==
The foreign relations of North Korea have been shaped by its conflict with South Korea (officially the Republic of Korea) and its historical ties with world communism. The governments of both North and South Korea claim to be the sole legitimate government of the whole of Korea. The Korean War in the 1950s failed to resolve the issue, leaving North Korea locked in a military confrontation with South Korea and the United States Forces Korea across the Demilitarized Zone.

At the start of the Cold War, North Korea only had diplomatic recognition by communist countries. Over the following decades, it established relations with developing countries and joined the Non-Aligned Movement. When the Eastern Bloc collapsed in the years 1989–1992, North Korea made efforts to improve its diplomatic relations with developed capitalist countries. At the same time, there were international efforts to resolve the confrontation on the Korean peninsula (known as the Korean conflict). At the same time, North Korea acquired nuclear weapons, adding to the concerns of the international community.

== See also ==
*Communism in Korea

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Uriminzokkiri.com 
* Freedom House Country Report on North Korea 
* The North Korean International Documentation Project 
* North Korea Uncovered, a comprehensive mapping on Google Earth of the DPRK&#x27;s political and economic infrastructure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154838" start="4" end="27" title="Politics of North Korea" label="politics of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="44" end="86" title="Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q113649307" start="163" end="188" title="Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism" label="Kimilsungism-Kimjongilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="196" end="201" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="287" end="300" title="Self-sustainability" label="self-reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190632" start="433" end="447" title="centralization" label="centralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357792" start="497" end="536" title="Democratic dictatorship" label="dictatorship of people&amp;#x27;s democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="571" end="599" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="622" end="637" title="one-party state" label="legal supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707631" start="668" end="689" title="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="WPK General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876342" start="707" end="721" title="Supreme Leader (North Korean title)" label="supreme leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834329" start="740" end="753" title="Presidium of the Politburo of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="WPK Presidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210127" start="759" end="772" title="Politburo of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="WPK Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841894" start="778" end="793" title="Secretariat of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="WPK Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q712482" start="802" end="833" title="Central Military Commission of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="WPK Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="1257" end="1275" title="mass organizations" label="mass organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q197853" start="1420" end="1452" title="Socialist Patriotic Youth League" label="Socialist Patriotic Youth League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550251" start="1454" end="1491" title="Socialist Women&amp;#x27;s Union of Korea" label="Socialist Women&amp;#x27;s Union of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091909" start="1493" end="1536" title="General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea" label="General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550209" start="1542" end="1580" title="Union of Agricultural Workers of Korea" label="Union of Agricultural Workers of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="1633" end="1645" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="1646" end="1658" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369391" start="1693" end="1731" title="North Korean cult of personality" label="cult of personality around Kim Il-sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220705" start="1736" end="1746" title="Kim dynasty (North Korea)" label="his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="1876" end="1892" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="1957" end="1962" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="2029" end="2035" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2106" end="2115" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578779" start="2230" end="2247" title="socialist economy" label="socialist economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="2368" end="2379" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247270" start="2414" end="2423" title="Death of Kim Il-sung" label="his death"/>
<link wikidata="Q707631" start="2461" end="2489" title="General Secretary of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="General Secretary of the WPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240364" start="2548" end="2570" title="Premier of North Korea" label="Premier of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700396" start="2593" end="2602" title="President of North Korea" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="2651" end="2662" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q698289" start="2909" end="2936" title="National Defence Commission" label="National Defence Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q468325" start="3203" end="3232" title="Eternal leaders of North Korea" label="Eternal leader of Juche Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369391" start="3328" end="3351" title="Kim Il-sung&amp;#x27;s cult of personality" label="the cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q707454" start="3440" end="3467" title="Constitution of North Korea" label="Constitution of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q714698" start="3514" end="3544" title="Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3555" end="3590" title="Provincial People&amp;#x27;s Assemblies" label="Provincial People&amp;#x27;s Assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="3626" end="3644" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="3649" end="3662" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q269616" start="3733" end="3748" title="Elections in North Korea" label="these elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="3753" end="3761" title="Show election" label="for show"/>
<link wikidata="Q491090" start="4045" end="4067" title="North Korean defectors" label="North Korean defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q49632" start="4150" end="4197" title="Democratic Front for the Reunification of Korea" label="Democratic Front for the Reunification of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="4208" end="4221" title="popular front" label="popular front"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="4246" end="4274" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49626" start="4312" end="4334" title="Chondoist Chongu Party" label="Chondoist Chongu Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49624" start="4343" end="4373" title="Korean Social Democratic Party" label="Korean Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11517815" start="4610" end="4635" title="Korea Buddhist Federation" label="Korea Buddhist Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082947" start="4637" end="4665" title="Democratic Independent Party" label="Democratic Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4667" end="4693" title="Dongro People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Dongro People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4695" end="4724" title="Gonmin People&amp;#x27;s Alliance" label="Gonmin People&amp;#x27;s Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4730" end="4758" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="4812" end="4825" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4833" end="4845" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="4893" end="4898" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4921" end="4930" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="4931" end="4944" title="Autarky" label="self-reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="4963" end="4979" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="5286" end="5295" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440449" start="5491" end="5551" title="International Meeting of Communist and Workers&amp;#x27; Parties" label="International Meeting of Communist and Workers&amp;#x27; Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196210" start="5578" end="5600" title="Cuba–North Korea relations" label="relationship with Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375957" start="5615" end="5638" title="North Korean government" label="North Korean government"/>
<link wikidata="Q27918457" start="5677" end="5702" title="Fidel Castro&amp;#x27;s death" label="Fidel Castro&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q497564" start="5819" end="5848" title="North Korea–South Korea relations" label="relationship with South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5861" end="5869" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5921" end="5952" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="6002" end="6014" title="Military of North Korea" label="its military"/>
<link wikidata="Q482555" start="6052" end="6065" title="Korean reunification" label="reunify Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="6129" end="6140" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6148" end="6161" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="6398" end="6426" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q41510590" start="7008" end="7049" title="North Korea at the 2018 Winter Olympics" label="participating in the Pyeongchang Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="7056" end="7067" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="7172" end="7186" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="7192" end="7209" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="7326" end="7342" title="market economy" label="market economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060616" start="7688" end="7712" title="North Korea-China border" label="North Korea-China border"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="9073" end="9085" title="Military of North Korea" label="the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931264" start="9325" end="9345" title="on-the-spot guidance" label="on-the-spot guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090408" start="9523" end="9558" title="10th Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly" label="10th Supreme People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12613371" start="9777" end="9814" title="Day of the Foundation of the Republic (North Korea)" label="Day of the Foundation of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10107" end="10132" title="Kyo&amp;#x27;ngje Yo&amp;#x27;ngu" label="Kyo&amp;#x27;ngje Yo&amp;#x27;ngu"/>
<link wikidata="Q39920" start="10180" end="10202" title="Kim Il Sung University" label="Kim Il Sung University"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="10328" end="10332" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137515" start="10342" end="10361" title="Kim Il-sung Stadium" label="Kim Il-sung Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q565657" start="10371" end="10400" title="FIFA World Cup qualification" label="World Cup qualification match"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321337" start="10435" end="10441" title="Football player" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="10455" end="10462" title="Referee (association football)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="10482" end="10498" title="Disqualification (sports)" label="disqualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q502317" start="10682" end="10695" title="Andrei Lankov" label="Andrei Lankov"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="11101" end="11140" title="Arab Spring" label="similar developments as in North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q703043" start="11485" end="11505" title="Death and state funeral of Kim Jong Il" label="death of Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330651" start="11664" end="11714" title="Supreme Commander of the Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Supreme Commander of the Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032102" start="11975" end="11993" title="Wonsu" label="Marshal of the KPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="12105" end="12136" title="Songun" label="military-first political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937145" start="12444" end="12451" title="Cabinet of North Korea" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q495876" start="12503" end="12520" title="Central Committee of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="13088" end="13099" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357521" start="13164" end="13179" title="world communism" label="world communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="13286" end="13291" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="13297" end="13307" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q491704" start="13430" end="13456" title="United States Forces Korea" label="United States Forces Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="13464" end="13486" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="the Demilitarized Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13509" end="13517" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="13681" end="13701" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="13712" end="13724" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q21422559" start="13975" end="13990" title="Korean conflict" label="Korean conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q65038587" start="14023" end="14047" title="North Korea and nuclear weapons" label="acquired nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774161" start="14079" end="14102" title="international community" label="international community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154264" start="14121" end="14139" title="Communism in Korea" label="Communism in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="14355" end="14367" title="Google Earth" label="Google Earth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21260" wikidata="Q224623" url="?curid=21260" title="Economy of North Korea">
<text>The economy of North Korea is a centrally planned economy, following &quot;Juche&quot;, where the role of market allocation schemes is limited, although increased to an extent. , North Korea continues its basic adherence to a centralized planned economy. With a total gross domestic product of $28.500 billion as of 2016, there has been some economic liberalization, particularly after Kim Jong Un assumed the leadership in 2012, but reports conflict over particular legislation and enactment. Since the 1990s, informal market activity has increased, which the government has tolerated. These markets are referred to as &#x27;Jangmadang&#x27;, and were formed as a result of the economic collapse during the 1990s, which made the regime unable to distribute food to its people.

After the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, the government tightened border control and began major crackdowns on private economic activities with a shift to a state-run monopoly on food sales, followed by greater centralization of foreign trade, and overall control over the economy.

The collapse of the Eastern Bloc from 1989 to 1992, particularly North Korea&#x27;s principal source of support, the Soviet Union, forced the North Korean economy to realign its foreign economic relations, including increased economic exchanges with South Korea. China is North Korea&#x27;s largest trading partner. North Korea&#x27;s ideology of &quot;Juche&quot; has resulted in the country pursuing autarky in an environment of international sanctions. While the current North Korean economy is still dominated by state-owned industry and collective farms, foreign investment and corporate autonomy have increased.

North Korea had a similar GDP per capita to its neighbor South Korea from the aftermath of the Korean War until the mid-1970s, but had a GDP per capita of less than $2,000 in the late 1990s and early 21st century. For the first time, in 2021, the South Korean Ministry of Unification estimated that the North Korean private sector outgrew the public sector until 2020. However, the 8th Congress of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea introduced new policies in 2021 which aim to strengthen the old command economy, it has been gradually implementing these policies forcing markets and private economic activities to significantly shrink.

==Size of the North Korean economy==
Estimating gross national product in North Korea is a difficult task because of a lack of economic data and the problem of choosing an appropriate rate of exchange for the North Korean won, the nonconvertible North Korean currency. The South Korean government&#x27;s estimate placed North Korea&#x27;s GNP in 1991 at US$22.9 billion, or US$1,038 per capita. In contrast, South Korea posted US$237.9 billion of GNP and a per capita income of US$5,569 in 1991. North Korea&#x27;s GNP in 1991 showed a 5.2% decline from 1989, and preliminary indications were that the decline would continue. South Korea&#x27;s GNP, by contrast, expanded by 9.3% and 8.4%, respectively, in 1990 and 1991.

It is estimated that North Korea&#x27;s GNP nearly halved between 1990 and 1999. North Korean annual budget reports suggest state income roughly tripled between 2000 and 2014. By about 2010, external trade had returned to 1990 levels.

The South Korea-based Bank of Korea estimated that over 2000 to 2013 average growth was 1.4% per year. It has published the following estimates of North Korea&#x27;s GDP growth:
This analysis converts production volume estimates into South Korean prices, so is subject to price changes over time of South Korean goods. According to analyst Andrei Lankov, writing in 2017, a significant number of observers believe that the Bank of Korea is too conservative and the real growth rate is North Korea reported that the government budget has been increasing at between 5% and 10% annually from 2007 to 2015. Reported planned capital expenditure, mainly on roads and public buildings, increased by 4.3% in 2014, 8.7% in 2015 to 13.7% in 2016. According to a North Korea economist, the growth rate was 3.7% in 2017, lifting GDP to $29.6 billion in 2018. The Australian government estimated 1.3% growth in 2017, while the South Korean government estimated −3.5%.

In 2018, North Korea&#x27;s government budget revenue plan overfulfilled 1.4%, an increase of 4.6% over 2017 year.

==Economic Freedom==
In 2024, North Korea&#x27;s &quot;economic freedom&quot; score from the free-market oriented Heritage Foundation was 2.9, making its economy the world’s least free. The country’s economic freedom score is lower than the world and regional averages. North Korea’s economy is considered “repressed” according to the 2024 Index.

==History==

===Colonial period and post Second World War===
Japan colonized Korea, officially annexing it on 22 August 1910 as the Province of Choson. Japan encouraged an inflow of Japanese capital to Korea&#x27;s less developed economy. A large majority of major firms in Korea became Japanese owned and operated as a result, with key positions reserved for Japanese. Koreans were permitted to work in menial roles under harsh labor conditions. Most of Korea&#x27;s coal, iron, and crop production was shipped to Japan.

Beginning in the mid-1920s, the Japanese colonial administration in Korea concentrated its industrial-development efforts in the comparatively under-populated and resource-rich northern portion of the country, resulting in a considerable movement of people northward from the agrarian southern provinces of the Korean Peninsula.

This trend did not reverse until after the end in 1945 of the Second World War, when more than 2 million Koreans moved from North to South following the division of Korea into Soviet and American military zones of administration. This southward exodus continued after the establishment of the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea (North Korea) in 1948 and during the 1950–53 Korean War.

The post-World War II division of the Korean Peninsula resulted in imbalances of natural and human resources, with disadvantages for both the North and the South. In 1945, about 80% of Korean heavy industry was in the North but only 31% of light industry, 37% of agriculture, and 18% of the peninsula&#x27;s total commerce.

North and South Korea both suffered from the massive destruction caused during the Korean War. Historian Charles K. Armstrong stated that &quot;North Korea had been virtually destroyed as an industrial society&quot;. In the years immediately after the war, North Korea mobilized its labour force and natural resources in an effort to achieve rapid economic development. Large amounts of aid from other communist countries, notably the Soviet Union and the People&#x27;s Republic of China, helped the country achieve a high growth-rate in the immediate postwar period.

===Early efforts at modernization===

In 1961, an ambitious seven-year plan was launched to continue industrial expansion and increase living standards, but within three years it became clear this was failing and the plan period was extended to 1970. The failure was due to reduced support from the Soviet Union when North Korea aligned more with China, and military pressure from the U.S. leading to increased defense spending. In 1965, South Korea&#x27;s rate of economic growth first exceeded North Korea&#x27;s in most industrial areas, though South Korea&#x27;s per capita GNP remained lower than North Korea&#x27;s.

In 1979, North Korea renegotiated much of its international debt, but in 1980 it defaulted on its loans except those from Japan. By the end of 1986, hard-currency debt had reached more than US$1 billion. It also owed nearly $2 billion to communist creditors, principally the Soviet Union. The Japanese declared North Korea in default. By 2000, taking into account penalties and accrued interest, North Korea&#x27;s debt was estimated at $10–12 billion. By 2012, North Korea&#x27;s external debt had grown to an estimated US$20 billion despite Russia reportedly writing off about $8 billion of debt in exchange for participation in natural resources development. Besides Russia, major creditors included Hungary, the Czech Republic and Iran.

Largely because of these debt problems and because of a prolonged drought and mismanagement, North Korea&#x27;s industrial growth slowed, and per capita GNP fell below that of the South. By the end of 1979 per capita GNP in North Korea was about one-third of that in the South.

There were minor efforts toward relaxing central control of the economy in the 1980s that involve industrial enterprises. Encouraged by Kim Jong Il&#x27;s call to strengthen the implementation of the independent accounting system (, &quot;tongnip ch&#x27;aesanje&quot;) of enterprises in March 1984, interest in enterprise management and the independent accounting system increased, as evidenced by increasing coverage of the topic in North Korean journals. Under the system, factory managers still are assigned output targets but are given more discretion in decisions about labour, equipment, materials, and funds.

In addition to fixed capital, each enterprise is allocated a minimum of working capital from the state through the Central Bank and is required to meet operating expenses with the proceeds from sales of its output. Up to 50% of the &quot;profit&quot; is taxed, the remaining half being kept by the enterprise for purchase of equipment, introduction of new technology, welfare benefits, and bonuses. As such, the system provides some built-in incentives and a degree of micro-level autonomy, unlike the budget allocation system, under which any surplus is turned over to the government in its entirety.

Another innovation, the August Third People&#x27;s Consumer Goods Production Movement, is centred on consumer goods production. This measure was so named after Kim Jong Il made an inspection tour of an exhibition of light industrial products held in Pyongyang on August 3, 1984. The movement charges workers to use locally available resources and production facilities to produce needed consumer goods. On the surface, the movement does not appear to differ much from the local industry programs in existence since the 1960s, although some degree of local autonomy is allowed. However, a major departure places output, pricing, and purchases outside central planning. In addition, direct sales stores were established to distribute goods produced under the movement directly to consumers. The movement is characterized as a third sector in the production of consumer goods, alongside centrally controlled light industry and locally controlled traditional light industry. Moreover, there were some reports in the mid-1980s of increasing encouragement of small-scale private handicrafts and farm markets. , however, no move was reported to expand the size of private garden plots.

All these measures appear to be minor stop-gap measures to alleviate severe shortages of consumer goods by infusing some degree of incentives. In mid-1993, no significant moves signalling a fundamental deviation from the existing system had occurred. The reluctance to initiate reform appears to be largely political. This concern is based on the belief that economic reform will produce new interests that will demand political expression and that demands for the institutionalization of such pluralism eventually will lead to political liberalization.

Beginning in the mid-1980s and particularly around the end of the decade, North Korea slowly began to modify its rigid self-reliant policy. The changes, popularly identified as the open-door policy, included an increasing emphasis on foreign trade, a readiness to accept direct foreign investment by enacting a joint venture law, the decision to open the country to international tourism, and economic cooperation with South Korea.

The main targets of the Third Seven-Year Plan of 1987–1993 were to achieve the &quot;Ten Long-Range Major Goals of the 1980s for the Construction of the Socialist Economy&quot;. These goals, conceived in 1980, were to be fulfilled by the end of the decade. The fact that these targets were rolled over to the end of the Third Seven-Year Plan is another indication of the disappointing economic performance during the Second Seven-Year Plan. The three policy goals of self-reliance, modernization, and scientification were repeated. Economic growth was set at 7.9% annually, lower than the previous plan. Although achieving the ten major goals of the 1980s was the main thrust of the Third Seven-Year Plan, some substantial changes have been made in specific quantitative targets. For example, the target for the annual output of steel was reduced by a third: from 15 million tons to 10 million tons. The output targets of cement and non-ferrous metals—two major export items—have been increased significantly. The June 1989 introduction of the Three-Year Plan for Light Industry as part of the Third Seven-Year Plan is intended to boost the standard of living by addressing consumer needs.

The Third Seven-Year Plan gave a great deal of attention to developing foreign trade and joint ventures, the first time a plan has addressed these issues. The diversion of resources to build highways, theatres, hotels, airports, and other facilities to host the Thirteenth World Festival of Youth and Students in July 1989 must have had a negative impact on industrial and agricultural development, although the expansion and improvement of social infrastructure have resulted in some long-term economic benefits.

====State Planning Commission====
Although general economic policy objectives are decided by the Central People&#x27;s Committee (CPC), it is the task of the State Planning Committee to translate the broad goals into specific annual and long-term development plans and quantitative targets for the economy as a whole, as well as for each industrial sector and enterprise. Under the basic tenets of the 1964 reforms, the planning process is guided by the principles of &quot;unified planning&quot; (, &quot;ilwŏnhwa&quot;) and of &quot;detailed planning&quot; (, &quot;saebunhwa&quot;).

Under &quot;unified planning&quot;, regional committees are established in each province, city, and county to systematically coordinate planning work. These committees do not belong to any regional organization and are directly supervised by the State Planning Committee. As a result of a reorganization in 1969, they are separated into provincial planning committees, city/county committees, and enterprise committees (for large-scale enterprises).

The planning committees, under the auspices of the State Planning Committee, coordinate their work with the planning offices of the economy-related government organizations the corresponding regional and local areas. The system attempts to enable the regional planning staff to better coordinate with economic establishments in their areas, which are directly responsible to them in planning, as well as communicating directly with staff at the CPC. &quot;Detailed planning&quot; seeks to construct plans with precision and scientific methods based on concrete assessment of the resources, labour, funds, plant capacities, and other necessary information.

There are four stages in drafting the final national economic plan.
* The first is collecting and compiling preliminary statistical data. These figures, which are used as the basic planning data on the productive capacities of economic sectors, originally are prepared by lower-level economic units and aggregated on a national level by respective departments and committees. Simultaneously, the regional, local, and enterprise planning committees prepare their own data and forward them to the CPC. Through this two-channel system of simultaneous, separate, and independent preparation of statistical data by economic units and planning committees, the government seeks to ensure an accurate, objective, and realistic data base unfettered by local and bureaucratic bias.
* The second stage is preparing the control figures by the CPC based on the preliminary data in accordance with the basic plan goals presented by the Central People&#x27;s Committee.
* In the third stage, a draft plan is prepared. The draft plan, prepared by the CPC, is the result of coordinating all draft figures submitted by the lower-level economic units, which, in turn, base their drafts on the control figures handed down from the committee.
* In the fourth stage, the CPC submits a unified national draft plan to the Central People&#x27;s Committee and the State Administration Council for confirmation. After approval by the Supreme People&#x27;s Assembly, the draft becomes final and is distributed to all economic units and regional and local planning committees.

The plan then becomes legal and compulsory. Frequent directives from the central government contain changes in the plan targets or incentives for meeting the plan objectives.

Although the central government is most clearly involved in the formulation and evaluation of the yearly and long-term plans, it also reviews summaries of quarterly or monthly progress. Individual enterprises divide the production time into daily, weekly, ten-day, monthly, quarterly, and annual periods. In general, the monthly plan is the basic factory planning period.

The success of an economic plan depends on the quality and detail of information received, the establishment of realistic targets, coordination among sectors, and correct implementation. High initial growth during the Three-Year Plan and, to a lesser extent, during the Five-Year Plan contributed to a false sense of confidence among the planners. Statistical over reporting—an inherent tendency in an economy where rewards lie in fulfilling the quantitative targets, particularly when the plan target year approaches—leads to overestimation of economic potential, poor product quality, and eventually to plan errors. Inefficient use of plants, equipment, and raw materials add to planning errors. Lack of coordination in planning and production competition among sectors and regions cause imbalances and disrupt input-output relationships. The planning reforms in 1964 were supposed to solve these problems, but the need for correct and detailed planning and strict implementation of plans was so great that their importance was emphasized in the report unveiling the Second Seven-Year Plan, indicating that planning problems persisted in the 1980s.

In the mid-1990s, North Korea abandoned firm directive planning, and multi-year plans became more of a long-term economic strategy.

====Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method====
The &quot;Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method&quot; () of management was born out of Kim Il Sung&#x27;s February 1960 visit to the Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Cooperative Farm in South P&#x27;yŏngan Province. Influenced by Mao Zedong&#x27;s Great Leap Forward Policy, Kim and other members of the KWP Central Committee offered &quot;on-the-spot guidance&quot; (, &quot;hyŏnji chido&quot;) and spent two months instructing and interacting with the workers. The avowed objective of this new method is to combat &quot;bureaucratism&quot; and &quot;formalism&quot; in the farm management system.

The leadership claimed that farm workers were unhappy and produced low output because low-ranking functionaries of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea (who expounded abstract Marxist theories and slogans) were using tactics that failed to motivate. To correct this, the leadership recommended that the workers receive specific guidance in solving production problems and be promised readily available material incentives. The Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method called for high-ranking party officials, party cadres, and administrative officials to emulate Kim Il Sung by making field inspections. The system provided opportunities for farmers to present their grievances and ideas to leading cadres and managers.

Perhaps more important than involving administrative personnel in on-site inspections was the increased use of material incentives, such as paid vacations, special bonuses, honorific titles, and monetary rewards. In fact, the Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method appeared to accommodate almost any expedient to spur production. The method, subsequently, was undercut by heavy-handed efforts to increase farm production and amalgamate farms into ever-larger units. Actual improvement in the agricultural sector began with the adoption of the subteam contract system as a means of increasing peasant productivity by adjusting individual incentives to those of the immediate, small working group. Thus the increasing scale of collective farms was somewhat offset by the reduction in the size of the working unit. &quot;On-the-spot guidance&quot; by high government functionaries, however, continued in the early 1990s, as exemplified by Kim Il Sung&#x27;s visits to such places as the Wangjaesan Cooperative Farm in Onsŏng County and the Kyŏngsŏn Branch Experimental Farm of the Academy of Agricultural Sciences between August 20 and 30, 1991. Kim Jong Il carried on the tradition, despite having refused to do so before, and even expanded it to the Korean People&#x27;s Army. Today, Kim Jong Un continues the practices of the method.

====Taean work system====
The industrial management system developed in three distinct stages. The first was a period of enterprise autonomy that lasted until December 1946. The second stage was a transitional system based on local autonomy, with each enterprise managed by the enterprise management committee under the direction of the local people&#x27;s committee. This system was replaced by the &quot;one-man management system&quot; (), with management patterned along Soviet lines as large enterprises were nationalized and came under central control. The third stage, the &quot;Taean&quot; Work System (, &quot;Taeanŭi saŏpch&#x27;e&quot;), was introduced in December 1961 as an application and refinement of agricultural management techniques to industry. The Taean industrial management system grew out of the &quot;Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni&quot; Method.

The highest managerial authority under the Taean system is the party committee. Each committee has approximately 25 to 35 members elected from the ranks of managers, workers, engineers, and the leadership of &quot;working people&#x27;s organizations&quot; at the factory. A smaller &quot;executive committee&quot;, about one-quarter the size of the regular committee, has practical responsibility for day-to-day plant operations and major factory decisions. The most important staff members, including the party committee secretary, factory manager, and chief engineer, make up its membership. The system focuses on co-operation among workers, technicians, and party functionaries at the factory level.

Each factory has two major lines of administration, one headed by the manager, the other by the party committee secretary. A chief engineer and his or her assistants direct a general staff in charge of all aspects of production, planning, and technical guidance. Depending on the size of the factory, varying numbers of deputies oversee factory logistics, marketing, and workers&#x27; services. The supply of materials includes securing, storing, and distributing all materials for factory use, as well as storing finished products and shipping them from the factory.

Deputies are assigned workers to their units and handle factory accounts and payroll. Providing workers&#x27; services requires directing any farming done on factory lands, stocking factory retail shops, and taking care of all staff amenities. Deputies in charge of workers&#x27; services are encouraged to meet as many of the factory&#x27;s needs as possible using nearby agricultural cooperatives and local industries.

The secretary of the party committee organizes all political activities in each of the factory party cells and attempts to ensure loyalty to the party&#x27;s production targets and management goals. According to official claims, all management decisions are arrived at by consensus among the members of the party committee. Given the overwhelming importance of the party in the country&#x27;s affairs, it seems likely that the party secretary has the last say in any major factory disputes.

The Taean system heralded a more rational approach to industrial management than that practised previously. Although party functionaries and workers became more important to management under the new system, engineers and technical staff received more responsibility in areas where their expertise could contribute the most. The system recognizes the importance of material as well as &quot;politico-moral&quot; incentives for managing the factory workers. The &quot;internal accounting system&quot;, a spin-off of the &quot;independent accounting system&quot;, grants bonuses to work teams and workshops that use raw materials and equipment most efficiently. These financial rewards come out of enterprise profits.

A measure of the success of the Taean work system is its longevity and its continued endorsement by the leadership. In his 1991 New Year&#x27;s address marking the 13th anniversary of the creation of the system, Kim Il Sung said that the

Taean work system is the best system of economic management. It enables the producer masses to fulfill their responsibility and role as masters and to manage the economy in a scientific and rational manner by implementing the mass line in economic management, and by combining party leadership organically with administrative, economic, and technical guidance.

====Mass production campaigns====
Parallel to management techniques such as the Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method and the Taean work system, which were designed to increase output in more normalized and regularized operations of farms and enterprises, the leadership continuously resorts to exhortations and mass campaigns to motivate the workers to meet output targets. The earliest and the most pervasive mass production campaign was the Ch&#x27;ŏllima Movement. Introduced in 1958 and fashioned after China&#x27;s Great Leap Forward (1958–1960), the Ch&#x27;ŏllima Movement organized the labour force into work teams and brigades to compete at increasing production. The campaign was aimed at industrial and agricultural workers and at organizations in education, science, sanitation and health, and culture.

In addition to work teams, units eligible for Ch&#x27;ŏllima citations included entire factories, factory workshops, and such self-contained units as a ship or a railroad station. The &quot;socialist emulation&quot; among the industrial sectors, enterprises, farms, and work teams under the Ch&#x27;ŏllima Movement frantically sought to complete the First Five-Year Plan (1957–1960) but instead created chaotic disruptions in the economy. This made it necessary to set aside 1959 as a &quot;buffer year&quot; to restore balance in the economy.

Although the Ch&#x27;ŏllima Movement was replaced in the early 1960s by the Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method and the Taean Work System, the regime&#x27;s reliance on mass campaigns continued into the early 1990s. Campaigns conducted after the Ch&#x27;ŏllima to speed battles toward the end of a period (such as a month, a year, or an economic plan) to reach production targets to carry out the economic goals of the decade.

===Efforts at modernization since 1991===
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the principal source of external support, North Korea announced in December 1993 a three-year transitional economic policy placing primary emphasis on agriculture, light industry, and foreign trade. However, lack of fertilizer, natural disasters, and poor storage and transportation practices caused the country to fall more than a million tons per year short of grain self-sufficiency. Moreover, lack of foreign exchange to purchase spare parts and oil for electricity generation left many factories idle.

The shortage of foreign exchange because of a chronic trade deficit, a large foreign debt, and dwindling foreign aid has constrained economic development. In addition, North Korea has been diverting scarce resources from developmental projects to defence; it spent more than 20% of GNP on defence toward the end of the 1980s, a proportion among the highest in the world. These negative factors, compounded by the declining efficiency of the central planning system and the failure to modernize the economy, have slowed the pace of growth since the 1960s. The demise of the socialist republics in the Soviet Union and East European countries—North Korea&#x27;s traditional trade partners and benefactors—has compounded the economic difficulties in the early 1990s.

Economically, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of Soviet support to North Korean industries caused a contraction of the North Korea&#x27;s economy by 25% during the 1990s. While, by some accounts, North Korea had a higher per capita income than South Korea in the 1970s, by 2006 its per capita income was estimated to be only $1108, one seventeenth that of South Korea.

Experimentation in small scale entrepreneurship took place from 2009 to 2013, and although there continue to be legal uncertainties this has developed into a significant sector. By 2016 economic liberalisation had progressed to the extent that both locally-responsible and state industrial enterprises gave the state 20% to 50% of their output, selling the remainder to buy raw materials at market-based prices akin to a free market.

In 2014, the Enterprise Act was amended to allow state-owned enterprise managers to engage in foreign trade and joint ventures, and to accept investment from non-government domestic sources. Under the new rules the enterprise director became more like the western chief executive officer, and the chief engineer had an operational role more like a western chief operating officer. As of 2017 it was unclear if the Taean Work System (described above) still in practice operated to give local people&#x27;s committees much influence.

In 2017, Dr. Mitsuhiro Mimura, Senior Research Fellow at Japan&#x27;s Economic Research Institute for Northeast Asia, who has visited North Korea 45 times, described it as the &quot;poorest advanced economy in the world&quot;, in that while having comparatively low GDP, it had built a sophisticated production environment. He described the recent rise of entrepreneurial groups through &quot;socialist cooperation&quot;, where groups of individuals could start small enterprises as cooperative groups. Managers in state-owned industries or farms were also free to sell or trade production beyond state plan targets, providing incentives to increase production. Managers could also find investment for expansion of successful operations, in a process he called &quot;socialist competition&quot;. A state plan was still the basis for production, but was more realistic leaving room for excess production.

In 2020 North Korea halted its economic reforms that were seen as a risky gambit to unleash market forces, and the government shifted back its focus towards more central planning and state control over the economy.

===Budget and finance===
The state budget is a major government instrument in carrying out the country&#x27;s economic goals. Expenditures represented about three-quarters of GNP in the mid-1980s, the allocation of which reflected the priorities assigned to different economic sectors. Taxes were abolished in 1974 as &quot;remnants of an antiquated society&quot;. This action, however, was not expected to have any significant effect on state revenue because the overwhelming proportion of government funds—an average of 98.1% during 1961–1970—was from turnover (sales) taxes, deductions from profits paid by state enterprises, and various user fees on machinery and equipment, irrigation facilities, television sets, and water.

In order to provide a certain degree of local autonomy as well as to lessen the financial burden of the central government, a &quot;local budget system&quot; was introduced in 1973. Under this system, provincial authorities are responsible for the operating costs of institutions and enterprises not under direct central government control, such as schools, hospitals, shops, and local consumer goods production. In return, they are expected to organize as many profitable ventures as possible and to turn over profits to the central government.

Around December of every year, the state budget for the following calendar year is drafted, subject to revision around March. Typically, total revenue exceeds expenditure by a small margin, with the surplus carried over to the following year. The largest share of state expenditures goes to the &quot;people&#x27;s economy&quot;, which averaged 67.3% of total expenditures between 1987 and 1990, followed in magnitude by &quot;socio-cultural&quot;, &quot;defense&quot;, and &quot;administration&quot;.

Defense spending, as a share of total expenditures, has increased significantly since the 1960s: from 3.7% in 1959 to 19% in 1960, and, after averaging 19.8% between 1961 and 1966, to 30.4% in 1967. After remaining around 30% until 1971, the defense share decreased abruptly to 17% in 1972, and continued to decline throughout the 1980s. Officially, in both 1989 and 1990 the defense share remained at 12%, and for 1991 it was 12.3% with 11.6% planned for 1992. The declining trend was consistent with the government&#x27;s announced intentions to stimulate economic development and increase the social benefits. However, Western experts have estimated that actual military expenditures are higher than budget figures indicate.

In the 1999 budget, expenditures for the farming and power sectors were increased by 15% and 11%, respectively, compared with those of 1998.

In the 2007 budget, it was estimated an increase in revenue at 433.2bn won ($3.072bn, $1 = 141 won). In 2006, 5.9% were considered the public revenue, whereas this year, this figure was raised to 7.1%.

North Korea claims that it is the only state in the world that does not levy taxes. Taxes were abolished beginning on April 1, 1974.

===Bonds===
Since 2003, North Korean authorities issue government bonds called The &quot;People&#x27;s Life Bonds&quot;, and promoted the slogan &quot;Buying bonds is patriotic&quot;.

North Korea sold bonds internationally in the late 1970s for 680 million Deutsche marks and 455 million Swiss francs. North Korea defaulted on these bonds by 1984, although the bonds remain traded internationally on speculation that the country would eventually perform on the obligations.

===The latest trends===

&quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; reported that Kim&#x27;s previous propaganda has shifted focus toward patriotism and the economy, and improving its relationships with China, South Korea, and the United States. The state-run television promoted a song of praise to the National flag by airing videos with images that included the flag being raised September 2018, during mass games events, marking North Korea&#x27;s 70th anniversary. In the video, brief images of troops, fighter jets releasing blue, red, and white smoke, scattered pictures of civilians, new high-rise apartments in the capital, fireworks displays, and even students in their school uniforms can all be seen at the same event.

The &quot;South China Morning Post&quot;, in a 2019 article, stated that already there is also some economical and cultural revolution happening recently within North Korea itself. It started in earnest in February 2018, during the Pyeongchang Winter Olympic Games, when top musicians from North Korea were sent to perform in South Korea. This included a female quintet who performed in black shorts and red tops. After two months, Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un saw the performance of South Korean girl group, Red Velvet. This is the first ever K-pop show to be held in Pyongyang. The North Korean musicians that performed in South Korea were highly praised for their performance that leader Kim decided to send them to Beijing for another goodwill tour in January 2019. Part of the revolution was the introduction of other cultures, including Western, which was previously believed to be vulgar and quite corrupt in the past, but is now slowly making its way to the North Korean people. Second-hand Harry Potter books can now be read at the National Library, and Bollywood films like the &quot;Three Idiots&quot; had just had a run in their cinemas. The changes have also found their way to the economic sector with factories that are also producing products that are associated more with the West, like Air Jordan shoes, for national consumption.
Per the amendments made to the Constitution in 2019, the former economic methods of management, Ch&#x27;ŏngsan-ni in agriculture and Taean in the industries, were now phased out altogether.

After the 8th Party Congress, Kim Byung-yeon of the Seoul National University said that, between 2017 and 2019, the North Korean GDP decreased by 10% and, in 2020, the North Korean GDP decreased by 5%.

==Economic sectors==

===Manufacturing===
North Korea also implements planned economy in industry. The government will provide fuel and materials for a factory, while the factory will manufacture products and quantities according to the government&#x27;s requirements.

North Korea&#x27;s self-reliant development strategy assigned top priority to developing heavy industry, with parallel development in agriculture and light industry. This policy was achieved mainly by giving heavy industry preferential allocation of state investment funds. More than 50% of state investment went to the industrial sector during the 1954–1976 period (47.6%, 51.3%, 57.0%, and 49.0%, respectively, during the Three-Year Plan, Five-Year Plan, First Seven-Year Plan, and Six-Year Plan). As a result, gross industrial output grew rapidly.

As was the case with the growth in national output, the pace of growth has slowed markedly since the 1960s. The rate declined from 41.7% and 36.6% a year during the Three-Year Plan and Five-Year Plan, respectively, to 12.8%, 16.3%, and 12.2%, respectively, during the First Seven Year Plan, Six-Year Plan, and Second Seven-Year Plan. As a result of faster growth in industry, that sector&#x27;s share in total national output increased from 16.8% in 1946 to 57.3% in 1970. Since the 1970s, industry&#x27;s share in national output has remained relatively stable. From all indications, the pace of industrialization during the Third Seven-Year Plan up to 1991 is far below the planned rate of 9.6%. In 1990 it was estimated that the industrial sector&#x27;s share of national output was 56%.

Industry&#x27;s share of the combined total of gross agricultural and industrial output climbed from 28% in 1946 to well over 90% in 1980. Heavy industry received more than 80% of the total state investment in industry between 1954 and 1976 (81.1%, 82.6%, 80%, and 83%, respectively, during the Three-Year Plan, Five-Year Plan, First Seven-Year Plan, and Six-Year Plan), and was overwhelmingly favored over light industry.

North Korea claims to have fulfilled the Second Seven-Year Plan (1978–1984) target of raising the industrial output in 1984 to 120% of the 1977 target, equivalent to an average annual growth rate of 12.2%. Judging from the production of major commodities that form the greater part of industrial output, however, it is unlikely that this happened. For example, the increase during the 1978–1984 plan period for electric power, coal, steel, metal-cutting machines, tractors, passenger cars, chemical fertilizers, chemical fibers, cement, and textiles, respectively, was 78%, 50%, 85%, 67%, 50%, 20%, 56%, 80%, 78%, and 45%.
Raw materials were in short supply and so were energy and hard currency. Infrastructure decayed and machinery became obsolete. Unlike other socialist countries in the Eastern Bloc, North Korea kept planning in a highly centralized manner and refused to liberalize economic management.
In the mid-1980s, the speculation that North Korea would emulate China in establishing Chinese-style special economic zones was flatly denied by then deputy chairman of the Economic Policy Commission Yun Ki-pok (Yun became chairman as of June 1989). China&#x27;s special economic zones typically are coastal areas established to promote economic development and the introduction of advanced technology through foreign investment. Investors are offered preferential tax terms and facilities. The zones, which allow greater reliance on market forces, have more decision-making power in economic activities than do provincial-level units. Over the years, China has tried to convince the North Korean leadership of the advantages of these zones by giving tours of the various zones and explaining their values to visiting high-level officials.

In April 1982, Kim Il Sung announced a new economic policy giving priority to increased agricultural production through land reclamation, development of the country&#x27;s infrastructure—especially power plants and transportation facilities—and reliance on domestically produced equipment. There also was more emphasis on trade.

In September 1984, North Korea promulgated a joint venture law to attract foreign capital and technology. The new emphasis on expanding trade and acquiring technology was not, however, accompanied by a shift in priorities away from support of the military. In 1991, North Korea announced the creation of a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in the northeast regions of Rason (Rason Special Economic Zone) and Ch&#x27;ŏngjin. Investment in this SEZ has been slow in coming. Problems with infrastructure, bureaucracy, uncertainties about the security of investments, and viability have hindered growth and development. Nevertheless, thousands of small Chinese businesses had set up profitable operations in North Korea by 2011.

A government research center, the Korea Computer Center, was set up in 1990, starting the slow development of an information technology industry.

In 2013 and 2014, the State Economic Development Administration announced a number of smaller special economic zones covering export handling, mineral processing, high technology, gaming and tourism. International conferences on special economic zones took place in 2013 and 2014, and the concept of many provincial economic zones was considered. However from 2019 these possibilities have diminished, partly out of a concern of excessive foreign influence on North Korean society.

====Garment industry====
The most successful export industry is the garment industry. Production is by a North Korean firm for a European or other foreign partner, by a Chinese firm operating in North Korea with a North Korean partner, or by North Korean workers working in Chinese or other foreign factories. Wages are the lowest in northeastern Asia.

====Automotive industry====
The North Korean motor vehicle production establishes military, industrial and construction goals, with private car ownership by citizens remaining on low demand. Having Soviet origins (the subsequent practice of cloning foreign specimens, and a recent automobile joint-venture), North Korea has developed a wide-range automotive industry with production of all types of vehicles. The basis for production is in urban and off-road minis; luxury cars; SUV cars; small, medium, heavy, and super-heavy cargo; construction and off-road trucks; minibuses/minivans, coach buses, civilian and articulated buses, trolleybuses, and trams. However, North Korea produces far fewer vehicles than its production capability due to the ongoing economic crisis. North Korea has not joined or collaborated with the OICA, or with any other automotive organization, so any critical information about its motor vehicle industry is limited.

===Power and energy===

The energy sector is one of the most serious bottlenecks in the North Korean economy. Since 1990, the supply of oil, coal, and electricity declined steadily, and seriously affected all sectors of the economy. Crude oil was formerly imported by pipeline at &quot;friendship prices&quot; from the former Soviet Union or China, but the withdrawal of Russian concessions and the reduction of imports from China brought down annual imports from about in 1988 to less than by 1997. As the imported oil was refined for fuels for transportation and agricultural machinery, a serious cutback in oil imports caused critical problems in transportation and agriculture.

According to statistics compiled by the South Korean agency Statistics Korea based on International Energy Agency (IEA) data, per capita electricity consumption fell from its peak in 1990 of 1247 kilowatt hours to a low of 712 kilowatt hours in 2000. It slowly rose since then to 819 kilowatt hours in 2008, a level below that of 1970.

North Korea has no coking coal, but has substantial reserves of anthracite in Anju, Aoji (Ŭndŏk), and other areas. Coal production peaked at 43 million tons in 1989 and steadily declined to 18.6 million tons in 1998. Major causes of coal shortages include mine flooding, and outdated mining technology. As coal was used mainly for industry and electricity generation, decrease in coal production caused serious problems in industrial production and electricity generation.

Electricity generation of North Korea peaked in 1989 at about 30 TWh. There were seven large hydroelectric plants in the 1980s. Four were along the Yalu River, built with Chinese aid, and supplying power to both countries. In 1989, 60% of electricity generation was hydroelectric and 40% fossil fueled, mostly coal-fired.

In 1997, coal accounted for more than 80% of primary energy consumption and hydro power more than 10%. Net imports of coal represented only about 3% of coal consumption. Hydroelectric power plants generated about 55% of North Korea&#x27;s electricity and coal-fired thermal plants about 39% in 1997. However, with only 20% of the per capita electricity generation of Japan, North Korea suffered from chronic supply shortages. Coal exports to China accounted for a major portion of North Korea&#x27;s revenue in mid-2010s.

Some hydroelectric facilities were believed to be out of operation due to damage from major flooding in 1995. Coal-fired power plants were running well under capacity, due in part to a serious decline in coal supply and in part to problems with transportation of coal. The electricity supply steadily declined and was 17 TWh in 1998. Transmission losses sit at just under 16% (15.8%) as of 2014.

===Construction===

Construction has been an active sector in North Korea. This was demonstrated not only through large housing programmes, of which most were visible in the high-rise apartment blocks in Pyongyang, but also in the smaller modern apartment complexes widespread even in the countryside. These are dwarfed in every sense by &quot;grand monumental edifices&quot;. The same may apply even to apparently economically useful projects such as the Nampo Dam, which cost US$4bn.

The years of economic contraction in the 1990s slowed this sector as it did others; the shell of the 105-story Ryugyŏng Hotel towered unfinished on Pyongyang&#x27;s skyline for over a decade. The Bank of Korea claims that construction&#x27;s share of GDP fell by almost one-third between 1992 and 1994, from 9.1% to 6.3%. This accords with a rare official figure of 6% for 1993, when the sector was said to have employed 4.2% of the labour force. However, the latter figure excludes the Korean People&#x27;s Army, which visibly does much of the country&#x27;s construction work.

Since about 2012, when 18 tower blocks were built in Pyongyang, a construction boom has taken place in Pyongyang. Major projects include the Mansudae People&#x27;s Theatre (2012), Munsu Water Park (2013), the modernisation of Pyongyang International Airport (2015) and the Science and Technology Center (2015).

===Banking===

The Central Bank of North Korea, under the Ministry of Finance, has a network of 227 local branches. Several reissues of banknotes in recent years suggest that citizens are inclined to hoard rather than bank any savings that they make from their incomes; reportedly they now also prefer foreign currency. At least two foreign aid agencies have recently set up microcredit schemes, lending to farmers and small businesses.

In late 2009, North Korea revalued its currency, effectively confiscating all privately held money above the equivalent of US$35 per person. The revaluation effectively wiped out the savings of many North Koreans. Days after the revaluation the won dropped 96% against the United States dollar. Pak Nam-gi, the director of the Planning and Finance Department of North Korea&#x27;s ruling Workers&#x27; Party, was blamed for the disaster and later executed in 2010.
In 2004 and 2006 laws were passed to codify rules for savings and commercial banking. However it was not until 2012 that North Korean banks started to seriously compete for retail customers. Competing electronic cash cards have become widely accepted in Pyongyang and other cities, but are generally not linked to bank accounts. North Korean banks have introduced retail products which permit a mobile phone app to make payments and top-ups.

As of May 2013, China Merchants Bank, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank, and Agricultural Bank of China, stopped &quot;all cross-border cash transfers, regardless of the nature of the business&quot; with North Korea. The Bank of China, China&#x27;s primary institution for foreign exchange transactions, said, on May 14, 2013, that &quot;it had closed the account of Foreign Trade Bank, North Korea&#x27;s main foreign exchange bank&quot;. However, &quot;smaller banks based in northeastern China across the border from North Korea said it was still handling large-scale cross-border transfers.&quot; For example, the Bank of Dalian branch in Dandong was still doing transfers to North Korea.

Kim Jong Un from 2015 has sought to enlarge and reform the banking sector, to assist economic growth, with credit cards viewed as a way to increase money circulation. The concept of socialist commercial banks is being developed to utilize &quot;idle funds&quot; effectively, including the savings of individuals, to promote economic growth.

===Retail===

Until the early 2000s the official retail sector was mainly state-controlled, under the direction of the People&#x27;s Services Committee. Consumer goods were few and of poor quality, with most provided on a ration basis. There were state-run stores and direct factory outlets for the masses, and special shops with luxuries for the elite—as well as a chain of hard-currency stores (a joint venture with the association of pro-Pyongyang Korean residents in Japan, the Ch&#x27;ongryŏn), with branches in large cities.

In 2002 and in 2010, private markets were progressively legalized, mostly for food sales. As of 2013, urban and farmer markets were held every 10 days, and most urban residents lived within 2 km of a market. Since the 2009 economic intervention, it is common for North Korean citizens to make purchases with Chinese yuan and United States dollars.

In 2012, the third large shopping mall in Pyongyang, the Kwangbok Area Shopping Center, opened. In 2014 the construction of another large shopping mall started. As of 2017, these malls sold competing brands of goods, for example at least ten different kinds of toothpaste were being sold.

In 2017, the Korea Institute for National Unification estimated there were 440 government-approved markets employing about 1.1 million people.

In 2021, the authorities began major crackdowns aimed at reducing the role of the markets with the shift to a state-run monopoly on food sales and measures to ensure that food would pass through state-run shops, a network of which the government had been building since 2019. These shops monopolized the sale and distribution of domestically produced goods and a great portion of newly imported goods.

===Tourism===
===Food===
====Agriculture====


North Korea&#x27;s sparse agricultural resources limit agricultural production. Climate, terrain, and soil conditions are not particularly favorable for farming, with a relatively short cropping season. Only about 17% of the total landmass, or approximately , is arable, of which is well suited for cereal cultivation; the major portion of the country is rugged mountain terrain.

The weather varies markedly according to elevation, and lack of precipitation, along with infertile soil, makes land at elevations higher than 400 meters unsuitable for purposes other than grazing. Precipitation is geographically and seasonally irregular, and in most parts of the country as much as half the annual rainfall occurs in the three summer months. This pattern favors the cultivation of paddy rice in warmer regions that are outfitted with irrigation and flood control networks. Rice yields are 5.3 tonnes per hectare, close to international norms. In 2005, North Korea was ranked by the FAO as an estimated 10th in the production of fresh fruit and as an estimated 19th in the production of apples.

Farming is concentrated in the flatlands of the four west coast provinces, where a longer growing season, level land, adequate rainfall, and good irrigated soil permit the most intensive cultivation of crops. A narrow strip of similarly fertile land runs through the eastern seaboard Hamgyŏng provinces and Kangwŏn Province, but the interior provinces of Chagang and Ryanggang are too mountainous, cold, and dry to allow much farming. The mountains contain the bulk of North Korea&#x27;s forest reserves while the foothills within and between the major agricultural regions provide lands for livestock grazing and fruit tree cultivation.

Since self-sufficiency remains an important pillar of North Korean ideology, self-sufficiency in food production is deemed a worthy goal. Another aim of government policies—to reduce the gap between urban and rural living standards—requires continued investment in the agricultural sector. The stability of the country depends on steady, if not rapid, increases in the availability of food items at reasonable prices. In the early 1990s, there were severe food shortages.
The most far-reaching statement on agricultural policy is embodied in Kim Il Sung&#x27;s 1964 &quot;Theses on the Socialist Agrarian Question in Our Country&quot;, which underscores the government&#x27;s concern for agricultural development. Kim emphasized technological and educational progress in the countryside as well as collective forms of ownership and management. As industrialization progressed, the share of agriculture, forestry, and fisheries in the total national output declined from 63.5% and 31.4%, respectively, in 1945 and 1946, to a low of 26.8% in 1990. Their share in the labor force also declined from 57.6% in 1960 to 34.4% in 1989.

In the 1990s, the decreasing ability to carry out mechanized operations (including the pumping of water for irrigation), as well as lack of chemical inputs, was clearly contributing to reduced yields and increased harvesting and post-harvest losses.

Incremental improvements in agricultural production have been made since the late 1990s, bringing North Korea close to self-sufficiency in staple foods by 2013. In particular, rice yields have steadily improved, though yields on other crops have generally not improved. The production of protein foods remains inadequate. Access to chemical fertilizer has declined, but the use of compost and other organic fertilizer has been encouraged.

====Fisheries====

North Korean fisheries export seafood, primarily crab, to Dandong, Liaoning, illicitly. Crabs, clams and conches from the Yellow Sea waters of North Korea are popular in China, possibly because the less salty water improves taste.

====Food distribution system====
Since the 1950s, a majority of North Koreans have received their food through the public distribution system (PDS). The PDS requires farmers in agricultural regions to hand over a portion of their production to the government and then reallocates the surplus to urban regions, which cannot grow their own foods. About 70% of the North Korean population, including the entire urban population, receives food through this government-run system.

Before the floods, recipients were generally allotted 600–700 grams per day while high officials, military men, heavy laborers, and public security personnel were allotted slightly larger portions of 700–800 grams per day. As of 2013, the target average distribution was 573 grams of cereal equivalent per person per day, but varied according to age, occupation, and whether rations are received elsewhere (such as school meals). However, as of 2019, this number has been reduced to 312 grams per day according to an investigation conducted by the United Nations between March 29 and April 12.

Decreases in production affected the quantity of food available through the public distribution system. Shortages were compounded when the North Korean government imposed further restrictions on collective farmers. When farmers, who had never been covered by the PDS, were mandated by the government to reduce their own food allotments from 167 kilograms to 107 kilograms of grain per person each year, they responded by withholding portions of the required amount of grain. By 2008, the system had significantly recovered, and, from 2009 to 2013, daily per person rations averaged at 400 grams per day for much of the year, though in 2011 it dropped to 200 grams per day from May to September.

It is estimated that in the early 2000s, the average North Korean family drew some 80% of its income from small businesses that were technically illegal (though unenforced) in North Korea. In 2002 and in 2010, private markets were progressively legalized. As of 2013, urban and farmer markets were held every 10 days, and most urban residents lived within 2 km of a market, with markets having an increasing role in obtaining food.

In recent years the government policy shifted towards a more controlled commercial networks, by restricting local markets and pushing sales in State-Owned Stores.

====Crisis and famine====

From 1994 to 1998, North Korea suffered a famine. Since North Korea is a closed country, the number of specific deaths in the incident is difficult to know. According to different literature, the starved or malnourished death toll is estimated to be between 240,000 and 480,000. Since 1998 there has been a gradual recovery in agriculture production, which by 2013 brought North Korea back close to self-sufficiency in staple foods. However, as of 2013, most households have borderline or poor food consumption, and consumption of protein remains inadequate.

In the 1990s, the North Korean economy saw stagnation turning into crisis. Economic assistance received from the Soviet Union and China was an important factor of its economic growth. Upon its collapse in 1991, the Soviet Union withdrew its support and demanded payment in hard currency for imports. China stepped in to provide some assistance and supplied food and oil, most of it reportedly at concessionary prices. The North Korean economy was undermined and its industrial output began to decline in 1990. Deprived of industrial inputs, including fertilizers, pesticides, and electricity for irrigation, agricultural output also started to decrease even before North Korea had a series of natural disasters in the mid-1990s. This evolution, combined with a series of natural disasters including record floods in 1995, caused one of the worst economic crises in North Korea&#x27;s history. Other causes of this crisis were high defense spending (about 25% of GDP) and bad governance.

In December 1991, North Korea established a &quot;zone of free economy and trade&quot; to include the northeastern port cities of Unggi (Sŏnbong), Ch&#x27;ŏngjin, and Najin. The establishment of this zone also had ramifications on the questions of how far North Korea would go in opening its economy to the West and to South Korea, the future of the development scheme for the Tumen River area, and, more important, how much North Korea would reform its economic system.

North Korea announced in December 1993 a three-year transitional economic policy placing primary emphasis on agriculture, light industry, and foreign trade. However, lack of fertilizer, natural disasters, and poor storage and transportation practices have left the country more than a million tons per year short of grain self-sufficiency. Moreover, lack of foreign exchange to purchase spare parts and oil for electricity generation left many factories idle.

The 1990s famine paralyzed many of the Stalinist economic institutions. The government pursued Kim Jong Il&#x27;s &quot;Songun&quot; policy, under which the military is deployed to direct production and infrastructure projects. As a consequence of the government&#x27;s policy of establishing economic self-sufficiency, the North Korean economy has become increasingly isolated from that of the rest of the world, and its industrial development and structure do not reflect its international competitiveness. Domestic firms are shielded from international as well as domestic competition; the result is chronic inefficiency, poor quality, limited product diversity, and underutilization of plants. This protectionism also limits the size of the market for North Korean producers, which prevents taking advantage of economies of scale.

North Korea, led by Kim Jong Un, declined external aid for flood recovery, relocating 15,400 displaced people to Pyongyang while emphasizing self-reliance. Despite offers from Russia, China, and others, the North has chosen to manage the crisis independently.
The food shortage was primarily precipitated by the loss of fuel and other raw materials imports from China and the Soviet Union which had been essential to support an energy intensive and energy inefficient farming system. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the former concessional trade relationships which benefited the North Korea were not available. The three flood and drought years between 1994 and 1996 only served to complete the collapse of the agriculture sector.
In 2004, more than half (57%) of the population did not have enough food to stay healthy. 37% of children had their growth stunted and of mothers severely lacked nutrition.

In 2006, the World Food Program (WFP) and FAO estimated a requirement of 5.3 to 6.5 million tons of grain when domestic production fulfilled only 3.825 million tons. The country also faces land degradation after forests stripped for agriculture resulted in soil erosion. In 2008, a decade after the worst years of the famine, total production was 3.34 million tons (grain equivalent) compared with a need of 5.98 million tons. Thirty seven percent of the population was deemed to be insecure in food access. Weather continued to pose challenges every year, but overall food production grew gradually, and by 2013, production had increased to the highest level since the crisis, to 5.03 million tons cereal equivalent, against a minimum requirement of 5.37 MMT.

In 2014, North Korea had an exceptionally good harvest, 5.08 million tonnes of cereal equivalent, almost sufficient to feed the entire population. While food production had recovered significantly since the hardest years of 1996 and 1997, the recovery was fragile, subject to adverse weather and year to year economic shortages. Distribution was uneven, with the Public Distribution System being largely ineffective. North Korea now has in most years lower malnutrition levels than in some richer Asian countries. However, in 2019 North Korea had the worst harvest in over a decade, which the United Nations described as a &quot;hunger crisis&quot;.

===Mining===

According to a 2012 report by South Korea-based North Korea Resource Institute (NKRI), North Korea has substantial reserves of iron ore, coal, limestone, and magnesite. In addition, North Korea is thought to have tremendous potential rare metal resources, which have been valued in excess of US$6 trillion.

It is the world&#x27;s 18th largest producer of iron and zinc, and has the 22nd largest coal reserves in the world. It is also the 15th largest fluorite producer and 12th largest producer of copper and salt in Asia. Other major natural resources in production include lead, tungsten, graphite, magnesite, gold, pyrites, fluorspar, and hydropower.

In 2015, North Korea exported 19.7 million tonnes of coal, worth $1.06 billion, much of it to China.
In 2016 it was estimated that coal shipments to China accounted for about 40% of exports.

However, starting from February 2017 China suspended all North Korean coal imports, although according to China overall trade with North Korea increased.

===Information technology and culture===

North Korea has a developing information technology industry. In 2018, a technological exhibition unveiled a new Wi-Fi service called Mirae (&quot;Future&quot;), which allowed mobile devices to access the intranet network in Pyongyang. The exhibition also showcased a home automation system using speech recognition in Korean.

North Korea established the Artificial Intelligence Research Institute under the Bureau of the Information Industry Guidance in 2013, which in 2021 was incorporated into the Ministry of Information Industry.

North Korea&#x27;s cartoon animation studios such as SEK Studio sub-contract work from South Korean animation studios. Mansudae Overseas Projects builds monuments around the world.

==Organization and management==
North Korea&#x27;s economy has been unique in its historical suppression of markets. By the 1960s, market elements had been suppressed almost completely. Almost all items, from food to clothes, have traditionally been handed out through a public distribution system, with money only having a symbolic meaning. Ratios of food depend on hierarchy in the system, wherein the positions seem to be semi-hereditary. Until the late 1980s, peasants were not allowed to cultivate private garden plots.

Since the government is the dominant force in the development and management of the economy, bureaus and departments have proliferated at all administrative levels. There are fifteen committees—such as the agricultural and state planning committees—one bureau, and twenty departments under the supervision of the Cabinet; of these, twelve committees—one bureau, and sixteen departments are involved in economic management. In the early 1990s, several vice premiers of the then State Administration Council supervised economic affairs. Organizations undergo frequent reorganization. Many of these agencies have their own separate branches at lower levels of government while others maintain control over subordinate sections in provincial and county administrative agencies.

Around 1990, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, restrictions on private sales, including grain, ceased to be enforced. It is estimated that in the early 2000s, the average North Korean family drew some 80% of its income from small businesses that were technically illegal (though unenforced) in North Korea. In 2002, and in 2010, private markets were progressively legalized. As of 2013, urban and farmer markets were held every 10 days, and most urban residents lived within 2 km of a market. However, in recent years the government policy shifted towards a more controlled commercial networks, by restricting local markets and pushing sales in State-Owned Stores.

In 2014, North Korea announced the &quot;May 30th measures&quot;. These planned to give more freedom to farmers, allowing them to keep around 30% of their produce. Also enterprise managers would be allowed to hire and fire workers within a specific framework, and decide whom they do business with and where they buy raw materials and spare parts. Some reports suggest that these measures would allow nominally state-run enterprises to be run on capitalist lines like those in China. However, the 8th Congress of the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea introduced new policies in 2021 which aim to strengthen the old command economy unified under the State Planning Commission.

===Economic planning===
North Korea, one of the world&#x27;s most centrally planned and isolated economies, faces desperate economic conditions. Industrial capital stock is nearly beyond repair as a result of years of underinvestment and shortages of spare parts. Industrial and power output have declined in parallel.
During what North Korea called the &quot;peaceful construction&quot; period before the Korean War, the fundamental task of the economy was to overtake the level of output and efficiency attained toward the end of the Japanese occupation; to restructure and develop a viable economy reoriented toward the communist-bloc countries; and to begin the process of socializing the economy. Nationalization of key industrial enterprises and land reform, both of which were carried out in 1946, laid the groundwork for two successive one-year plans in 1947 and 1948, respectively, and the Two-Year Plan of 1949–50. It was during this period that the piece-rate wage system and the independent accounting system began to be applied and that the commercial network increasingly came under state and cooperative ownership.

The basic goal of the Three-Year Plan, officially named &quot;The Three-Year Post-war Reconstruction Plan of 1954–56&quot;, was to reconstruct an economy torn by the Korean War. The plan stressed more than merely regaining the prewar output levels. The Soviet Union, other East European countries and China provided reconstruction assistance. The highest priority was developing heavy industry, but an earnest effort to collectivize farming also was begun. At the end of 1957, output of most industrial commodities had returned to 1949 levels, except for a few items such as chemical fertilizers, carbides, and sulfuric acid, whose recovery took longer.

Having basically completed the task of reconstruction, the state planned to lay a solid foundation for industrialization while completing the socialization process and solving the basic problems of food and shelter during the Five-Year Plan of 1957–1960. The socialization process was completed by 1958 in all sectors of the economy, and the Ch&#x27;ŏllima Movement was introduced. Although growth rates reportedly were high, there were serious imbalances among the different economic sectors. Because rewards were given to individuals and enterprises that met production quotas, frantic efforts to fulfill plan targets in competition with other enterprises and industries caused disproportionate growth among various enterprises, between industry and agriculture and between light and heavy industries. Because resources were limited and the transportation system suffered bottlenecks, resources were diverted to politically well-connected enterprises or those whose managers complained the loudest. An enterprise or industry that performed better than others often did so at the expense of others. Such disruptions intensified as the target year of the plan approached.

Until the 1960s, North Korea&#x27;s economy grew much faster than South Korea&#x27;s. Although North Korea was behind in total national output, it was ahead of South Korea in per capita national output, because of its smaller population relative to South Korea. For example, in 1960 North Korea&#x27;s population was slightly over 10 million people, while South Korea&#x27;s population was almost 25 million people. Annual economic growth rates of 30% and 21% during the Three-Year Plan of 1954–1956 and the Five-Year Plan of 1957–1960, respectively, were reported. After claiming early fulfillment of the Five-Year Plan in 1959, North Korea officially designated 1960 a &quot;buffer year&quot;—a year of adjustment to restore balances among sectors before the next plan became effective in 1961. Not surprisingly the same phenomenon recurred in subsequent plans. Because the Five-Year Plan was fulfilled early, it became a de facto four-year plan. Beginning in the early 1960s, however, North Korea&#x27;s economic growth slowed until it was stagnant at the beginning of the 1990s.

Various factors explain the very high rate of economic development of the country in the 1950s and the general slowdown since the 1960s. During the reconstruction period after the Korean War, there were opportunities for extensive economic growth—attainable through the communist regime&#x27;s ability to marshall idle resources and labor and to impose a low rate of consumption. This general pattern of initially high growth resulting in a high rate of capital formation was mirrored in other Soviet-type economies. Toward the end of the 1950s, as reconstruction work was completed and idle capacity began to diminish, the economy had to shift from the extensive to the intensive stage, where the simple communist discipline of marshaling underutilized resources became less effective. In the new stage, inefficiency arising from emerging bottlenecks led to diminishing returns. Further growth would only be attained by increasing efficiency and technological progress.

Beginning in the early 1960s, a series of serious bottlenecks began to impede development. Bottlenecks were pervasive and generally were created by the lack of arable land, skilled labor, energy, and transportation, and deficiencies in the extractive industries. Moreover, both land and marine transportation lacked modern equipment and modes of transportation. The inability of the energy and extractive industries as well as of the transportation network to supply power and raw materials as rapidly as the manufacturing plants could absorb them began to slow industrial growth.

The First Seven-Year Plan (initially 1961–1967) built on the groundwork of the earlier plans but changed the focus of industrialization. Heavy industry, with the machine tool industry as its linchpin, was given continuing priority. During the plan, however, the economy experienced widespread slowdowns and reverses for the first time, in sharp contrast to the rapid and uninterrupted growth during previous plans. Disappointing performance forced the planners to extend the plan three more years, until 1970. During the last part of the &quot;de facto&quot; ten-year plan, emphasis shifted to pursuing parallel development of the economy and of defense capabilities. This shift was prompted by concern over the military takeover in South Korea by General Park Chung Hee (1961–1979), escalation of the United States involvement in Vietnam, and the widening Sino-Soviet split. It was thought that stimulating a technological revolution in the munitions industry was one means to achieve these parallel goals. In the end, the necessity to divert resources to defense became the official explanation for the plan&#x27;s failure.

The Six-Year Plan of 1971–1976 followed immediately in 1971. In the aftermath of the poor performance of the preceding plan, growth targets of the Six-Year Plan were scaled down substantially. Because some of the proposed targets in the First Seven-Year Plan had not been attained even by 1970, the Six-Year Plan did not deviate much from its predecessor in basic goals. The Six-Year Plan placed more emphasis on technological advance, self-sufficiency (&quot;Juche&quot;) in industrial raw materials, improving product quality, correcting imbalances among different sectors, and developing the power and extractive industries; the last of these had been deemed largely responsible for slowdowns during the First Seven-Year Plan. The plan called for attaining a self- sufficiency rate of 60–70% in all industrial sectors by substituting domestic raw materials wherever possible and by organizing and renovating technical processes to make the substitution feasible. Improving transport capacity was seen as one of the urgent tasks in accelerating economic development—it was one of the major bottlenecks of the Six-Year Plan.

North Korea claimed to have fulfilled the Six-Year Plan by the end of August 1975, a full year and four months ahead of schedule. Under the circumstances, it was expected that the next plan would start without delay in 1976, a year early, as was the case when the First Seven-Year Plan was instituted in 1961. Even if the Six-Year Plan had been completed on schedule, the next plan should have started in 1977. However, it was not until nearly two years and four months later that the long-awaited plan was unveiled—1977 had become a &quot;buffer year&quot;.

The inability of the planners to continuously formulate and institute economic plans reveals as much about the inefficacy of planning itself as the extent of the economic difficulties and administrative disruptions facing the country. For example, targets for successive plans have to be based on the accomplishments of preceding plans. If these targets are underfulfilled, all targets of the next plan—initially based on satisfaction of the plan—have to be reformulated and adjusted. Aside from underfulfillment of the targets, widespread disruptions and imbalances among various sectors of the economy further complicate plan formulation.

The basic thrust of the Second Seven-Year Plan (1978–1984) was to achieve the three-pronged goals of self-reliance, modernization, and &quot;scientification&quot;. Although the emphasis on self-reliance was not new, it had not previously been the explicit focus of an economic plan. This new emphasis might have been a reaction to mounting foreign debt originating from large-scale imports of Western machinery and equipment in the mid-1970s. Through modernization North Korea hoped to increase mechanization and automation in all sectors of the economy. &quot;Scientification&quot; means the adoption of up-to-date production and management techniques. The specific objectives of the economic plan were to strengthen the fuel, energy, and resource bases of industry through priority development of the energy and extractive industries; to modernize industry; to substitute domestic resources for certain imported raw materials; to expand freight-carrying capacity in railroad, road, and marine transportation systems; to centralize and containerize the transportation system; and to accelerate a technical revolution in agriculture.

In order to meet the manpower and technology requirements of an expanding economy, the education sector also was targeted for improvements. The quality of the comprehensive eleven-year compulsory education system was to be enhanced to train more technicians and specialists, and to expand the training of specialists, particularly in the fields of fuel, mechanical, electronic, and automation engineering.

Successful fulfillment of the so-called nature-remaking projects also was part of the Second Seven-Year Plan. These projects referred to the five-point program for nature transformation unveiled by Kim Il Sung in 1976: completing the irrigation of non-paddy fields; reclaiming 1,000 square kilometres of new land; building 1,500 to 2,000 km of terraced fields; carrying out afforestation and water conservation work; and reclaiming tidal land.

From all indications, the Second Seven-Year Plan was not successful. North Korea generally downplayed the accomplishments of the plan, and no other plan received less official fanfare. It was officially claimed that the economy had grown at an annual rate of 8.8% during the plan, somewhat below the planned rate of 9.6%. The reliability of this aggregate measure, however, is questionable. During the plan, the target annual output of 10 million tons of grains (cereals and pulses) was attained. However, by official admission, the targets of only five other commodities were fulfilled. Judging from the growth rates announced for some twelve industrial products, it is highly unlikely that the total industrial output increased at an average rate of 12.2% as claimed. After the plan concluded, there was no new economic plan for two years, indications of both the plan&#x27;s failure and the severity of the economic and planning problems confronting the economy in the mid-1980s. From 1998 to 2003, the government implemented a plan for scientific and technical development, which focused on the nation&#x27;s IT and electronic industry.

===Corruption===

In 2019, North Korea was ranked 172nd in the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index with a score of 17 out of 100.

==Labor==

Growth and changes in the structure and ownership pattern of the economy also have changed the labor force. By 1958 individual private farmers, who once constituted more than 70% of the labor force, had been transformed into or replaced by state or collective farmers. Private artisans, merchants, and entrepreneurs had joined state or cooperative enterprises. In the industrial sector in 1963, the last year for which such data are available, there were 2,295 state enterprises and 642 cooperative enterprises. The size and importance of the state enterprises can be surmised by the fact that state enterprises, which constituted 78% of the total number of industrial enterprises, contributed 91% of total industrial output.

Labor force (12.6 million)—by occupation:
*Agricultural: 35%
*Industry and services: 65% (2008 est.)

==External trade==

Statistics from North Korea&#x27;s trade partners are collected by international organizations like the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund, and by the South Korean Ministry of Unification.

It has also been estimated that imports of arms from the Soviet Union in the period 1988 to 1990 accounted for around 30% of North Korea&#x27;s total imports, and that between 1981 and 1989 North Korea earned approximately $4 billion from the export of arms, approximately 30% of North Korea&#x27;s total exports in that period. The nominal dollar value of arms exports from North Korea in 1996 was estimated to have been around $50 million.

North Korea&#x27;s foreign trade deteriorated in the 1990s. After hitting the bottom of $1.4 billion in 1998, it recovered slightly. North Korea&#x27;s trade total in 2002 was $2.7 billion: only about 50% of $5.2 billion in 1988, even in nominal US dollars. These figures exclude intra-Korean trade, deemed internal, which rose in 2002 to $641 million. During the late 2000s trade grew strongly, almost tripling between 2007 and 2011 to $5.6 billion, with much of the growth being with China. By about 2010 external trade had returned to 1990 levels, and by 2014 was near double 1990 levels, with trade with China increasing from 50% of total trade in 2005 to near 90% in 2014. In 2015, it was estimated that exports to China were $2.3 billion—83% of total exports of $2.83 billion.

In addition to Kaesŏng and Kŭmgang-san, other special economic areas were established at Sinŭiju in the northwest (on the border with China), and at Rasŏn in the northeast (on the border with China and Russia).

International sanctions impeded international trade to some degree, many related to North Korea&#x27;s development of weapons of mass destruction. United States President Barack Obama approved an executive order in April 2011 that declared &quot;the importation into the United States, directly or indirectly, of any goods, services, or technology from North Korea is prohibited&quot;. Operational sanctions included United Nations Security Council Resolutions 1695, 1718, 1874, 1928, 2087, and 2094. Reports in 2018 indicated that trade sanctions (bans on almost all exports and the freezing of overseas accounts) were seriously affecting the economy. The main paper Rodong Sinmun was running short of paper and was publishing only a third of its normal print run, two energy plants supplying electricity to Pyongyang had to be shut down intermittently due to lack of coal, causing blackouts, coal mines were operating under capacity due to lack of fuel, coal could not be transported due to lack of fuel and food rations had been cut by half.

The Taep&#x27;oong International Investment Group of Korea is the official company that manages oversea investments to North Korea.

After 1956, North Korea reached out to the Third World in the hope of making trade deals. However, according to analyst Benjamin R Young: &quot;In the end, this approach proved ineffective, and Pyongyang never succeeded in developing robust trade relations with the Global South — a situation that appears unlikely to change anytime soon&quot;.

===North–South economic ties===
North and South Korea&#x27;s economic ties have fluctuated greatly over the past 30 years or so. In the late 1990s and most of the 2000s, north–south relations warmed under the Sunshine Policy of President Kim Dae-jung. Many firms agreed to invest in North Korea, encouraged by the South Korean government&#x27;s commitment to cover their losses, should investment projects in the north fail to become profitable.

Following a 1988 decision by the South Korean Government to allow trade with the North (see Reunification efforts since 1971), South Korean firms began to import North Korean goods. Direct trade with the South began in the fall of 1990 after the unprecedented September 1990 meeting of the two Korean Prime Ministers. Trade between the countries increased from $18.8 million in 1989 to $333.4 million in 1999, much of it processing or assembly work undertaken in the North.

During this decade, the chairman of the South Korean company Daewoo visited North Korea and reached agreement on building a light industrial complex at Namp&#x27;o. In other negotiations, Hyundai Asan obtained permission to bring tour groups by sea to Kŭmgang-san on the North Korea&#x27;s southeast coast (see Kŭmgang-san Tourist Region), and more recently to construct the Kaesŏng Industrial Region, near the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), at a cost of more than $1 billion.

In response to the summit between Kim Jong Il and Kim Dae-jung in 2000, North and South Korea agreed in August 2000 to reconnect the section of the Seoul–Pyongyang Gyeongui Railway Line across the DMZ. In addition, the two governments said they would build a four-lane highway bypassing the truce village at Panmunjeom.

TV commercials for Samsung&#x27;s Anycall cell phone featuring North Korean dancer Cho Myong-ae and South Korea&#x27;s Lee Hyo-ri were first broadcast on June 11, 2006.

Trade with South Korea declined after Lee Myung-bak was elected President of South Korea in 2008, who reduced trade to put pressure on North Korea over nuclear matters. Trade with South Korea fell from $1.8 billion to $1.1 billion between 2007 and 2013, most of the remaining trade being through the Kaesŏng Industrial Region. The Park has been subject to frequent shutdowns due to political tensions.

===China===
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, China has been North Korea&#x27;s primary trading partner. Bilateral trade rose sharply after 2007. In 2007 trade between the two countries was $1.97 billion (₩1.7 trillion). By 2011 trade had increased to $5.6 billion (₩5.04 trillion). Trade with China represented 57% of North Korea&#x27;s imports and 42% of exports.

Chinese statistics for 2013 indicate that North Korean exports to China were nearly $3 billion, with imports of about $3.6 billion. Exports to China in 2015 were estimated at $2.3 billion.

===Joint ventures===
Some South Korean companies launched joint ventures in areas like animation and computer software, and Chinese traders have done a booming business back and forth across the China–North Korea border. In a 2007 survey of 250 Chinese operations in North Korea, a majority reported paying bribes. Robert Suter, who headed the Seoul office of Swedish-Swiss power generation company ABB, says ABB was staking out a position in North Korea, &quot;It is the same as it was in China years ago. You had to be there and you had to build trust.&quot; A number of South Korean enterprises were mainly active in a specially developed industrial zone in Kaesŏng Industrial Region and Chinese enterprises were known to be involved in a variety of activities in trade and manufacturing in North Korea. European enterprises founded in 2005 the European Business Association (EBA), Pyongyang, a &quot;de facto&quot; chamber of commerce representing a number of European-invested joint ventures and other businesses. Ch&#x27;ongryŏn, the pro-North Korean General Association of Korean Residents in Japan, broadcast on their TV channel in 2008 a TV film in three parts featuring foreign investment and business in North Korea. This film was put on a YouTube channel called &quot;BusinessNK&quot; and could be watched together with a number of other videos on foreign joint ventures as well as other investment and business activities in North Korea.

Though no international banks operated in the isolated socialist state in 2013, foreign companies were said to be increasingly interested in dealing with North Korea.

A flat LCD television factory in North Korea was funded by the Ch&#x27;ongryŏn in 2010.

The Rason Special Economic Zone was established in the early 1990s, in the northeastern corner of the country bordering China and Russia. In June 2011, an agreement with China was made to establish a joint free trade area on North Korea&#x27;s Hwanggumpyong and Wihwa Islands and China&#x27;s border area near Dandong.
North Korea designated over a dozen new special economic zones in 2013 and 2014.

==See also==

* Illicit activities of North Korea
* Chollima Movement
* Taxation in North Korea
* Poverty in North Korea

==References==

*Felix Abt. &quot;North Korea — a demanding business environment. Advice on investing and doing business&quot;, Hamburg: German Asia-Pacific Business Association, 2009
*Cumings, Bruce. &quot;Korea&#x27;s place in the Sun: a Modern history&quot;, New York: WW Norton and company, 2005.
*Reese, D. &quot;The prospects for North Korea&#x27;s survival&quot;, London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1998.
*Savada, Andrea Matles. &quot;North Korea: A Country Study.&quot; Washington: Library of Congress, 1994.

==Notes==
==External links==

* International Trade Office of Korea Full of information on investments in North Korea.
*North Korean Economy Watch 
*World Hunger – Korea (DPR), World Food Programme
*Despite U.S. Attempts, N. Korea Anything but Isolated, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, May 12, 2005
*On North Korea&#x27;s streets, pink and tangerine buses, &quot;The Christian Science Monitor&quot;, June 2, 2005
*North Korea on the rebound, Global Beat Syndicate, June 27, 2005
*A Question of Interpretation: Economic Statistics From and About North Korea , Ruediger Frank, 38 North, School of Advanced International Studies, July 16, 2012
*Korea Society Podcast: North Korea: Market Opportunity, Poverty and the Provinces 
*&quot;North Korea lifts the veil on its agroforestry practices &quot;
*&quot;Agroforestry is not rocket science but it might save DPR Korea&quot; 
**&quot;Participatory agroforestry development for restoring degraded sloping land in DPR Korea&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224623" start="4" end="26" title="Economy of North Korea" label="economy of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="32" end="57" title="Central planning" label="centrally planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="75" end="80" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770788" start="106" end="130" title="market allocation scheme" label="market allocation scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="179" end="190" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="238" end="253" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="268" end="290" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851547" start="342" end="365" title="North Korean economic reform" label="economic liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="386" end="397" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808162" start="626" end="636" title="Jangmadang" label="Jangmadang"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="802" end="819" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="1067" end="1075" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1083" end="1095" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1180" end="1192" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1326" end="1331" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="1465" end="1472" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471715" start="1494" end="1517" title="International sanctions against North Korea" label="international sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="1580" end="1600" title="State-owned enterprise" label="state-owned industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="1605" end="1621" title="Collective farming" label="collective farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="1739" end="1750" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1777" end="1787" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1819" end="1822" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q276612" start="1942" end="1965" title="Ministry of Unification" label="Ministry of Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q98517123" start="2064" end="2112" title="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q106720" start="2527" end="2543" title="North Korean won" label="North Korean won"/>
<link wikidata="Q485531" start="3299" end="3312" title="Bank of Korea" label="Bank of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q502317" start="3617" end="3630" title="Andrei Lankov" label="Andrei Lankov"/>
<link wikidata="Q271855" start="4261" end="4278" title="government budget" label="government budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="4463" end="4482" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q495558" start="4781" end="4803" title="Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910" label="officially annexing it"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="4829" end="4847" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Province of Choson"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="5252" end="5284" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese colonial administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5612" end="5628" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q498735" start="5703" end="5720" title="division of Korea" label="division of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242873" start="5726" end="5732" title="Soviet Civil Administration" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q484104" start="5737" end="5754" title="United States Army Military Government in Korea" label="American military"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5931" end="5941" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q498735" start="5966" end="5998" title="division of Korea" label="division of the Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="6136" end="6150" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079641" start="6374" end="6394" title="Charles K. Armstrong" label="Charles K. Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="6821" end="6828" title="Post-war" label="postwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q702362" start="7542" end="7551" title="Default (finance)" label="defaulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="7610" end="7623" title="hard currency" label="hard-currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="8164" end="8171" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="8177" end="8191" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8196" end="8200" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="8356" end="8359" title="gross national product" label="GNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="8618" end="8629" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q823288" start="9172" end="9187" title="working capital" label="working capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141425" start="9215" end="9227" title="Central Bank of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="9953" end="9962" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288584" start="11804" end="11825" title="international tourism" label="international tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="13012" end="13030" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187038" start="13324" end="13371" title="13th World Festival of Youth and Students" label="Thirteenth World Festival of Youth and Students"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18698" end="18722" title="Ch&amp;#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method" label="Ch&amp;#x27;ŏngsan-ni Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q109380" start="18846" end="18865" title="South Pyongan" label="South P&amp;#x27;yŏngan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="18890" end="18900" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931264" start="19000" end="19020" title="on-the-spot guidance" label="on-the-spot guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="19182" end="19195" title="Bureaucracy" label="bureaucratism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="19379" end="19407" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="19432" end="19439" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="19803" end="19814" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q705188" start="20962" end="20975" title="Onsong" label="Onsŏng County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411783" start="21312" end="21340" title="Industrial organization" label="industrial management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q705131" start="26075" end="26098" title="Chollima Movement" label="Ch&amp;#x27;ŏllima Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="26152" end="26170" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q552964" start="26638" end="26657" title="socialist emulation" label="socialist emulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26798" end="26818" title="First Five-Year Plan (North Korea)" label="First Five-Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="27466" end="27494" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="27962" end="27984" title="electricity generation" label="electricity generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842112" start="28585" end="28603" title="socialist republic" label="socialist republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="29859" end="29882" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q623279" start="29951" end="29974" title="chief operating officer" label="chief operating officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="34181" end="34184" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324820" start="34293" end="34308" title="government bond" label="government bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="34405" end="34414" title="Patriotism" label="patriotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="34496" end="34509" title="Deutsche mark" label="Deutsche mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="34527" end="34538" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q702362" start="34553" end="34562" title="default (finance)" label="defaulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="34745" end="34770" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="34791" end="34794" title="Kim Jong-un" label="Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="34847" end="34857" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198574" start="35451" end="35475" title="South China Morning Post" label="South China Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="35673" end="35705" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="Pyeongchang Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466114" start="35948" end="35958" title="Red Velvet (group)" label="Red Velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="35983" end="35988" title="K-pop" label="K-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="36438" end="36450" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="36502" end="36517" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood films"/>
<link wikidata="Q229633" start="36533" end="36545" title="Three Idiots" label="Three Idiots"/>
<link wikidata="Q420953" start="36743" end="36759" title="Air Jordan" label="Air Jordan shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q514816" start="37875" end="37890" title="Three-Year Plan" label="Three-Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="39982" end="40021" title="Eastern Bloc" label="socialist countries in the Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="40228" end="40249" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40327" end="40337" title="Yun Ki-pok" label="Yun Ki-pok"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="40537" end="40555" title="Foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="40983" end="40994" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="41088" end="41104" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q489209" start="41343" end="41356" title="joint venture" label="joint venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="41380" end="41387" title="Capital (economics)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="41392" end="41402" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="41434" end="41439" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q221734" start="41660" end="41665" title="Rason" label="Rason"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295151" start="41667" end="41694" title="Rason Special Economic Zone" label="Rason Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q109336" start="41700" end="41714" title="Chongjin" label="Ch&amp;#x27;ŏngjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="41778" end="41792" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="41794" end="41805" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707579" start="42052" end="42073" title="Korea Computer Center" label="Korea Computer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="42131" end="42153" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42187" end="42228" title="State Economic Development Administration" label="State Economic Development Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11828862" start="42716" end="42732" title="Clothing industry" label="garment industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291525" start="43828" end="43832" title="Organisation Internationale des Constructeurs d&amp;#x27;Automobiles" label="OICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="44184" end="44193" title="Crude oil" label="Crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="44720" end="44747" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="44990" end="45001" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coking coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="45035" end="45045" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q196236" start="45049" end="45053" title="Anju (city)" label="Anju"/>
<link wikidata="Q251951" start="45061" end="45066" title="Undok" label="Ŭndŏk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28311027" start="45227" end="45240" title="mine flooding" label="mine flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="45593" end="45603" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="45711" end="45724" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="46892" end="46901" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q224717" start="47144" end="47153" title="Nampo Dam" label="Nampo Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29272" start="47286" end="47300" title="Ryugyŏng Hotel" label="Ryugyŏng Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="47323" end="47332" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q485531" start="47371" end="47384" title="Bank of Korea" label="Bank of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="47662" end="47687" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q33131271" start="47896" end="47926" title="Mansudae People&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Mansudae People&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198628" start="47935" end="47951" title="Munsu Water Park" label="Munsu Water Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q491767" start="47981" end="48012" title="Pyongyang International Airport" label="Pyongyang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141425" start="48086" end="48113" title="Central Bank of the Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Central Bank of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182222" start="48125" end="48144" title="Ministry of Finance (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q707394" start="48800" end="48810" title="Pak Nam-gi" label="Pak Nam-gi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="49224" end="49233" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073327" start="49429" end="49449" title="China Merchants Bank" label="China Merchants Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q26463" start="49451" end="49490" title="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China" label="Industrial and Commercial Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q26299" start="49492" end="49515" title="China Construction Bank" label="China Construction Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q26298" start="49521" end="49547" title="Agricultural Bank of China" label="Agricultural Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q790068" start="49665" end="49678" title="Bank of China" label="Bank of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062382" start="49811" end="49829" title="Foreign Trade Bank" label="Foreign Trade Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048919" start="50062" end="50076" title="Bank of Dalian" label="Bank of Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="50138" end="50149" title="Kim Jong Un" label="Kim Jong Un"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058121" start="50962" end="50977" title="Ch&amp;#x27;ongryŏn" label="Ch&amp;#x27;ongryŏn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808162" start="51033" end="51048" title="Jangmadang" label="private markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="51320" end="51332" title="Chinese yuan" label="Chinese yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="51337" end="51357" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="51386" end="51399" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="51403" end="51412" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976172" start="51664" end="51704" title="Korea Institute for National Unification" label="Korea Institute for National Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="53226" end="53229" title="FAO" label="FAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="53330" end="53335" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q699243" start="53623" end="53631" title="Hamgyŏng" label="Hamgyŏng"/>
<link wikidata="Q41416" start="53646" end="53653" title="Kangwon Province (North Korea)" label="Kangwŏn"/>
<link wikidata="Q272406" start="53694" end="53701" title="Chagang" label="Chagang"/>
<link wikidata="Q110171" start="53706" end="53715" title="Ryanggang" label="Ryanggang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307419" start="54550" end="54606" title="Theses on the Socialist Agrarian Question in Our Country" label="Theses on the Socialist Agrarian Question in Our Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="55497" end="55508" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="55866" end="55870" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q75110" start="55875" end="55892" title="Dandong, Liaoning" label="Dandong, Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="55939" end="55949" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56164" end="56190" title="public distribution system (North Korea)" label="public distribution system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354694" start="56411" end="56434" title="Demographics of North Korea" label="North Korean population"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="56457" end="56473" title="urban population" label="urban population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="57074" end="57088" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808162" start="58027" end="58042" title="Jangmadang" label="private markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="58860" end="58871" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149302" start="60126" end="60133" title="Sonbong" label="Sŏnbong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="60366" end="60377" title="Tumen River" label="Tumen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="61042" end="61048" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="61625" end="61638" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="61737" end="61755" title="Economy of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497778" start="62865" end="62881" title="land degradation" label="land degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310892" start="64459" end="64463" title="List of countries by iron production" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860811" start="64468" end="64472" title="List of countries by zinc production" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64486" end="64498" title="Coal#World coal reserves" label="22nd largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="64499" end="64503" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056181" start="64555" end="64572" title="List of countries by fluorite production" label="fluorite producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792815" start="64602" end="64608" title="List of countries by copper mine production" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235694" start="64613" end="64617" title="List of countries by salt production" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="64679" end="64683" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="64685" end="64693" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="64695" end="64703" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q425450" start="64705" end="64714" title="magnesite" label="magnesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="64716" end="64720" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="64722" end="64728" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="64731" end="64740" title="fluorspar" label="fluorspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="64746" end="64756" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="65261" end="65266" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123292511" start="65282" end="65287" title="Mirae (Wi-Fi)" label="Mirae"/>
<link wikidata="Q848436" start="65416" end="65431" title="home automation" label="home automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="65445" end="65463" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65650" end="65682" title="Ministry of Information Industry (North Korea)" label="Ministry of Information Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="65704" end="65721" title="cartoon animation" label="cartoon animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050337" start="65738" end="65748" title="SEK Studio" label="SEK Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q747845" start="65804" end="65830" title="Mansudae Overseas Projects" label="Mansudae Overseas Projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="65975" end="65982" title="market economy" label="markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="66234" end="66243" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="66292" end="66307" title="inheritance" label="semi-hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630594" start="67190" end="67218" title="collapse of the Soviet Union" label="collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q98517123" start="68336" end="68384" title="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="8th Congress of the Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68483" end="68508" title="Economy of North Korea#State Planning Commission" label="State Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="69047" end="69066" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="70253" end="70266" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247839" start="70858" end="70874" title="production quota" label="production quota"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="71036" end="71044" title="Industrial sector" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="71049" end="71060" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q192270" start="72921" end="72932" title="Consumption (economics)" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421968" start="73208" end="73217" title="extensive stage" label="extensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044388" start="73225" end="73240" title="intensive stage" label="intensive stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q863946" start="73413" end="73432" title="diminishing returns" label="diminishing returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="73707" end="73712" title="Labour (economics)" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="73714" end="73720" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="73726" end="73740" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385203" start="73766" end="73787" title="extractive industries" label="extractive industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="74226" end="74243" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="74652" end="74660" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14356" start="74864" end="74878" title="Park Chung Hee" label="Park Chung Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="74939" end="74946" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="74965" end="74982" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="75695" end="75700" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952330" start="79081" end="79103" title="automation engineering" label="automation engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="80006" end="80012" title="Food grain" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="80756" end="80782" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="80783" end="80811" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="81831" end="81858" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q276612" start="81884" end="81907" title="Ministry of Unification" label="Ministry of Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q714871" start="83226" end="83233" title="Sinuiju Special Administrative Region" label="Sinŭiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q221734" start="83286" end="83291" title="Rason" label="Rasŏn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471715" start="83349" end="83372" title="Sanctions against North Korea" label="International sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65038587" start="83433" end="83494" title="North Korea and weapons of mass destruction" label="North Korea&amp;#x27;s development of weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="83520" end="83532" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q877358" start="83766" end="83808" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q988133" start="83810" end="83814" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q589320" start="83816" end="83820" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718" label="1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q717051" start="83822" end="83826" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798341" start="83828" end="83832" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327738" start="83834" end="83838" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2087" label="2087"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289910" start="83844" end="83848" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 2094" label="2094"/>
<link wikidata="Q387054" start="84017" end="84030" title="Rodong Sinmun" label="Rodong Sinmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11089379" start="84399" end="84453" title="Taep&amp;#x27;oong International Investment Group of Korea" label="Taep&amp;#x27;oong International Investment Group of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="84571" end="84582" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="84794" end="84806" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q489155" start="85083" end="85098" title="Sunshine Policy" label="Sunshine Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45785" start="85112" end="85124" title="Kim Dae-jung" label="Kim Dae-jung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85413" end="85445" title="Foreign relations of North Korea#Reunification Efforts Since 1971" label="Reunification efforts since 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q321772" start="85857" end="85863" title="Daewoo" label="Daewoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q109386" start="85948" end="85959" title="Nampo" label="Namp&amp;#x27;o"/>
<link wikidata="Q489982" start="85984" end="85996" title="Hyundai Asan" label="Hyundai Asan"/>
<link wikidata="Q495501" start="86048" end="86059" title="Kumgang-san" label="Kŭmgang-san"/>
<link wikidata="Q495431" start="86107" end="86133" title="Kumgang-san Tourist Region" label="Kŭmgang-san Tourist Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q495424" start="86171" end="86196" title="Kaesong Industrial Region" label="Kaesŏng Industrial Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="86207" end="86232" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarized Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="86310" end="86321" title="Kim Jong Il" label="Kim Jong Il"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="86424" end="86429" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="86430" end="86439" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17488" start="86440" end="86461" title="Gyeongui Line" label="Gyeongui Railway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q495167" start="86584" end="86594" title="Panmunjeom" label="Panmunjeom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="86616" end="86623" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q493121" start="86631" end="86638" title="Anycall" label="Anycall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86680" end="86692" title="Cho Myong-ae" label="Cho Myong-ae"/>
<link wikidata="Q232491" start="86716" end="86726" title="Lee Hyo-ri" label="Lee Hyo-ri"/>
<link wikidata="Q14342" start="86805" end="86818" title="Lee Myung-bak" label="Lee Myung-bak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060616" start="87927" end="87951" title="China–North Korea border" label="China–North Korea border"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="88131" end="88134" title="ABB" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="88651" end="88670" title="chamber of commerce" label="chamber of commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058121" start="88751" end="88766" title="Ch&amp;#x27;ongryŏn" label="Ch&amp;#x27;ongryŏn"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="88983" end="88990" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295151" start="89445" end="89472" title="Rason Special Economic Zone" label="Rason Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q706910" start="89685" end="89698" title="Hwanggumpyong Island" label="Hwanggumpyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q706605" start="89703" end="89715" title="Wihwa Island" label="Wihwa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q75110" start="89751" end="89758" title="Dandong" label="Dandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q25108774" start="89800" end="89822" title="Special economic zone (North Korea)" label="special economic zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207201" start="89858" end="89891" title="Illicit activities of North Korea" label="Illicit activities of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q705131" start="89894" end="89911" title="Chollima Movement" label="Chollima Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23928071" start="89914" end="89937" title="Taxation in North Korea" label="Taxation in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q20010779" start="89940" end="89962" title="Poverty in North Korea" label="Poverty in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403296" start="89981" end="89990" title="Felix Abt" label="Felix Abt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="90679" end="90699" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="90762" end="90781" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="90866" end="90895" title="The Christian Science Monitor" label="The Christian Science Monitor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21261" wikidata="Q863897" url="?curid=21261" title="Telecommunications in North Korea">
<text>Telecommunications in North Korea refers to the communication services available in North Korea. North Korea has not fully adopted mainstream Internet technology due to some restrictions on foreign interventions.

==Telephone==

North Korea has an adequate telephone system, with 1.18 million fixed lines available in 2008. However, most phones are only installed for senior government officials. Someone wanting a phone installed must fill out a form indicating their rank, why they want a phone, and how they will pay for it. Most of these are installed in government offices, collective farms, and state-owned enterprises (SOEs), with only perhaps 10 percent controlled by individuals or households.
By 1970 automatic switching facilities were in use in Pyongyang, Sinŭiju, Hamhŭng, and Hyesan. A few public telephone booths were beginning to appear in Pyongyang around 1990. In the mid-1990s, an automated exchange system based on an E-10A
system produced by Alcatel joint-venture factories in China was installed in Pyongyang. North Koreans announced in
1997 that automated switching had replaced manual switching in Pyongyang and 70 other locales.
North Korean press reported in 2000 that fiber-optic cable had been extended to the port of Nampho and that North Pyong&#x27;an Province had been connected with fiber-optic cable.

===Mobile phones===
In November 2002, mobile phones were introduced to North Korea and by November 2003, 20,000 North Koreans had bought mobile phones.

There was a ban on cell phones from 2004 to 2008.

In December 2008, a new mobile phone service was launched in Pyongyang, operated by Egyptian company Orascom, but the North Korean government immediately expropriated control of the enterprise and its earnings. The official name of the 3G mobile phone service in North Korea is called Koryolink, and is now effectively under the control of the state-owned Korea Post and Telecommunications Corporation (KPTC). There has been a large demand for the service since it was launched.

In May 2010, more than 120,000 North Koreans owned mobile phones; this number had increased to 301,000 by September 2010, 660,000 by August 2011, and 900,000 by December 2011. Orascom reported 432,000 North Korean subscribers after two years of operation (December 2010), increasing to 809,000 by September 2011, and exceeding one million by February 2012. By April 2013 subscriber numbers neared two million. By 2015 the figure had grown to three million.

In 2011, 60% of Pyongyang&#x27;s citizens between the age of 20 and 50 had a cellphone. That year, StatCounter.com confirmed that some North Koreans use Apple&#x27;s iPhones, as well as Nokia&#x27;s and Samsung&#x27;s smartphones.

In November 2020, no mobile phones could dial into or out of the country, and there was no Internet connection. A 3G network covered 94 percent of the population, but only 14 percent of the territory.

Koryolink has no international roaming agreements. Pre-paid SIM cards can be purchased by visitors to North Korea to make international (but not domestic) calls. Prior to January 2013, foreigners had to surrender their phones at the border crossing or airport before entering the country, but with the availability of local SIM cards this policy is no longer in place. Internet access, however, is only available to resident foreigners and not tourists.

North Korean mobile phones use a digital signature system to prevent access to unsanctioned files, and log usage information that can be physically inspected. Smartphone apps such as mapping and navigation app Fellow Traveler are available.

A survey in 2017 found that 69% of households had a mobile phone.

In September 2019 a previously unknown company, Kwangya Trading Company (광야무역회사의), announced the release of a cell phone for North Korean consumer use called the Kimtongmu. Although state-run media reports that the phone was developed by North Korean outlets it is likely sourced rather from a Chinese OEM and outfitted with North Korean software.

In December 2023, North Korea started to deploy a 4G network using second-hand 4G networking equipment from Huawei.

In 2024, &quot;38 North&quot; reported the number mobile phones models available had doubled since 2022, offering about 55 smartphone models generally with good mid-market specifications, some 4G, with at least 10 companies supplying them to consumers. Some of the functionality was limited in line with state control measures by a localized version of Android. None of the smartphones were domestically manufactured. In a country of about 24 million people there are an estimated 6.5-7 million mobile subscriptions, with use of digital payment apps popular.

===International connection===
North Korea has had a varying number of connections to other nations. Currently, international fixed line connections consist of a network connecting Pyongyang to Beijing and Moscow, and Chongjin to Vladivostok. Communications were opened with South Korea in 2000. In May 2006 TransTeleCom Company and North Korea&#x27;s Ministry of Communications have signed an agreement for the construction and joint operation of a fiber-optic transmission line in the section of the Khasan–Tumangang railway checkpoint in the North Korea-Russia border. This is the first direct land link between Russia and North Korea. TTC&#x27;s partner in the design, construction, and connection of the communication line from the Korean side to the junction was Korea Communication Company of North Korea&#x27;s Ministry of Communications. The technology transfer was built around STM-1 level digital equipment with the possibility of further increasing bandwidth. The construction was completed in 2007.

Since joining Intersputnik in 1984, North Korea has operated 22 lines of frequency-division multiplexing and 10 lines of single channel per carrier for communication with Eastern Europe. and in late 1989 international direct dialing service through microwave link was introduced from Hong Kong. A satellite ground station near Pyongyang provides direct international communications using the International Telecommunications Satellite Corporation (Intelsat) Indian Ocean satellite. A satellite communications center was installed in Pyongyang in 1986 with French technical support. An agreement to share in Japan&#x27;s telecommunications satellites was reached in 1990. North Korea joined the Universal Postal Union in 1974 but has direct postal arrangements with only a select group of countries.

==Fiber optic lines==
Following the agreement with UNDP, the Pyongyang Fiber Optic Cable Factory was
built in April 1992 and the country&#x27;s first optical fiber cable network consisting of 480
pulse-code modulation (PCM) lines and 6 automatic exchange stations from Pyongyang
to Hamhung () was installed in September 1995. Moreover, the nationwide land leveling and rezoning campaign initiated by Kim Jong-il in Kangwon province in May 1998 and in North Pyongan province in January 2000 facilitated the construction of provincial and county fiber optic lines, which were laid by tens of thousands of Korean People&#x27;s Army (KPA) soldier-builders and provincial shock brigade members mobilized for the large-scale public works projects designed to rehabilitate the hundreds of thousands of hectares of arable lands devastated by the natural disasters in the late 1990s.

==Television==
Broadcasting in North Korea is tightly controlled by the state and is used as a propaganda arm of the ruling Korean Workers&#x27; Party. The Korean Central Television station is located in Pyongyang, and there are also stations in major cities, including Chŏngjin, Hamhŭng, Haeju, Kaesŏng, Sinŭiju, Wŏnsan. There are four channels in Pyongyang but only one channel in other cities. Imported Japanese-made color televisions have a North Korean brand name superimposed, but nineteen-inch black-and-white sets have been produced locally since 1980. One estimate placed the total number of television sets in use in the early 1990s at 250,000 sets. A study in 2017 found that 98% of households had a TV set.

==Radio==

Visitors are not allowed to bring a radio. As part of the government&#x27;s information blockade policy, North Korean radios and televisions must be modified to receive only government stations. These modified radios and televisions should be registered at special state department. They are also subject to inspection at random. The removal of the official seal is punishable by law. In order to buy a TV set or radio, North Korean citizens are required to get special permission from officials at their places of residence or employment.

North Korea has two AM radio broadcasting networks, (Voice of Korea) and Korean Central Broadcasting Station, and one FM network, . All three networks have stations in major cities that offer local programming. There also is a powerful shortwave transmitter for overseas broadcasts in several languages.

The official government station is the Korean Central Broadcasting Station (KCBS), which broadcasts in Korean. In 1997 there were 3.36 million radio sets.

==Internet==
===National area network===

Kwangmyong is a North Korean &quot;walled garden&quot; national intranet opened in 2000. It is accessible from within North Korea&#x27;s major cities, counties, as well as universities and major industrial and commercial organizations. Kwangmyong has 24-hour unlimited access by dial-up telephone line. A survey in 2017 found that 19% of households had a computer, but that only 1% nationally and 5% in Pyongyang had access to the intranet. In 2018, it was estimated that 18-20% of the population had mobile phones with access to the intranet.

In August 2016, it was reported that North Korea had launched a state-approved video streaming service which has been likened to Netflix. The service, known as &quot;Manbang&quot; (meaning &quot;everyone&quot;), uses a set-top box to stream live TV, on-demand video and newspaper articles (from the state newspaper Rodong Sinmun) over the intranet. The service is only available to citizens in Pyongyang, Siniju and Sariwon. The state TV channel Korean Central Television (KCTV) described the service as a &quot;respite from radio interference&quot;.

In 2018, North Korea unveiled a new Wi-Fi service called Mirae (&quot;Future&quot;), which allowed mobile devices to access the intranet network in Pyongyang.

During the COVID-19 pandemic the Rakwon video conferencing system, developed at Kim Il-sung University, became popular for remote meetings, and appeared regularly on news bulletins. Telemedicine and remote education systems have been developed.

=== International Internet access ===
North Korea&#x27;s main connection to the international Internet is through a fiber-optic cable connecting Pyongyang with
Dandong, China, crossing the China–North Korea border at Sinuiju. Internet access is provided by China Unicom. Before the fiber connection, international Internet access was limited to government-approved dial-up over land lines to China. In 2003 a joint venture between businessman Jan Holterman in Berlin and the North Korean government called KCC Europe brought the commercial Internet to North Korea. The connection was established through an Intelsat satellite link from North Korea to servers located in Germany. This link ended the need to dial ISPs in China.

In 2007 North Korea successfully applied at ICANN for the .kp country code top-level domain (ccTLD). KCC Europe administered the domain from Berlin, and also hosted a large number of websites.

In 2009 Internet service provider Star Joint Venture Co., a joint venture between the North Korean government&#x27;s Post and Telecommunications Corporation and Thailand-based Loxley Pacific, took control of North Korea&#x27;s Internet and address allocation. The satellite link was phased out in favour of the fiber connection and is currently only used as a backup line.

In October 2017 a large scale DDoS attack on the main China connection led to a second Internet connection taken into service. This connects North Korea through a fiber optic cable with Vladivostok, crossing the Russia-North Korea border at Tumangang. Internet access is provided by TransTelekom, a subsidiary of Russian national railway operator Russian Railways.

North Korea&#x27;s first Internet café opened in 2002 as a joint venture with South Korean Internet company Hoonnet. It is connected via a land line to China. Foreign visitors can link their computers to the Internet through international phone lines available in a few hotels in Pyongyang. In 2005 a new Internet café opened in Pyongyang, connected not through China, but through the North Korean satellite link. Content is most likely filtered by North Korean government agencies.

Since February 2013, foreigners have been able to access the internet using the 3G phone network.

==Access to foreign media==
&quot;A Quiet Opening: North Koreans in a Changing Media Environment&quot;, a study commissioned by the U.S. State Department and conducted by Intermedia and released May 10, 2012 shows that despite extremely strict regulations and draconian penalties North Koreans, particularly elite elements, have increasing access to news and other media outside the state-controlled media authorized by the government. While access to the Internet is tightly controlled, radio and DVDs are common media accessed, and in border areas, television.

As of 2011, USB flash drives were selling well in North Korea, primarily used for watching South Korean dramas and films on personal computers.

==See also==

* Censorship in North Korea
* Media of North Korea
* Radio jamming in Korea
* North Korean postal service

==References==
==External links==
*North Korea Uncovered , (North Korea Google Earth) See most of North Korea&#x27;s communications facilities, including: The Korea Computer Center, the Pyongyang Television Tower, the KCBS tower, the major communications center in Heaju, as well as satellite communications stations near Pyongyang.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863897" start="0" end="33" title="Telecommunications in North Korea" label="Telecommunications in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="84" end="95" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="257" end="273" title="telephony" label="telephone system"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="757" end="766" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q156243" start="768" end="775" title="Sinŭiju" label="Sinŭiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q109356" start="777" end="784" title="Hamhŭng" label="Hamhŭng"/>
<link wikidata="Q489829" start="790" end="796" title="Hyesan" label="Hyesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q509404" start="963" end="970" title="Alcatel-Lucent" label="Alcatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q109386" start="1246" end="1252" title="Nampho" label="Nampho"/>
<link wikidata="Q109348" start="1262" end="1290" title="North Pyong&amp;#x27;an Province" label="North Pyong&amp;#x27;an Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370287" start="1640" end="1647" title="Orascom" label="Orascom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047618" start="1824" end="1833" title="Koryolink" label="Koryolink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055858" start="1895" end="1905" title="North Korean postal service" label="Korea Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2800" end="2808" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="2823" end="2825" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="3399" end="3416" title="digital signature" label="digital signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="3525" end="3540" title="Mobile app" label="Smartphone apps"/>
<link wikidata="Q649186" start="3549" end="3571" title="Web mapping" label="mapping and navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q267558" start="3977" end="3980" title="Original equipment manufacturer" label="OEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="4074" end="4076" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="4132" end="4138" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001061" start="4156" end="4164" title="38 North" label="38 North"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="4334" end="4336" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="4494" end="4501" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="4882" end="4891" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="4895" end="4902" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="4907" end="4913" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q109336" start="4919" end="4927" title="Chongjin" label="Chongjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="4931" end="4942" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010163" start="5203" end="5209" title="Khasan (urban-type settlement)" label="Khasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541997" start="5210" end="5219" title="Tumangang" label="Tumangang"/>
<link wikidata="Q631348" start="5246" end="5271" title="North Korea-Russia border" label="North Korea-Russia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621069" start="5589" end="5594" title="STM-1" label="STM-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548793" start="5728" end="5740" title="Intersputnik" label="Intersputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555726" start="5787" end="5818" title="frequency-division multiplexing" label="frequency-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="5963" end="5977" title="Microwave transmission" label="microwave link"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="5998" end="6007" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="6011" end="6035" title="satellite ground station" label="satellite ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="6162" end="6170" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="6408" end="6430" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="6565" end="6569" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="6664" end="6683" title="optical fiber cable" label="optical fiber cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="6710" end="6731" title="pulse-code modulation" label="pulse-code modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109356" start="6796" end="6803" title="Hamhung" label="Hamhung"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="6914" end="6925" title="Kim Jong-il" label="Kim Jong-il"/>
<link wikidata="Q41416" start="6929" end="6945" title="Kangwon Province (North Korea)" label="Kangwon province"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="7117" end="7142" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="7514" end="7540" title="Korean Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Korean Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q697648" start="7546" end="7571" title="Korean Central Television" label="Korean Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q109336" start="7660" end="7668" title="Chŏngjin" label="Chŏngjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109356" start="7670" end="7677" title="Hamhung" label="Hamhŭng"/>
<link wikidata="Q714865" start="7679" end="7684" title="Haeju" label="Haeju"/>
<link wikidata="Q109079" start="7686" end="7693" title="Kaesŏng" label="Kaesŏng"/>
<link wikidata="Q156243" start="7695" end="7702" title="Sinuiju" label="Sinŭiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q109374" start="7704" end="7710" title="Wonsan" label="Wŏnsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="8682" end="8690" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q698863" start="8715" end="8729" title="Voice of Korea" label="Voice of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="8780" end="8782" title="FM radio" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784339" start="9006" end="9041" title="Korean Central Broadcasting Station" label="Korean Central Broadcasting Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q139859" start="9200" end="9213" title="walled garden (technology)" label="walled garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979618" start="9220" end="9237" title="national intranet" label="national intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q714008" start="9401" end="9411" title="Kwangmyong (network)" label="Kwangmyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120713" start="9876" end="9883" title="Manbang" label="Manbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q387054" start="10025" end="10038" title="Rodong Sinmun" label="Rodong Sinmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="10104" end="10113" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q156243" start="10115" end="10121" title="Sinuiju" label="Siniju"/>
<link wikidata="Q505807" start="10126" end="10133" title="Sariwon" label="Sariwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q697648" start="10156" end="10181" title="Korean Central Television" label="Korean Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="10298" end="10303" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123292511" start="10319" end="10324" title="Mirae (Wi-Fi)" label="Mirae"/>
<link wikidata="Q86675924" start="10433" end="10450" title="COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124040142" start="10455" end="10461" title="Rakwon" label="Rakwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="10462" end="10480" title="video conferencing" label="video conferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39920" start="10502" end="10524" title="Kim Il-sung University" label="Kim Il-sung University"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994" start="10604" end="10616" title="Telemedicine" label="Telemedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="10813" end="10822" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q75110" start="10828" end="10835" title="Dandong" label="Dandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060616" start="10857" end="10881" title="China–North Korea border" label="China–North Korea border"/>
<link wikidata="Q156243" start="10885" end="10892" title="Sinuiju" label="Sinuiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068485" start="10925" end="10937" title="China Unicom" label="China Unicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="11128" end="11134" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q707579" start="11174" end="11184" title="Korea Computer Center" label="KCC Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="11275" end="11283" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="11440" end="11445" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q42172" start="11454" end="11457" title=".kp" label=".kp"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="11458" end="11470" title="country code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="11471" end="11487" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="11489" end="11494" title="ccTLD" label="ccTLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="11537" end="11543" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="11598" end="11623" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010275" start="11707" end="11746" title="Ministry of Post and Telecommunications (North Korea)" label="Post and Telecommunications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325156" start="11766" end="11780" title="Loxley Pacific" label="Loxley Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="12150" end="12161" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q631348" start="12176" end="12201" title="North Korea–Russia border" label="Russia-North Korea border"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541997" start="12205" end="12214" title="Tumangang" label="Tumangang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461970" start="12247" end="12259" title="TransTelekom" label="TransTelekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q660770" start="12311" end="12327" title="Russian Railways" label="Russian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="12355" end="12368" title="Internet café" label="Internet café"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="12894" end="12896" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="13489" end="13504" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148232" start="13638" end="13663" title="Censorship in North Korea" label="Censorship in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438771" start="13666" end="13686" title="Media of North Korea" label="Media of North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893173" start="13689" end="13711" title="Radio jamming in Korea" label="Radio jamming in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055858" start="13714" end="13741" title="North Korean postal service" label="North Korean postal service"/>
</links>
</doc>
