<doc id="21709" wikidata="Q220222" url="?curid=21709" title="Nation of Islam">
<text>The Nation of Islam (NOI) is a religious organization founded in the United States by Wallace Fard Muhammad in 1930. A centralized and hierarchical organization, the NOI is committed to black nationalism and focuses its attention on the African diaspora, especially on African Americans. While describing itself as Islamic and using Islamic terminologies, its religious tenets differ substantially from orthodox Islamic traditions. Scholars of religion characterize it as a new religious movement.

The Nation teaches that there has been a succession of mortal gods, each a black man named Allah, of whom Fard Muhammad is the most recent. It claims that the first Allah created the earliest humans, the Arabic-speaking, dark-skinned Tribe of Shabazz, whose members possessed inner divinity and from whom all people of color descend. It maintains that a scientist named Yakub then created the white race. The whites lacked inner divinity, and were intrinsically violent; they overthrew the Tribe of Shabazz and achieved global dominance. Setting itself against the white-dominated society of the United States, the NOI campaigns for the creation of an independent African-American nation-state, and calls for African Americans to be economically self-sufficient and separatist. A millenarian tradition, it maintains that Fard Muhammad will soon return aboard a spaceship, the &quot;Mother Plane&quot; or &quot;Mother Ship&quot;, to wipe out the white race and establish a utopia. Members worship in buildings called mosques or temples. Practitioners are expected to live disciplined lives, adhering to strict dress codes, specific dietary requirements, and patriarchal gender roles.

Wallace Fard Muhammad established the Nation of Islam in Detroit. He drew on various sources, including Noble Drew Ali&#x27;s Moorish Science Temple of America, black nationalist trends like Garveyism, and black-oriented forms of Freemasonry. After Fard Muhammad disappeared in 1934, the leadership of the NOI was assumed by Elijah Muhammad. He expanded the NOI&#x27;s teachings and declared Fard Muhammad to be the latest Allah. Attracting growing attention in the late 1950s and 1960s, the NOI&#x27;s influence expanded through high-profile members such as the black nationalist activist Malcolm X and the boxer Muhammad Ali. Deeming it a threat to domestic security, the Federal Bureau of Investigation worked to undermine the group. Following Elijah Muhammad&#x27;s death in 1975, his son Warith Deen Mohammed took over the organization, moving it towards Sunni Islam and renaming it the World Community of Islam in the West. Members seeking to retain Elijah Muhammad&#x27;s teachings re-established the Nation of Islam under Louis Farrakhan&#x27;s leadership in 1977. Farrakhan has continued to develop the NOI&#x27;s beliefs, for instance by drawing connections with Dianetics, and expanding its economic and agricultural operations.

Based in the United States, the Nation of Islam has also established a presence abroad, with membership open only to people of color. In 2007 it was estimated to have 50,000 members. The Nation has proven to be particularly successful at converting prisoners. The Southern Poverty Law Center and the Anti-Defamation League have characterized it as a black supremacist hate group that promotes racism towards white people, antisemitism, and anti-LGBT rhetoric. Muslim critics accuse it of promoting teachings that are not authentically Islamic.

== Definition ==

The Nation of Islam (NOI) is a new religious movement, a black nationalist religion, and an African-American religion. As well as being characterised as an &quot;ethno-religious movement&quot;, it has been labelled a social movement. Scholars of religion have highlighted commonalities between the NOI and UFO religions, with extraterrestrial spaceships featuring in the group&#x27;s ideas about the end of the world. The scholar of religion Stephen C. Finley also suggested that it could be seen as a form of esotericism.

The name &quot;Nation of Islam&quot; has represented two distinct organizations: the first group was established by Wallace Fard Muhammad in the 1930s and existed until 1975, after which the second organization was created by Louis Farrakhan in the late 1970s. Farrakhan&#x27;s second Nation bears some differences from its predecessor, reflecting how the Nation&#x27;s teachings have shifted over its history.

The Nation is a highly centralized, hierarchical, and authoritarian movement.
Unlike practitioners of Rastafari, a contemporary of the NOI which shares many of its key concerns, members of the Nation do not exhibit considerable variation in their approach to the religion, displaying a high degree of uniformity and conformity. Despite this, not all members have believed all of its teachings implicitly, and there are members who have privately broken its rules on personal behavior and lifestyle. 

===Relationship to Christianity and Islam===

Having no specific holy text of its own, the Nation draws influence from both Christianity and Islam while offering profoundly different interpretations of their central scriptures, the Bible and the Quran. 
Having arisen from within a Christian-majority society, the Nation denigrates Christianity, presenting it as a tool of white supremacy. For the group—whose members are commonly called &quot;Black Muslims&quot;—their Islamic identity offers an alternative to mainstream, Christian-dominated American culture. 

In describing itself as Islamic the NOI seeks to reclaim what it regards as the historic Muslim identity of the African-American people, with the group&#x27;s second leader, Elijah Muhammad, stating that &quot;Islam is the natural religion of the Black Nation.&quot; The Nation sees itself as part of the Islamic world, and Islamic elements in its practices include the use of the Arabic language, prayers five times a day, and the adoption of a flag based on that of Muslim-majority Turkey.

The Nation has little in common with mainstream forms of Islam. Mainstream Muslims generally see it as a movement that has &quot;selectively adopted some Islamic beliefs and concepts&quot; but is not &quot;truly Islamic&quot;. The scholars Jason Eric Fishman and Ana Belén Soage observed that although the Nation uses many standard Islamic terms, it gives them &quot;profoundly different meanings&quot; to those understood by most Muslims. The Nation&#x27;s views differ from the Five Pillars, which are typically seen as central to Islam; its claims that God takes anthropomorphic form and that there is no afterlife differ fundamentally from Muslim teaching. Unlike most forms of Islam, the NOI does not hold that Muhammad was the final nor the most important messenger of God, instead treating its first two leaders, Fard Muhammad and Elijah Muhammad, as being more important.
From mainstream Islamic perspectives, its teachings are heretical, with its theology being &quot;shirk&quot; (blasphemy). Accordingly, some scholars of religion have characterised it as &quot;quasi-Islamic&quot;, or referred to it as &quot;Fardian Islam&quot;, &quot;pseudo-Islam&quot;, or &quot;nontraditional Islam&quot;.

== Beliefs ==
=== Theology ===

The sociologist of religion David V. Barrett noted that the Nation&#x27;s theology is &quot;very distinct&quot; and &quot;extremely detailed&quot;. The Nation provides conflicting statements about its theology; although it professes commitment to the monotheistic idea of a single God, its discourse refers to multiple gods, meaning that it can be interpreted as polytheistic.

In the NOI&#x27;s view, each Allah (God) is not an incorporeal spiritual entity but a flesh-and-blood person. These Allahs are anthropomorphic, taking the form of black men, which was the shape that the first Allah consciously adopted. In Nation teaching, the Allahs are not immortal, instead typically living for around 200 to 300 years. They have varying abilities and degrees of power, with each taking over following the death of their predecessor, after which they rule for a cycle in history. The Nation regards its founder, Fard Muhammad, as the latest of these Allahs, or &quot;God in person&quot;. He is deemed the first to have attained the same powers as that of the earliest Allah, namely the ability to return the universe to its primordial darkness and then recreate it. The Nation teaches that although this founder disappeared in 1934, he had secretly moved to Mecca and would live for another 409 years.

The Nation promotes the idea that &quot;God is man and man is God, that God has a presence inside human individuals.&quot; Accordingly, the NOI teaches that the black race, in its natural state, is divine, a &quot;nation of Gods&quot;, with Elijah Muhammad espousing the view that &quot;all Muslims are Allahs&quot;. According to the NOI, &quot;knowledge of self&quot; is key for black people to realize their inner divinity. The NOI thus maintains that by following its teachings, its adherents can recognize their inner godliness. Elijah Muhammad for instance stated that humans could develop parapsychological powers and that he personally had telepathic abilities.

The Nation of Islam&#x27;s theology is &quot;completely divorced&quot; from mainstream Islam. The two differ in regard to the fundamental ontological divide between humanity and God, as well as God&#x27;s nature, which for mainstream Muslims is deemed eternal and non-anthropomorphic. Also conflicting with mainstream Islam is the NOI&#x27;s claim that there is no afterlife; Elijah Muhammad wrote that &quot;when you are dead, you are DEAD&quot;. Notions of Heaven, the Nation claims, are a lie used by white Christians to keep black people docile. Instead Elijah Muhammad taught that there is no spiritual realm beyond the material universe.

=== Cosmogony and the Tribe of Shabazz ===
The Nation teaches that in the beginning there was nothing but darkness. Then, 76 trillion years ago, the first Allah willed himself into being, taking 6 million years to form into his desired appearance: that of a black man, in reference to the blackness from which he had emerged. The first Allah then created the Sun and the planets, as well as fellow black gods, who lived predominantly on the Earth but also on Mars. Of these, the first Allah and 23 others formed a council of ruling imams: 12 greater and 12 lesser. Each of these imams would take a turn being the ruling Allah for one cycle each. 

The NOI refers to these early individuals as &quot;god-scientists&quot;. They are part of what it calls the &quot;Original&quot; or &quot;Asiatic&quot; race, a people who were divided into 13 tribes. The Nation labels these people &quot;black&quot;, describing them as having dark skin as well as smooth, straight hair, closely resembling dark-complexioned Arabians or South Asians rather than Sub-Saharan Africans. In portraying humanity as the creation of the first Allah, rather than a product of evolution, the Nation endorses a unique form of creationism and believes dinosaurs to be a hoax created by white scientists.

According to Nation teaching, one of the god-scientists was a renegade and, 66 trillion years ago, tried to destroy the Earth with explosives. The resulting explosion forced a chunk of the Earth&#x27;s mass into orbit, where it became the moon. One of the 13 tribes was trapped on the moon, where they died due to lack of water. The Nation also maintains that 15,000 years ago, the god-scientists wrote down knowledge of the future in a text, the Mother Book, parts of which have passed down in the Torah, Gospels, and Quran. 

Of the twelve tribes that remained on Earth, the most resilient was the Tribe of Shabazz; they settled in Egypt&#x27;s Nile Valley and the area around Mecca in the Arabian peninsula. The Nation calls this region &quot;East Asia&quot;, reflecting its belief that Asia and Africa were once a single continent. It was because they moved into the &quot;jungles of East Asia&quot; (i.e. Africa), Elijah Muhammad claimed, that members of this Original Asiatic Race developed Afro-textured hair. The Nation teaches that the Original Race were Muslims by their intrinsic nature, but that many created heretical deviations such as Hinduism; some of those who broke Islamic rules were exiled to North America, where they became the continent&#x27;s native population.

For the Nation, everyone not of West European genetic origin is a descendant of the Original Asiatic Race. In contrast to understandings of race held by most Americans, for the Nation, &quot;black&quot; does not simply mean those of Sub-Saharan African genetic descent, but all people of color, including Asians, North Africans, and Native Americans. Even some Eastern Europeans, such as Albanians, are considered descendants of the Original Asiatic Race. Elijah Muhammad for instance referred to &quot;black, brown, yellow [and] red&quot; people as collectively constituting &quot;black mankind&quot;, which he then juxtaposed against the &quot;white race&quot;.

=== Myth of Yakub===

The NOI promotes a story called the myth of Yakub, which received its fullest exposition in Elijah Muhammad&#x27;s 1965 book &quot;Message to the Blackman&quot;. In this narrative, Yakub was a black scientist; a child prodigy, by the age of 18 he had learned everything that Mecca&#x27;s universities had to teach him. He attracted a following but caused trouble, leading the Meccan authorities to exile him and his 59,999 followers to Pelan, the Mediterranean island of Patmos.

On Pelan, the NOI claims, Yakub engaged in a selective breeding program to create the white race. This entailed breeding new children, with those who were too dark killed at birth and their bodies fed to wild animals or incinerated. Over two centuries, Yakub&#x27;s experiments created a blonde, light-skinned people, the white race. As a group of people distinct from the Original Asiatic Race, the white race are degenerate, sub-human, and bereft of divinity, being intrinsically prone to lying, violence, and brutality. Elijah Muhammad repeatedly referred to whites as &quot;the devil&quot;. The Nation maintains that most white people are unaware of their true origins, but that such knowledge is held by senior white Freemasons. These ideas have been labelled both racist and racialist.

According to the Nation&#x27;s teachings, Yakub&#x27;s newly created white race sowed discord among black people, and thus were exiled to live in the caves of &quot;West Asia&quot;, meaning Europe. In this narrative, it was in Europe that the white race engaged in bestiality and degenerated, resulting in the emergence of apes and monkeys. To help the whites develop, the ruling Allah sent prophets to them, the first of whom was Musa (Moses), who taught the whites to cook and wear clothes. According to the Nation, Jesus was also a prophet sent to civilise the white race. The group reject the Christian belief that Jesus was a unique manifestation of God, that he was the Messiah, was the product of a virgin birth, or was crucified and resurrected.

===White rule===

In the Nation&#x27;s teachings, the ruling Allah permitted the white race to rule the Earth for 6000 years, a period ending in 1914. It claims that the ruling Allahs allowed this so that black people would discover humanity&#x27;s inner potential for evil and learn how to defeat it, thus enabling them to realize their inner divine capacity and become gods.

The NOI claims that over 6000 years ago the whites began to dominate the world, using treacherous tactics that the Nation calls &quot;tricknology&quot;. As part of this, the whites enslaved the Tribe of Shabazz, shipping many of them to the Americas through the Atlantic slave trade. The NOI claims that most enslaved blacks forgot their true names, their Arabic language, and their Muslim identity, instead embracing Christianity, which the Nation labels &quot;white man&#x27;s religion&quot;. The group deems Christianity a tool of white supremacy used to subjugate black people, and expresses the belief that the oppressed (African Americans) and the oppressors (European Americans) cannot share the same god. The Nation claims that in their enslaved state, black people have lost their morality by engaging in sinful behaviour such as fornication and drinking alcohol, something encouraged by the whites. In making this argument, the NOI equates the United States with the city of Babylon as presented in the Bible.

The Nation thus understands the modern subjugation of African Americans as part of an ancient white conspiracy. The group interprets many of the problems facing African Americans in this light; Farrakhan for instance claimed that the white establishment encouraged a black gang culture to provide an excuse for the police killing of black youths, that they flooded black-majority areas with drugs, and that they created AIDS to exterminate black people. The Nation is also openly critical of U.S. aggression towards countries with non-white and Muslim majorities, and in keeping with its ethos has adopted an anti-Zionist position regarding Israel.

=== Eschatology and the Mother Plane ===

The NOI is millenarian, believing that humanity is living in end times. It propounds a distinct eschatology drawing on the Book of Revelation. Central to its view of the apocalypse is a large spaceship, known as the Wheel, the Mother Plane, or the Mother Ship, and which members usually refer to using female pronouns. Elijah Muhammad described this as &quot;a small human planet&quot;, claiming that it is half a mile in diameter. The Nation teaches that this vessel is the Merkabah that appears in the Book of Ezekiel (1: 4–28). It teaches that Allah and many of his scientists live in a magnificent city on the Mother Plane, from which they monitor humanity; Farrakhan has claimed that Elijah Muhammad never died but is resident aboard this ship. The Nation teaches that there are also smaller vessels, &quot;baby planes&quot;, docked inside the Mother Ship and that these travel to visit Earth.

The Nation teaches that a period of deteriorating racial tensions will culminate in the apocalypse. NOI members have repeatedly claimed that this apocalypse is imminent; Farrakhan for instance predicted that the Gulf War of 1990 would spark it, while Tynetta Muhammad predicted it would occur in 2001. According to Nation teaching, the apocalypse will come when the Mother Plane appears above the Earth and transports the righteous to live aboard it. It will then use the baby planes to bury bombs beneath the Earth&#x27;s surface, which on detonation will wipe out the old, white-dominated order. The Earth&#x27;s atmosphere will then burn for 390 years and spend another 610 cooling down.

Once the Earth has returned to a habitable state, the ruling Allah will return the righteous to live on the planet, in a new black paradise. In his book &quot;The Supreme Wisdom&quot;, Elijah Muhammad claimed that after the apocalypse, &quot;Peace, joy and happiness will have no end.&quot; Those living in this perfect society will eat the finest food and wear clothes of silk interwoven with gold. The NOI has taught that the white ruling elite are aware of this forthcoming apocalypse and that the U.S. exploration of space and the Strategic Defense Initiative are futile attempts to protect themselves against the Mother Plane.

=== Black nationalism and separatism ===

Ideologically, the NOI is black nationalist, and has sometimes been perceived as a Black Power political organization. Scholar of religion Mattias Gardell commented that the idea of black unity is &quot;at the very core of the NOI ideology&quot;. It seeks to empower black people by giving them a positive self-identity, purging ideas of white superiority and black inferiority from its followers. In the Nation&#x27;s view, black liberation requires a religious dimension.
It regards African Americans, or black people more broadly, as the Chosen People, espousing a cosmology in which the black race is superior and the white race inferior.

The Nation is black separatist, rejecting the integration. This racial separatism was at odds with the mainstream civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s. The Nation was critical of African-American activists who promoted racial integration, such as Martin Luther King Jr. and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, regarding them as &quot;Uncle Tom Negroes&quot;. In contrast to King&#x27;s calls for non-violent protest against segregation and racial violence, the Nation maintained that self-defence was a moral obligation for African Americans.

The NOI called for the creation of a separate, sovereign African-American nation-state in the southern part of what is currently the United States, with Elijah Muhammad stipulating that the U.S. should financially support this new country for 20 to 25 years. This is presented as compensation for the unpaid labor of their enslaved ancestors. Farrakhan has also suggested that the countries of Africa should set aside land on that continent for the African diaspora, characterising this as a reparation for the complicity of West African states in the slave trade. Gardell suggested that any nation-state formed under the Nation&#x27;s leadership would be theocratic, authoritarian, and totalitarian.

Unlike the Garveyites and Rastafari who strongly emphasise links between the African diaspora and Africa itself, Elijah Muhammad and the NOI instead focused their attention on the African diaspora in the Americas, rejecting a specifically Pan-African ideology. Elijah Muhammad stated that &quot;where as the Black man in Africa is our brother, our central responsibility is with the Black man here in the wilderness of North America&quot;. Rather than treating Africa as a homeland, the Nation&#x27;s origin myths present Mecca as the original home of African Americans; Africa itself is often portrayed in Nation writings as the least desirable of the Original Asiatic lands.

=== Gender and sexuality issues ===

The NOI&#x27;s teachings on gender are conservative and patriarchal. It promotes strict gender roles, maintaining that the security of the black family is ensured when its members adhere to their gendered responsibilities. Emphasis is placed on the family unit, with the Nation being critical of the historically matrifocal focus of many African-American families, instead stressing the importance of a male family figurehead.

Seeking to restore black manhood, the Nation expresses great concern regarding the emasculation of black men, attributing this attitude to the failure of black men to prevent the sexual assault of black women by white men over the centuries. It expects men to be providers for their family. Women are expected to act as caretakers of the household and the children, and are cautioned against forming friendships with men. Outsiders often perceive the Nation&#x27;s women as being victims of male oppression and control.

The group&#x27;s leadership is overwhelmingly male, although several women rose to senior positions during the 1990s; in 1998 the Nation appointed its first woman minister, Ava Muhammad, as head of Mosque Number 15 in Georgia. Some Nation women still play an active role in their communities, sometimes challenging established gender norms in the organization.

The NOI strictly enforces heterosexual monogamy among its members and encourages sexual abstinence prior to marriage. Members seeking to court another are expected to inform the captain of their local Fruit of Islam or Muslim Girls Training branch about their intentions.
Men found to have beaten their wives are temporarily suspended from Nation membership. Divorce is discouraged but not forbidden. Children are expected to study hard, avoid street culture, and respect their elders.

Although Nation members are allowed to marry non-members, the group stipulates that they should only marry other black people, claiming that sex with white women emasculates black men. Birth control methods are criticised as an attempt by the white establishment to lower the black birthrate, although Farrakhan stated support for abortion in cases of rape, incest or where the woman&#x27;s life is endangered.
Same-sex relationships are condemned as immoral. Elijah Muhammad complained that schools, jails, and prisons were &quot;breeding dens of homosexuals,&quot; while Farrakhan banned gay men from his Million Man March, bringing accusations of homophobia.

== Practices ==

=== Services, prayer, and celebration ===
During the 1960s, the NOI&#x27;s places of worship were called both temples and mosques. As well as serving a religious function, these can also be used as a community center, bank, school, and child-care facility. The figure leading a temple is called the captain and will be a member of the Fruit of Islam subgroup.

Those attending meetings will sometimes be searched by members of the Fruit of Islam or the Muslim Girl&#x27;s Training group, who look for weapons and for objects like cosmetics and cigarettes which are disapproved of. After this, attendees are seen to their seats, usually rows of benches. The sexes are segregated during worship; women on the right and men on the left. The tone of Nation services is sombre and quiet. Services typically begin with the statement &quot;As-salamu alaykum&quot; (peace be upon you), with the congregation responding &quot;Wa &#x27;alaikum As-salam&quot; (and also upon you). Meetings at the mosque are both opened and closed with prayers, and the Nation&#x27;s &quot;national anthem&quot; may be played. A lecture is provided by a minister, who may also read verses from either the Bible or Qur&#x27;an.

In the late 1950s, Elijah Muhammad published a prayer manual outlining how his followers should pray five times a day. This involved an ablution beforehand, typically involving washing the hands, face, and ears, symbolically associating physical cleanliness with the purification of the body more broadly. Women are expected to cover their heads while praying. Elijah Muhammad stipulated that these prayers should be in English, although commented that in future he would explain how to do so in Arabic. In later articles, he explained that his followers should face towards Mecca as they pray, symbolising their journey toward the restoration of black greatness.

The most important date in the Nation&#x27;s year is February 26, Saviours&#x27; Day, which is believed to be the birthday of Fard Muhammad. This is the date on which the organization holds its annual national convention. Under Farrakhan, the Nation has also held a second Saviour&#x27;s Day each year, on October 7, to mark the birth of Elijah Muhammad. In addition to marking festivals, NOI members are encouraged to make the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca; Elijah Muhammad himself did so three times.

=== Lifestyle ===

The Nation requests that, as a declaration of mental emancipation, new members change any names inherited from slave-owners who owned their ancestors. This is not considered necessary if the new member has a name that is already African in origin. In the NOI&#x27;s early years, Wallace Fard Muhammad bestowed new names on followers for a $10 fee. During the mid-20th century the Nation began encouraging the use of &quot;X&quot; as a surname, symbolising what they regarded as the African-American&#x27;s identity as an &quot;ex-slave&quot; and also as a marker for their lost ancestral name. As this results in many individuals having the same name, numbers are added before the X to differentiate members (i.e. &quot;Charles 2X&quot;, &quot;Charles 3X&quot;).

The NOI encourages its followers to live highly disciplined and structured lifestyles; this conservative and ascetic approach has led to followers being called &quot;Black Puritans&quot;. Nation members are encouraged to obey the law, to seek gainful employment, to always be punctual, to avoid buying on credit, and to never gamble. 

Male members typically cut their hair short, sometimes shaving the head entirely, and do not usually wear beards. This signifies their willingness to abide to the Nation&#x27;s strict rules and reflect their renunciation of much personal choice. They are expected to wear suits with either ties or bowties; those who are part of the Fruit of Islam wear military-style uniforms, sometimes accompanied by a fez. Women are commanded to dress modestly; they are not permitted to wear trousers, are expected to wear long sleeves, and are encouraged to cover their heads. Cosmetics and the chemical or heat-based straightening of hair is also discouraged.

The NOI teaches that practitioners should keep fit and maintain a healthy diet, as part of which it espouses strict dietary rules. Vegetarianism is encouraged among members, although not obligatory, with Elijah Muhammad writing that &quot;meat was never intended for man to eat&quot;. In &quot;How to Eat to Live&quot;, Elijah Muhammad urged his followers to subsist primarily on fruit, vegetables, and certain grains, and to choose lamb if they must eat meat. Discouraged foods include dried fruits, white flour, additives, and fast food. Although its own produce is not wholly organic, the Nation is supportive of organic food and the avoidance of genetically modified crops, insecticides, and pesticides.

The NOI also encourages followers to avoid foods associated with the slave culture of the U.S., such as cornbread, catfish, and collard greens, deeming this cuisine to be undignified. Concerned about obesity and diabetes among African Americans, Elijah Muhammad urged his followers to restrict their caloric intake, ideally by eating only one meal a day. He claimed that this would extend the human lifespan and that those who ate only once every 24 hours would live for 150 years and that those who ate once every seven days would live for 1,050 years. Members are also encouraged to conduct regular three-day fasts, and to fast during the daylight for the entirety of December. The NOI also prohibits the use of alcohol, tobacco, and other recreational drugs, and has recommended the avoidance of vaccines for children.

=== Economic and educational independence ===
Espousing economic nationalism, the Nation follows the ideas of earlier thinkers like Booker T. Washington and Marcus Garvey in emphasizing the construction of African American infrastructure as a means of community empowerment. The Nation has created many companies, including the Salaam restaurant chain, the Shabazz bakeries, the Fashahnn Islamic clothing range, the Clean &#x27;N Fresh skin and haircare products, and Abundant Life Clinics. It also owns a mall in Chicago and clothing stores and food markets. These businesses provide income for the NOI and help tackle African American unemployment.

Since the 1980s, the Nation has also sought government contracts, and in 1988, it established the Security Agency Incorporated to provide FOI patrols for clients. In 1985 it launched its POWER (People Organized and Working for Economic Rebirth) project, designed to redirect black purchasing power toward black-owned businesses. It also seeks the collective economic advancement of African Americans through individual achievement; various women members created their own businesses, sometimes run from the home.
Some of its African-American anti-capitalist critics have derided the Nation&#x27;s economic approach as black capitalism. Farrakhan has responded that while socialism appeals to him, capitalism is the only feasible road to economic empowerment for African-Americans.

The Nation prioritises land ownership to increase food production and autonomy for African Americans; a commonly used slogan among the NOI is that &quot;The farm is the engine of our national life.&quot; It established a farm in White Cloud, Michigan in 1947, and by the early 1970s owned 20,000 acres of farm land in Michigan, Alabama, and Georgia. In 1994 Farrakhan&#x27;s Nation purchased 1,556 acres of rural South Georgia near Bronwood, naming it Muhammad Farms. Much of the produce grown here is distributed to NOI mosques around the country. NOI members also own urban gardens in various U.S. cities.

In 1991, the Nation launched its Three Year Economic Savings Plan, asking followers to send them $10 a month over the three years, money that would collectively allow the group to buy more farmland. For the Nation, acquiring land and growing food is regarded as a means of building self-determination for African Americans. It hopes to establish a system of black-owned farms through which to feed 40 million black people, with the stated aim of providing at least one healthy meal a day for every African American.

The NOI is highly critical of the U.S. school system, believing that, by being Eurocentric in its focus and concealing the achievement of non-white societies, it perpetuates white supremacy. To this end, the Nation has established its own educational system. Across the U.S. it has established Muhammad Universities of Islam; most of these are elementary schools, although a few also offer secondary education. These emphasize science, mathematics, black history, Arabic, and NOI doctrine; Farrakhan has said that they need to provide black children with &quot;an education to make them Gods&quot;. In these schools, boys and girls are taught separately; pupils are only given two weeks of vacation each year. Combating the idea that academic achievement entails &quot;acting white&quot;, the Nation has sought to associate hard work in school with pride in being black. As well as African-American pupils, some of these schools have also accepted students from Latino, Asian, and Pacific Island communities.

=== Civic engagement ===

The Nation has a longstanding record of involvement in civic, economic, and political activities. In some economically deprived areas, it has played a role in providing services that public institutions have not. In some areas with high African-American populations, the NOI has for instance engaged in door-to-door campaigns to raise awareness about local pollution, or used the Fruit of Islam to patrol neighborhoods as a community watchdog, especially to stop drug-dealing. The Nation has also urged African Americans not to rely on state welfare payments, arguing that this undermines the community&#x27;s ability to be self-sufficient.

The scholar Edward E. Curtis IV stated that the Nation is &quot;both highly religious and political at the same time&quot;, while Gardell noted that it &quot;formulated emphatic political demands&quot;. However, the NOI has urged its members to avoid mainstream electoral politics; throughout most of his leadership, Elijah Muhammad instructed his followers not to vote. Later, Farrakhan backed Jesse Jackson&#x27;s 1984 campaign to become the Democratic Party&#x27;s presidential candidate, and in 1990 three NOI candidates stood for election in the U.S. Although many outsiders have presumed the NOI to be a revolutionary movement, it has not sought to foment political revolution or violent social change, instead focusing its emphasis on shifting the consciousness of its members, encouraging them to focus on personal moral improvement, family building, and economic activity.

== History ==

=== Background ===
Islam had a presence in North America prior to the formation of the United States. African Muslims were among the Spanish expeditions that explored the continent during the early modern period, and were also among the many enslaved people transported there via the Atlantic slave trade of the 16th to 19th centuries. It is estimated that, at the time of the American Revolution in the 1760s–80s, approximately 15 percent of enslaved Africans and African Americans in the new United States were Muslim. Although Islam probably died out among the African-American community over subsequent generations, the notion that Islam was a religion historically associated with African Americans influenced the emergence of groups like the NOI in the early 20th century.

The Nation formed in the 1930s, when large numbers of African Americans were migrating from southern states to northern cities, and most of its early members were southern migrants who had settled in Detroit. The early NOI&#x27;s outlook was informed by various sources, including older forms of black nationalism, Garveyism, the Moorish Science Temple of America, the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, and Black Freemasonry. In particular, the scholar Dawn Gibson characterised the Nation as having been &quot;born out of a fusion&quot; between the ideas of Garveyism and the Moorish Science Temple.

A major influence on the NOI&#x27;s ideas was the Jamaican black nationalist Marcus Garvey, who lived in the U.S. from 1916 to 1927 and who formed the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA). Garvey&#x27;s economic nationalism and calls for black self-sufficiency and enterprise were a particular influence on the Nation, with the scholar Zoe Coley commenting that &quot;UNIA provided the cultural bedrock for the NOI&quot;. The Moorish Science Temple, an organization also promoting an idiosyncratic religion that described its teachings as Islam, would also be a key influence on the Nation. This had been established by the North Carolina-born African American Noble Drew Ali in Newark, New Jersey, in 1913. Drew Ali claimed that he was the reincarnation of both Jesus and Muhammad, and maintained that African Americans should refer to themselves as &quot;Moorish Americans&quot;, reflecting what he believed were their connections to the Islamic Moors of North Africa.

=== Wallace Fard Muhammad ===

The Nation of Islam was founded by Wallace Fard Muhammad, who appeared in Detroit in July 1930, when he began preaching his ideas among the city&#x27;s African Americans. Fard Muhammad claimed that he was an Arab from Mecca who had come to the United States on a mission to the African-American people, whom he called the &quot;Nation of Islam&quot;, to restore them to their original faith. The Nation has since taught that Fard Muhammad was Allah himself. They have claimed that he was born in Mecca on February 26, 1877, the son of a black father and white mother, a woman from the Caucasus Mountains named Baby Gee. Being half-white, the NOI maintain, was necessary for allowing him to move freely in white society.

Outside of the Nation, various theories have been proposed as to Fard Muhammad&#x27;s true identity. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) later noted that Fard Muhammad&#x27;s fingerprints matched those of Wallie D. Ford, a white man who had a record of arrests and had served a three-year sentence in San Quentin Prison for drug charges. Ford had been released in May 1929, a year before the appearance of Fard Muhammad. The NOI reject the identification of Fard Muhammad as Ford, claiming that the FBI forged the fingerprint evidence. There have also been suggestions made that, on his release from prison, Fard had joined the Moorish Science Temple of America and subsequently forged his Nation as a breakaway faction.

Fard Muhammad&#x27;s following grew rapidly. He held meetings three days a week which attracted 7,000 to 8,000 people, some of them former members of the Moorish Science Temple. Fard Muhammad wrote two manuals, the &quot;Secret Ritual of the Nation of Islam&quot; and the &quot;Teaching for the Lost Found Nation of Islam in a Mathematical Way&quot;. He also urged his followers to listen to the radio sermons of the Watch Tower Society and Baptist fundamentalists. He established a bureaucratic administration within the Nation, its own system of schools, and the Fruit of Islam (FOI) paramilitary wing for men and the Muslim Girls Training School for women.

In 1931, an African-American man named Elijah Poole became a disciple of Fard Muhammad. He had been born to a poor family in Bold Springs, Georgia in 1897; his father was a sharecropper and Baptist preacher. In 1923, Poole and his wife Clara relocated to Detroit, where they settled in the black ghetto of Paradise Valley. There, he joined Garvey&#x27;s UNIA, and worked in industrial plants before becoming unemployed amid the Great Depression. On joining the Nation of Islam, Fard Muhammad gave Poole the new name of Elijah Karriem.

In 1932 the Detroit Police Department arrested an NOI member for a murder which they claimed was a human sacrifice, generating growing press coverage. The police then raided the Nation&#x27;s headquarters and arrested Fard Muhammad. He was soon released; the killer was declared insane. After this incident, Fard Muhammad gave Elijah Poole increasing powers, declaring him Supreme Minister of the Nation and renaming him Elijah Muhammad. In 1933, Elijah Muhammad then set up a new temple on Chicago&#x27;s South Side. Fard Muhammad was arrested several further times; in September 1933 he was arrested for disorderly conduct in Chicago, which is his last known verified whereabouts. In 1934, Fard Muhammad disappeared without notifying his followers or designating a successor. Rumours spread that he had moved to Europe or that he had been killed, either by the police or by former followers.

=== Elijah Muhammad&#x27;s leadership ===
With Fard Muhammad gone, Elijah Muhammad became head of the Nation. It was under his leadership &quot;that the NOI&#x27;s theology crystallized&quot;. Elijah Muhammad claimed that Fard Muhammad had been the latest Allah and that he had now returned to his own realm, with Elijah Muhammad remaining on Earth as his messenger. His wife Clara took on the identity of Khadija. Elijah Muhammad relocated the NOI&#x27;s headquarters to Chicago, and embarked on seven years traveling the US to promote his religion, especially along the East Coast.

During the Second World War, the FBI started monitoring the Nation; FBI informants reported pro-Japanese sentiment being expressed at its meetings. Many Nation members refused the military draft and in September 1942 the FBI arrested 65 NOI members, including Elijah Muhammad, for doing so. Elijah Muhammad was released in August 1946, at which point he found the Nation&#x27;s membership had declined. He lived at a villa named The Palace in Chicago&#x27;s Hyde Park area, and in winter moved to a large ranch outside Phoenix, Arizona. Increasingly exposed to Sunni Islam, Elijah Muhammad drew more elements from it into the Nation, and also undertook the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca three times, in 1959, 1967, and 1971.

The group&#x27;s membership grew during the latter part of the 1950s. In 1959, the FBI encouraged the media to attack the Nation, hoping to discredit it. It was in this year that a documentary about the group, &quot;The Hate that Hate Produced&quot;, was screened. This press criticism backfired, giving the group significant attention and assisting its recruitment. The NOI became a foil for the civil rights movement, which presented the group as evidence for the harmful effect that poor race relations were having in the U.S. In 1962, Los Angeles police raided one of the Nation&#x27;s temples; one member was killed and seven injured, attracting national press attention. In 1963, a schism in the Nation&#x27;s Temple Number 7 in Harlem led to the creation of a new group, the Five Percent Nation of Islam.

One of the Nation&#x27;s most significant members at this time was Malcolm X. Born Malcolm Little, he discovered the Nation while in prison; following his release in 1952 he rose swiftly through its hierarchy. In 1960, he launched the newspaper &quot;Muhammad Speaks&quot;, which reached a circulation of over 600,000. In 1963, he became the Nation&#x27;s first National Representative. He also travelled internationally; in Britain, he met with Michael de Freitas, who converted to the Nation and created a British branch. Another prominent NOI member was the boxer Muhammad Ali. Born Cassius Clay, he encountered the Nation in 1961 and received significant media criticism after announcing his membership of the group in 1964.

Malcolm X went on the hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, where he came across white Muslims, an experience that shifted him from his total hostility to white people. In light of these experiences, in March 1964 he left the Nation and became a Sunni Muslim. He began denouncing Elijah Muhammad for his extramarital affairs and accused the Nation of holding back the revolutionary potential of African Americans. In February 1965, Malcolm X was assassinated in New York. The following year, three members of the NOI were convicted of the killing. There was press speculation that the Nation&#x27;s leaders were complicit, something which damaged the group&#x27;s reputation; recruitment declined in the latter half of the 1960s. As the Black Power movement emerged in the late 1960s, many observers saw the Nation as its forerunner and a vanguard, with the Nation claiming that it had inspired the movement.

In 1972, the NOI bought the St. Constantine Greek Orthodox Church in Chicago and transformed it into their headquarters temple, Mosque Maryam, and by 1974 it had either temples or study groups in every U.S. state and the District of Columbia. Relations with law enforcement remained strained; in 1972, a New York City policeman was shot and killed during a search of a NOI Mosque in Harlem. It had continued to face opposition from the FBI, who engaged in a renewed counterintelligence project to destabilise it from the late 1960s. This included sowing discord between the Nation and the Black Panther Party, encouraging several incidents in which Black Panthers attacked NOI newspaper sellers.
The NOI also engaged in recurring conflicts with other Islamic groups that had predominantly black memberships. It argued with Hamaas Abdul Khaalis&#x27; Hanafi Muslim group, and in 1973 a group of Nation of Islam members killed seven Hanafi Muslims, five of them children. The Nation&#x27;s leadership denied sanctioning this attack.

=== Wallace Muhammad and the NOI&#x27;s transition to Sunni Islam ===

In 1975, Elijah Muhammad died and was succeeded by his son, Wallace Muhammad. Wallace Muhammad had had a strained relationship with his father and his father&#x27;s teachings; while imprisoned in the early 1960s he had moved closer to Sunni Islam and had left the Nation on several occasions during the 1960s and 1970s, only re-joining in 1974. As leader, Wallace Muhammad launched what he called a &quot;Second Resurrection&quot; in the movement.

Wallace Muhammad increasingly aligned the group with Sunni Islam, rejecting many of the Nation&#x27;s idiosyncratic teachings, including its claim that Fard Muhammad was God, that Elijah Muhammad had been a prophet, and its belief in the Myth of Yakub and the Mother Plane. He retained the Nation&#x27;s themes of black pride, healthy diets, sexual modesty, and economic self-determination. &quot;Temples&quot; were renamed &quot;mosques&quot;, while &quot;ministers&quot; were renamed &quot;imams&quot;. The FOI was disbanded, with Wallace calling it a &quot;hooligan outfit&quot;. Black nationalism was abandoned, and the ban on white people joining the Nation was lifted.

In November 1976, the Nation was renamed the World Community of al-Islam in the West, and in April 1978 it became the American Muslim Mission. Wallace Muhammad also renamed himself, first to Warith Deen and then to Warithuddin Muhammad. Wallace Muhammad claimed that these changes were in accordance with his father&#x27;s intentions; he claimed to be in contact with Fard Muhammad, and that the founder had established the NOI&#x27;s idiosyncratic beliefs as a means of gradually introducing Islamic teachings to African Americans, with the ultimate intention of bringing them to Sunni Islam.

Wallace Muhammad claimed that the Nation&#x27;s old belief that the white man was the Devil referred to mental whiteness, a state that is rebelling against Allah, rather than light-skinned people themselves. Most mosques remained with Wallace Muhammad during these reforms but some mosques rejected them, seeking to return to the group&#x27;s original teachings; small splinter groups emerged in Detroit, Atlanta, and Baltimore. In 1985, Wallace Muhammad disbanded the organization, telling his followers to affiliate instead with their local mosques.

=== Louis Farrakhan&#x27;s revival ===
The leading figure in rejecting Wallace Muhammad&#x27;s reforms was Louis Farrakhan, who, with other disaffected members began to rebuild the Nation of Islam in 1977. Born in the Bronx to Caribbean migrants, Farrakhan had been a nightclub singer prior to joining the original Nation in 1955. In 1964 he had become minister of the NOI&#x27;s Harlem Temple and in 1967 a national representative of Elijah Muhammad. Under Wallace Muhammad&#x27;s leadership, Farrakhan was relocated to Chicago, widely seen as a demotion.

Farrakhan presented himself as Elijah Muhammad&#x27;s true successor; his followers described Wallace Muhammad&#x27;s leadership as &quot;the Fall&quot;. Farrakhan&#x27;s NOI spent the first several years focusing on rebuilding; the Fruit of Islam was re-established. In 1979, Farrakhan established a newspaper, &quot;The Final Call&quot;, which by 1994 had a circulation of 500,000. In 1981, Farrakhan&#x27;s Nation held its first convention, and its membership began to increase rapidly in the mid-1980s. It was able to buy much of the property owned by its predecessor, including the Chicago Palace and the Stoney Island Mosque.

Farrakhan claimed that in 1985, at Tepotzotlán in Mexico, he was teleported aboard the Mother Plane and there was given advice on the future of the Nation. Masonic elements and numerology came to play an important part in Farrakhan&#x27;s speeches. Farrakhan&#x27;s Nation expanded its international network, including building links in Africa; particularly strong links were built between Farrakhan and Ghanaian President Jerry Rawlings. Under Farrakhan, the NOI adopted more elements of mainstream Islamic practice, although not to the extent of Wallace Muhammad.

Although Farrakhan was critical of the heavy use of themes such as sex, violence, and drugs in rap and hip hop music, during the 1980s and 1990s artists influenced by the Nation who were active in these genres played a role in spreading the Nation&#x27;s message. Farrakhan had grown concerned by the growth of gang violence, especially among African-American youths, and in 1989 launched his &quot;Stop the Killing&quot; campaign to combat it. He played a key role in getting two of the country&#x27;s largest gangs, the Bloods and the Crips, to sign a ceasefire in May 1992. Later in the 1990s, Farrakhan&#x27;s NOI opened its first mosques in Britain.

Farrakhan organized the Million Man March through Washington DC in 1995 which united a range of African-American groups to counter negative portrayals of black manhood; it was the largest black demonstration in U.S. history. During the 1990s, Farrakhan was also introduced to the ideas of the Church of Scientology and in 2006 he was honoured at the Church-sponsored Ebony Awakening Awards.
In 2010, Farrakhan announced his embrace of Dianetics and has actively encouraged NOI members to undergo auditing from the Church. Farrakhan praised L. Ron Hubbard, founder of Dianetics and Scientology, stating that his ideas were &quot;exceedingly valuable to every Caucasian person on this Earth&quot;, presenting auditing as a method by which whites could purify themselves of their inherent badness. NOI Sister Charlene Muhammad received the &quot;Dianetics Auditor of the Year&quot; Award 2018.

== Organization ==

=== Leadership and financing ===

As of 2020, the Nation consisted of ten ministries: for Spiritual Development, Agriculture, Education, Information, Health, Trade and Commerce, Defense, Justice, Arts and Culture, and Science and Technology. It also established a shadow ministry, forming the prototype for the governance of the future state it hopes to lead. Responsible for the group&#x27;s national security is the supreme captain, one of the most powerful roles in the organization. Family ties are an important element of the NOI&#x27;s senior ranks; various members of Elijah Muhammad&#x27;s family were for instance married to members of Farrakhan&#x27;s family.

The Fruit of Islam (FOI) is a group of men within the NOI. FOI members are trained in military protocol, wrestling, boxing, and judo. They are tasked with protecting NOI leaders, temples, and other NOI property and are expected to strictly follow NOI rules. The Nation has also established Muslim Girls&#x27; Training for women, whose members receive lessons in domestic skills and self defense tactics.

The NOI says that its finances come primarily from donations and its businesses. At the start of the 1960s, it was reported that members were expected to donate a set part of their earnings to the group each year; as of 1952, this reportedly constituted a third of a member&#x27;s annual income. In 1976, Wallace Muhammad estimated the Nation&#x27;s net worth to be $46 million, although revealed it had a severe cash flow problem, owed millions in back taxes to the Internal Revenue Service, and was making a loss with its agricultural operations. Although the Nation does not disclose the extent of its financial resources, in the 1990s its assets were estimated to total $80,000,000.

=== Press and media ===

From its early days, the Nation used print media to promote its ideas, including the magazines &quot;Muhammad Speaks&quot; (1961–75) and &quot;The Final Call&quot;. &quot;Muhammad Speaks&quot; included contributions not only from Nation members, but also from leftist and progressive writers in the African American community. Members were encouraged to sell these magazines on street corners or sometimes door-to-door in African-American-majority areas. These sellers were given sales quotas to fulfill and were sometimes punished if they failed to meet them. The Nation&#x27;s first magazine aimed at women, &quot;Righteous Living&quot;, appeared in the early 1990s. As well as running shows on radio stations, and distributing videos, the Nation has also established websites and a presence across many social media outlets.

=== Domestic and international affiliations ===

In the 1930s and 1940s, the Nation had links with Satokata Takahashi, a Japanese man promoting pro-Japanese sentiment among African-American groups. Takahashi lived with an officer of the Nation for a time and also married a former member. Elijah Muhammad declared that Takahashi was teaching African Americans that &quot;the Japanese were brothers and friends of the American Negroes&quot;. During the Second World War, in which the U.S. fought against Japan, many Nation members expressed pro-Japanese sentiment and refused the draft, stating that they would not fight people they regarded as fellow members of the Original Asiatic Race.

Under Elijah Muhammad, the Nation established relations with various Muslim countries, regarded as strategic allies in its conflict with the U.S. government. In 1957, Malcolm X organized a conference on colonialism attended by delegates from Egypt, Iraq, Sudan, and Morocco, while Elijah Muhammad met with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1959 and the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi in 1972. For many years, Gaddafi was the Nation&#x27;s most prominent international supporter and offered them assistance in various forms. His government gave the Nation a $3 million interest-free loan in 1972 to purchase its Chicago South Side centre, and another $5 million interest-free loan in 1985 to fund its black enterprise program. It later offered Farrakhan&#x27;s Nation $1 billion, which the U.S. government sought to block. On taking control, Farrakhan also pursued links with various Muslim-majority countries, visiting Ghana and Libya in 1985, and embarking on a larger tour of Africa and the Middle East in 1996, meeting with leaders including Gaddafi, Ghana&#x27;s Jerry Rawlings, Nigeria&#x27;s Sani Abacha, South Africa&#x27;s Nelson Mandela, and Iraq&#x27;s Saddam Hussein. On that tour, he also attended annual celebrations of the Iranian Revolution in Tehran; he visited Iran again in 2018.

Like Garvey&#x27;s UNIA before them, the Nation built links with white nationalist and other far-right white groups on the basis of their shared belief in racial separatism. Malcolm X revealed that the Nation had held meetings with representatives of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and the American Nazi Party (ANP). The ANP&#x27;s leader George Lincoln Rockwell attended an NOI rally in Washington DC in 1961 and then spoke at the Nation&#x27;s St Saviour&#x27;s Day rally in Chicago in 1962. Links with the white far-right continued under Farrakhan&#x27;s Nation, with Tom Metzger of the White Aryan Resistance donating money to the Nation in 1985 and expressing approval of its separatist aims. During the 1980s, the Nation also had a supportive relationship with the British National Front as the latter&#x27;s Strasserite leadership were endorsing a united front against multi-racial society. During the 1990s, the Nation collaborated with members of the far-right LaRouche movement as part of their shared opposition to the U.S.-led Gulf War. These links have not prevented some white far-right opposition to the NOI; in 1993 the Fourth Reich Skinheads were revealed to have plotted to kill Farrakhan.

==Demographics==

The Nation does not publish its membership numbers, and in the past had a high turnover, with some members developing into conventional Sunni Muslims. Under Fard Muhammad&#x27;s leadership, it reached a total of approximately 8,000 members. By 1960, its membership was being estimated at between 30,000 and 100,000, the latter being supported by the scholar C. Eric Lincoln in his 1961 study of the group. In 2007, the scholar of religion Lawrence A. Mamiya suggested that there were then around 50,000 members of the Nation. 

While based in the U.S., the Nation has also established either a presence or influence among African diaspora groups elsewhere; in 2006, the scholar Nuri Tinaz suggested that the Nation &quot;may have&quot; up to 2,000 members and sympathisers in the United Kingdom. Not all members are of African heritage; although, prior to 1975, only a small number of Hispanic American and Native American individuals were members of the NOI, under Farrakhan the Nation put greater efforts into recruiting from these groups.

In its early decades, the Nation&#x27;s appeal was strongest in poor African-American neighborhoods, but over the course of the 20th century the NOI&#x27;s membership became increasingly middle-class. Gardell suggested that this was partly due to the Nation&#x27;s focus on hard work and rigid morality, which helped improve the economic situation of its members, coupled with the broader growth of the African-American middle class in this period. He also believed that the changing class composition, and with it a less hostile attitude to white-dominant American society, assisted the shift to Sunnism under Wallace Muhammad in the 1970s. 

===Conversion===

The NOI refers to its proselytising efforts as &quot;fishing for the dead&quot;. To this end, the Nation holds regular open meetings, mass rallies, street-corner lectures, and prison outreach, seeking new recruits in &quot;jails and penitentiaries, pool halls and barbershops, college campuses and street corners&quot;. It has used books by Elijah Muhammad, radio broadcasts, and audio-recorded speeches to promote its message. Through this, it has sought to attract unemployed, disenchanted black youth, as well as disenfranchised Christians.

The NOI&#x27;s recruitment efforts have proven particularly effective among drug addicts and incarcerated criminals. The Nation was active in prison ministry by the 1950s, with its numbers of imprisoned followers rising steadily in the latter part of that decade; many members, including Malcolm X, were recruited while in prison. Farrakhan stepped up the prison ministry in the 1980s in response to the growing incarceration of young black men under Reagan&#x27;s administration. By the early 1960s, prison authorities were raising concerns that the NOI was exacerbating racial tensions in prisons. Some incarcerated members have claimed to have experienced discriminatory treatment from prison authorities because of their religion, and in some cases have filed legal action as a result.

Ula Y. Taylor, a scholar of African American studies, suggested that female members were attracted by the Nation&#x27;s offer of a &quot;stable family life&quot; and the opportunity to get involved in &quot;the development of a new black nation&quot;. The historian Zoe Colley thought that it offered men living in poverty the &quot;opportunity to reclaim their manhood and sense of pride&quot;, thus partly explaining its appeal. It also attracted followers with its offer of a separate schooling system where African-American children would not suffer the racism found in the mainstream public school system.

== Accusations of prejudice ==
Criticism of the Nation has come from both non-black and black individuals, amongst them African-American civil rights activists like the NAACP&#x27;s Roy Wilkins, who considers the NOI a hate group. The group has repeatedly been accused of stirring up racial hatred against whites, as for instance in a 1993 speech at Kean College, when the NOI representative Khalid Abdul Muhammad stated that White South Africans should be given 24 hours to leave their country, with any remaining after that point being killed. Amongst the Nation&#x27;s critics are the Southern Poverty Law Center, which accuses it of promoting black supremacism as well as anti-LGBT rhetoric.

The NOI has also repeatedly faced accusations of antisemitism. In the 1980s, Farrakhan referred to Judaism as a &quot;dirty religion&quot; and described Adolf Hitler as a &quot;very great man&quot; who &quot;raised Germany up from nothing&quot;. Farrakhan dismissed the claim that the Jews are God&#x27;s Chosen People as &quot;ridiculous&quot;, insisting that this role is taken by the black race. At his Kean College speech, Khalid Mohammad referred to the &quot;Jew-nited Nations&quot; in &quot;Jew York City&quot; and stated that the Jewish people deserved Hitler. The NOI Health Minister Abdul Alim Muhammad accused Jewish doctors of injecting blacks with the AIDS virus; in 2020 Ishmael Muhammad claimed that Jews were receiving different vaccines for COVID-19 from other people. In 1991, the NOI published an anonymously authored book, &quot;The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews&quot;, which claimed that Jews were disproportionately responsible for the Atlantic slave trade.

Among those accusing the NOI of antisemitism has been the Anti-Defamation League (ADL), a Jewish organization that has placed the group under surveillance, lobbied against it, and attempted to block its enterprises. Other Jewish groups have also been critical of the NOI; four Jewish organizations withdrew their sponsorship of the Parliament of World Religions when it invited Farrakhan to speak, while Jewish student groups have picketed Farrakhan&#x27;s speeches on university campuses. Far-right Jewish groups have gone further; the Jewish Defense League organized a 1985 &quot;Death to Farrakhan&quot; march, while the Jewish Defense Organization included Farrakhan on its kill list.

== Reception and influence ==

The Nation became the largest black nationalist organization in the United States. At the start of the 21st century, Barrett called the NOI &quot;one of the most visible and controversial black religions&quot;, while in the 1990s Gardell termed it the &quot;most renowned and controversial&quot; of the African-American Muslim groups. The Nation&#x27;s teachings have also influenced other religious groups, such as the Ansaaru Allah Community, and the Word of Faith movement. 

The African-American studies scholar Priscilla McCutcheon noted that although the NOI remained comparatively small, it had &quot;a wide discursive reach&quot;, while in 1996 Gardell commented that its influence among black youth &quot;far exceeds&quot; its membership. Among those influenced by it have been hip hop and rap artists including Public Enemy, Ice Cube, Kam, The Skinny Boys, and Sister Souljah. The Nation has cultivated a sense of pride among many African Americans, and its role in confronting gang violence, drugs, and poverty within African-American communities has earned it respect. The sociologist A.A. Akom opined that the NOI had a reputation even among non-Muslim African Americans of &quot;speaking truth to power&quot;; a 1994 &quot;Time&quot;/CNN poll found that two-thirds of African-Americans who knew of Farrakhan had favorable views of him. Similarly positive assessments of the Nation have been observed among black communities in Britain.

Although throughout the 20th century the Nation was generally unwilling to open itself up to study, the NOI has been the subject of much scholarly attention. Initial research, largely undertaken by historians and sociologists in the late 1950s and 1960s, was often hostile or dismissive; research influenced by disciplines like religious studies and gender studies followed later. Those outside the movement have often seen its teachings as illogical and irrational; various historical and scientific errors have been identified in its leaders&#x27; claims. Mainstream scientists, and much of the wider public, regard its mythological accounts as being pseudo-scientific, while critics have also presented its founder, Fard Muhammad, as a petty criminal who established the group to swindle his followers.

Mainstream Islamic groups maintain that the Nation&#x27;s members are not really Muslim. Most mainstream Islamic organisations in the U.S. have distanced themselves from the Nation, as have smaller Muslim groups like the Ahmadiyya. Elijah Muhammad dismissed these objections by claiming that the &quot;Old Islam&quot; of his critics was &quot;led by white people&quot;. Farrakhan responded to such rejection with his own critique of the mainstream Islamic world, accusing it of racism, of being obedient to the U.S. government, of engaging in sectarian violence, and of excessively relying on the &quot;hadith&quot; rather than the Quran.

== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* 
* Nation of Islam profile at the World Religion and Spirituality Project (WRSP)
* Messenger Elijah Muhammad Web Resources Center, Online books, audio, and video
* Nation of Islam-affiliated &quot;Final Call&quot; newspaper website
* Official Website of the United Kingdom Branch of the Nation of Islam
* Federal Bureau of Prisons &quot;Technical Reference Manual on Inmate Beliefs and Practices&quot;
* FBI file on the Nation of Islam</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220222" start="4" end="19" title="Nation of Islam" label="Nation of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q220222" start="21" end="24" title="Nation of Islam" label="NOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q581139" start="86" end="107" title="Wallace Fard Muhammad" label="Wallace Fard Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="186" end="203" title="black nationalism" label="black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="237" end="253" title="African diaspora" label="African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="269" end="286" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="412" end="430" title="Islamic schools and branches#African-American movements" label="Islamic traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="432" end="452" title="Religious studies" label="Scholars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="474" end="496" title="new religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="590" end="595" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="703" end="709" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538822" start="733" end="749" title="Tribe of Shabazz" label="Tribe of Shabazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="808" end="823" title="Person of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331244" start="869" end="874" title="Yakub (Nation of Islam)" label="Yakub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511034" start="1265" end="1275" title="Black separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="1279" end="1290" title="Millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1360" end="1369" title="Spacecraft" label="spaceship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="1471" end="1477" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="1515" end="1521" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="1526" end="1532" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1740" end="1747" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086661" start="1787" end="1801" title="Noble Drew Ali" label="Noble Drew Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400211" start="1809" end="1842" title="Moorish Science Temple of America" label="Moorish Science Temple of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524522" start="1874" end="1883" title="Garveyism" label="Garveyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1913" end="1924" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q345182" start="2008" end="2023" title="Elijah Muhammad" label="Elijah Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="2273" end="2282" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="2297" end="2309" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2357" end="2388" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030011" start="2476" end="2496" title="Warith Deen Mohammed" label="Warith Deen Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="2543" end="2554" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329010" start="2575" end="2611" title="American Society of Muslims" label="World Community of Islam in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q49075" start="2713" end="2728" title="Louis Farrakhan" label="Louis Farrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q284451" start="2856" end="2865" title="Dianetics" label="Dianetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="3188" end="3215" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="3224" end="3246" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q795000" start="3274" end="3291" title="Black supremacy" label="black supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233801" start="3292" end="3302" title="hate group" label="hate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="3332" end="3344" title="white people" label="white people"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="3346" end="3358" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774220" start="3364" end="3382" title="anti-LGBT rhetoric" label="anti-LGBT rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="3518" end="3540" title="new religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="3704" end="3719" title="social movement" label="social movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784735" start="3793" end="3805" title="UFO religion" label="UFO religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="3997" end="4008" title="Western esotericism" label="esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q581139" start="4127" end="4148" title="Wallace Fard Muhammad" label="Wallace Fard Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49075" start="4237" end="4252" title="Louis Farrakhan" label="Louis Farrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="4477" end="4490" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="4525" end="4534" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="4989" end="4998" title="Religious text" label="holy text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="5156" end="5161" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="5170" end="5175" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="5297" end="5312" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q345182" start="5662" end="5677" title="Elijah Muhammad" label="Elijah Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="5869" end="5875" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5972" end="5978" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q176770" start="6461" end="6473" title="Five Pillars of Islam" label="Five Pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="6697" end="6705" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="6917" end="6926" title="Heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q901150" start="6958" end="6963" title="Shirk (Islam)" label="shirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081767" start="6971" end="6980" title="Islam and blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461659" start="7222" end="7245" title="Sociology of religion" label="sociologist of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240583" start="7246" end="7262" title="David V. Barrett" label="David V. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="7292" end="7300" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="7469" end="7481" title="Monotheism" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="7581" end="7593" title="Polytheism" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="7625" end="7630" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="8473" end="8478" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="9165" end="9175" title="Telepathy" label="telepathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="9647" end="9653" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="10292" end="10296" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="10981" end="10990" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="11029" end="11040" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="11054" end="11063" title="dinosaurs" label="dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="11606" end="11611" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="11613" end="11620" title="Gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="11754" end="11765" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263850" start="12104" end="12122" title="Afro-textured hair" label="Afro-textured hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="12257" end="12265" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="12672" end="12687" title="people of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="12782" end="12791" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331244" start="13117" end="13130" title="Yakub (Nation of Islam)" label="myth of Yakub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190053" start="13552" end="13558" title="Patmos" label="Patmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="14283" end="14293" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="14331" end="14337" title="racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="14342" end="14351" title="Scientific racism" label="racialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8392" start="14619" end="14629" title="bestiality" label="bestiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990155" start="14785" end="14789" title="Moses in Islam" label="Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="14791" end="14796" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="14872" end="14877" title="Jesus of Nazareth" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="15030" end="15037" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="16472" end="16479" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="16928" end="16932" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q584548" start="17117" end="17129" title="Anti-Zionism" label="anti-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="17211" end="17222" title="Millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="17261" end="17270" title="Eschatology" label="end times"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="17296" end="17307" title="eschatology" label="eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="17323" end="17341" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573644" start="17671" end="17683" title="Merkabah mysticism" label="the Merkabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178390" start="17704" end="17719" title="Book of Ezekiel" label="Book of Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="18312" end="18320" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029326" start="18351" end="18367" title="Tynetta Muhammad" label="Tynetta Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="19327" end="19355" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="19550" end="19561" title="Black Power" label="Black Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341353" start="19606" end="19621" title="Mattias Gardell" label="Mattias Gardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511034" start="20125" end="20141" title="Black separatism" label="black separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="20366" end="20388" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="20397" end="20455" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="21347" end="21357" title="theocracy" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="21378" end="21390" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="21632" end="21643" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066144" start="22421" end="22431" title="Matrifocal family" label="matrifocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="24237" end="24245" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581794" start="24513" end="24530" title="Million Man March" label="Million Man March"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="24556" end="24566" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847734" start="24987" end="24998" title="Body search" label="be searched"/>
<link wikidata="Q212695" start="25419" end="25436" title="As-salamu alaykum" label="As-salamu alaykum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428348" start="26517" end="26535" title="Saviours&amp;#x27; Day" label="Saviours&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="26879" end="26883" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q189862" start="28474" end="28477" title="Fez (hat)" label="fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="28851" end="28864" title="Vegetarianism" label="Vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253181" start="29014" end="29032" title="How to Eat to Live" label="How to Eat to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q81799" start="29249" end="29258" title="fast food" label="fast food"/>
<link wikidata="Q10480676" start="29299" end="29306" title="Organic product" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503477" start="29370" end="29396" title="genetically modified crops" label="genetically modified crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108866" start="29533" end="29542" title="cornbread" label="cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="29544" end="29551" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14879985" start="29557" end="29571" title="collard greens" label="collard greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="30122" end="30150" title="Teetotalism" label="prohibits the use of alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641686" start="30215" end="30236" title="Vaccine hesitancy" label="avoidance of vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="30308" end="30328" title="economic nationalism" label="economic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="30384" end="30404" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="30766" end="30773" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q271969" start="31185" end="31201" title="purchasing power" label="purchasing power"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="31446" end="31461" title="Anti-capitalism" label="anti-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922285" start="31522" end="31538" title="black capitalism" label="black capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="31575" end="31584" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517117" start="31915" end="31936" title="White Cloud, Michigan" label="White Cloud, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439391" start="32118" end="32126" title="Bronwood, Georgia" label="Bronwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169301" start="32138" end="32152" title="Muhammad Farms" label="Muhammad Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="32577" end="32595" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="32891" end="32902" title="Eurocentrism" label="Eurocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="34885" end="34898" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255748" start="34906" end="34919" title="1984 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1984 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="34934" end="34950" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="35431" end="35444" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674073" start="35490" end="35505" title="African Muslims" label="African Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238120" start="35521" end="35540" title="Spanish expeditions to the Pacific Northwest" label="Spanish expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="35580" end="35599" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="35672" end="35692" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="35765" end="35784" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="36245" end="36294" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="migrating from southern states to northern cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524522" start="36483" end="36492" title="Garveyism" label="Garveyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400211" start="36498" end="36531" title="Moorish Science Temple of America" label="Moorish Science Temple of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="36537" end="36561" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238196" start="36567" end="36584" title="Black Freemasonry" label="Black Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="36839" end="36852" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="36913" end="36983" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League" label="Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="37427" end="37441" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086661" start="37464" end="37478" title="Noble Drew Ali" label="Noble Drew Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="37482" end="37500" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="37751" end="37756" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="37880" end="37887" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="38391" end="38409" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="38632" end="38663" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912407" start="38834" end="38852" title="San Quentin Prison" label="San Quentin Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506405" start="39820" end="39834" title="Fruit of Islam" label="Fruit of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939074" start="40041" end="40062" title="Bold Springs, Georgia" label="Bold Springs, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920406" start="40222" end="40237" title="Paradise Valley, Detroit" label="Paradise Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="40344" end="40360" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q131632413" start="40517" end="40525" title="Killing of James J. Smith" label="a murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="40551" end="40566" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42034" start="41753" end="41760" title="Khadija bint Khuwaylid" label="Khadija"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41943" end="41959" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143666" start="42375" end="42399" title="Hyde Park, Chicago" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="42589" end="42593" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411864" start="42869" end="42896" title="The Hate that Hate Produced" label="The Hate that Hate Produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="43050" end="43071" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609449" start="43435" end="43463" title="Five-Percent Nation" label="Five Percent Nation of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="43533" end="43542" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712707" start="43912" end="43930" title="Michael X" label="Michael de Freitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="44033" end="44045" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="44218" end="44222" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q21260516" start="44921" end="44941" title="Black Power movement" label="Black Power movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q690130" start="45222" end="45235" title="Mosque Maryam" label="Mosque Maryam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575029" start="45422" end="45483" title="1972 Harlem mosque incident" label="was shot and killed during a search of a NOI Mosque in Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="45683" end="45702" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935879" start="45917" end="45937" title="Hamaas Abdul Khaalis" label="Hamaas Abdul Khaalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="45944" end="45950" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097715" start="45977" end="46039" title="1973 Hanafi Muslim massacre" label="a group of Nation of Islam members killed seven Hanafi Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030011" start="46257" end="46273" title="Warith Deen Muhammad" label="Wallace Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="46432" end="46443" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49075" start="48577" end="48592" title="Louis Farrakhan" label="Louis Farrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="48684" end="48693" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905161" start="49696" end="49707" title="Tepotzotlán" label="Tepotzotlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="49838" end="49848" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="50084" end="50098" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="50323" end="50326" title="rap" label="rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="50331" end="50344" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q828498" start="50750" end="50756" title="Bloods" label="Bloods"/>
<link wikidata="Q486682" start="50765" end="50770" title="Crips" label="Crips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581794" start="50908" end="50925" title="Million Man March" label="Million Man March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="51177" end="51198" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q284451" start="51319" end="51328" title="Dianetics" label="Dianetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347046" start="51380" end="51388" title="Auditing (Scientology)" label="auditing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="51424" end="51438" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="52595" end="52599" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942902" start="52757" end="52784" title="Muslim Girls Training" label="Muslim Girls&amp;#x27; Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="53339" end="53363" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="54391" end="54403" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426343" start="54513" end="54531" title="Satokata Takahashi" label="Satokata Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="55429" end="55447" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="55478" end="55493" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="56177" end="56191" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q207942" start="56208" end="56219" title="Sani Abacha" label="Sani Abacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="56241" end="56255" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="56273" end="56287" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="56347" end="56365" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="56369" end="56375" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="56474" end="56491" title="white nationalism" label="white nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="56664" end="56676" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="56691" end="56710" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="56740" end="56763" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113455" start="56972" end="56983" title="Tom Metzger" label="Tom Metzger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781344" start="56991" end="57013" title="White Aryan Resistance" label="White Aryan Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q158093" start="57180" end="57194" title="National Front (UK)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q701333" start="57216" end="57227" title="Strasserism" label="Strasserite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084556" start="57371" end="57388" title="LaRouche movement" label="LaRouche movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57537" end="57559" title="Fourth Reich Skinheads" label="Fourth Reich Skinheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006427" start="57986" end="58001" title="C. Eric Lincoln" label="C. Eric Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q383968" start="60697" end="60721" title="Black studies" label="African American studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738344" start="61463" end="61474" title="Roy Wilkins" label="Roy Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233801" start="61500" end="61510" title="hate group" label="hate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382148" start="61631" end="61643" title="Kean College" label="Kean College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740491" start="61673" end="61694" title="Khalid Abdul Muhammad" label="Khalid Abdul Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q785378" start="61707" end="61727" title="White South Africans" label="White South Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="61869" end="61896" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="62027" end="62039" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="62077" end="62084" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="62131" end="62143" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156645" start="62272" end="62296" title="Jews as the chosen people" label="God&amp;#x27;s Chosen People"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="62643" end="62647" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029098" start="62663" end="62679" title="Ishmael Muhammad" label="Ishmael Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="62736" end="62744" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522639" start="62827" end="62874" title="The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews" label="The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="63031" end="63053" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752626" start="63305" end="63334" title="Parliament of World Religions" label="Parliament of World Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q275445" start="63510" end="63531" title="Jewish Defense League" label="Jewish Defense League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850137" start="63597" end="63624" title="Jewish Defense Organization" label="Jewish Defense Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070677" start="64114" end="64137" title="Nuwaubian Nation" label="Ansaaru Allah Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q941184" start="64147" end="64160" title="Word of Faith" label="Word of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q383968" start="64177" end="64201" title="Black studies" label="African-American studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="64515" end="64527" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="64529" end="64537" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192301" start="64539" end="64542" title="Kam (rapper)" label="Kam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764641" start="64544" end="64559" title="The Skinny Boys" label="The Skinny Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168992" start="64565" end="64579" title="Sister Souljah" label="Sister Souljah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="64931" end="64935" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="64942" end="64945" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662673" start="65495" end="65509" title="gender studies" label="gender studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="66173" end="66182" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="66555" end="66561" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21710" wikidata="Q2612896" url="?curid=21710" title="Nerve agent">
<text>Nerve agents, sometimes also called nerve gases, are a class of organic chemicals that disrupt the mechanisms by which nerves transfer messages to organs. The disruption is caused by the blocking of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), an enzyme that catalyzes the breakdown of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter. Nerve agents are irreversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitors used as poison.

Poisoning by a nerve agent leads to constriction of pupils, profuse salivation, convulsions, and involuntary urination and defecation, with the first symptoms appearing in seconds after exposure. Death by asphyxiation or cardiac arrest may follow in minutes due to the loss of the body&#x27;s control over respiratory and other muscles. Some nerve agents are readily vaporized or aerosolized, and the primary portal of entry into the body is the respiratory system. Nervous agents can also be absorbed through the skin, requiring that those likely to be subjected to such agents wear a full body suit in addition to a respirator.

Nerve agents are generally colorless and tasteless liquids. Nerve agents evaporate at varying rates depending on the substance. None are gases in normal environments. The popular term &quot;nerve gas&quot; is inaccurate.
Agents Sarin and VX are odorless; Tabun has a slightly fruity odor and Soman has a slight camphor odor.

==Biological effects==
Nerve agents attack the nervous system. All such agents function the same way resulting in cholinergic crisis: they inhibit the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which is responsible for the breakdown of acetylcholine (ACh) in the synapses between nerves that control whether muscle tissues are to relax or contract. If the agent cannot be broken down, muscles are prevented from receiving &#x27;relax&#x27; signals and they are effectively paralyzed. It is the compounding of this paralysis throughout the body that quickly leads to more severe complications, including the heart and the muscles used for breathing. Because of this, the first symptoms usually appear within 30 seconds of exposure and death can occur via asphyxiation or cardiac arrest in a few minutes, depending upon the dose received and the agent used.

Initial symptoms following exposure to nerve agents (like Sarin) are a runny nose, tightness in the chest, and constriction of the pupils. Soon after, the victim will have difficulty breathing and will experience nausea and salivation. As the victim continues to lose control of bodily functions, involuntary salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, 
gastrointestinal pain and vomiting will be experienced. Blisters and burning of the eyes and/or lungs may also occur. This phase is followed by initially myoclonic jerks (muscle jerks) followed by status epilepticus–type epileptic seizure. Death then comes via complete respiratory depression, most likely via the excessive peripheral activity at the neuromuscular junction of the diaphragm.

The effects of nerve agents are long lasting and increase with continued exposure. Survivors of nerve agent poisoning almost invariably develop chronic neurological damage and related psychiatric effects. Possible effects that can last at least up to two–three years after exposure include blurred vision, tiredness, declined memory, hoarse voice, palpitations, sleeplessness, shoulder stiffness and eye strain. In people exposed to nerve agents, serum and erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase in the long-term are noticeably lower than normal and tend to be lower the worse the persisting symptoms are.

===Mechanism of action===
When a normally functioning motor nerve is stimulated, it releases the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which transmits the impulse to a muscle or organ. Once the impulse is sent, the enzyme acetylcholinesterase immediately breaks down the acetylcholine in order to allow the muscle or organ to relax.

Nerve agents disrupt the nervous system by inhibiting the function of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase by forming a covalent bond with its active site, where acetylcholine would normally be broken down (undergo hydrolysis). Acetylcholine thus builds up and continues to act so that any nerve impulses are continually transmitted and muscle contractions do not stop. This same action also occurs at the gland and organ levels, resulting in uncontrolled drooling, tearing of the eyes (lacrimation) and excess production of mucus from the nose (rhinorrhea).

The reaction product of the most important nerve agents, including Soman, Sarin, Tabun and VX, with acetylcholinesterase were solved by the U.S. Army using X-ray crystallography in the 1990s. The reaction products have been confirmed subsequently using different sources of acetylcholinesterase and the closely related target enzyme, butyrylcholinesterase. The X-ray structures clarify important aspects of the reaction mechanism (e.g., stereochemical inversion) at atomic resolution and provide a key tool for antidote development.

===Treatment===
Standard treatment for nerve agent poisoning is a combination of an anticholinergic to manage the symptoms, and an oxime as an antidote. Anticholinergics treat the symptoms by reducing the effects of acetylcholine, while oximes displaces phosphate molecules from the active site of the cholinesterase enzymes, allowing the breakdown of acetylcholine. Military personnel are issued the combination in an autoinjector (e.g. ATNAA), for ease of use in stressful conditions.

Atropine is the standard anticholinergic drug used to manage the symptoms of nerve agent poisoning. It acts as an antagonist to muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, blocking the effects of excess acetylcholine. Some synthetic anticholinergics, such as biperiden, may counteract the central symptoms of nerve agent poisoning more effectively than atropine, since they pass the blood–brain barrier better. While these drugs will save the life of a person affected by nerve agents, that person may be incapacitated briefly or for an extended period, depending on the extent of exposure. The endpoint of atropine administration is the clearing of bronchial secretions.

Pralidoxime chloride (also known as &quot;2-PAMCl&quot;) is the standard oxime used to treat nerve agent poisoning. Rather than counteracting the initial effects of the nerve agent on the nervous system as does atropine, pralidoxime chloride reactivates the poisoned enzyme (acetylcholinesterase) by scavenging the phosphoryl group attached on the functional hydroxyl group of the enzyme, counteracting the nerve agent itself. Revival of acetylcholinesterase with pralidoxime chloride works more effectively on nicotinic receptors while blocking acetylcholine receptors with atropine is more effective on muscarinic receptors.

Anticonvulsants, such as diazepam, may be administered to manage seizures, improving long term prognosis and reducing risk of brain damage. This is not usually self-administered as its use is for actively seizing patients.

===Countermeasures===
Pyridostigmine bromide was used by the US military in the first Gulf War as a pretreatment for Soman as it increased the median lethal dose. It is only effective if taken prior to exposure and in conjunction with Atropine and Pralidoxime, issued in the Mark I NAAK autoinjector, and is ineffective against other nerve agents. While it reduces fatality rates, there is an increased risk of brain damage; this can be mitigated by administration of an anticonvulsant. Evidence suggests that the use of pyridostigmine may be responsible for some of the symptoms of Gulf War syndrome.

Butyrylcholinesterase is under development by the U.S. Department of Defense as a prophylactic countermeasure against organophosphate nerve agents. It binds nerve agent in the bloodstream before the poison can exert effects in the nervous system.

Both purified acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase have demonstrated success in animal studies as &quot;biological scavengers&quot; (and universal targets) to provide stoichiometric protection against the entire spectrum of organophosphate nerve agents. Butyrylcholinesterase currently is the preferred enzyme for development as a pharmaceutical drug primarily because it is a naturally circulating human plasma protein (superior pharmacokinetics) and its larger active site compared with acetylcholinesterase may permit greater flexibility for future design and improvement of butyrylcholinesterase to act as a nerve agent scavenger.

==Classes==
There are two main classes of nerve agents. The members of the two classes share similar properties and are given both a common name (such as &quot;Sarin&quot;) and a two-character NATO identifier (such as GB).

===G-series===
The &quot;G-series&quot; is thus named because German scientists first synthesized them. G series agents are known as non-persistent, meaning that they evaporate shortly after release, and do not remain active in the dispersal area for very long. All of the compounds in this class were discovered and synthesized during or prior to World War II, led by Gerhard Schrader (later under the employment of IG Farben).

This series is the first and oldest family of nerve agents. The first nerve agent ever synthesized was GA (Tabun) in 1936. GB (Sarin) was discovered next in 1939, followed by GD (Soman) in 1944, and finally the more obscure GF (Cyclosarin) in 1949. GB was the only G agent that was fielded by the US as a munition, in rockets, aerial bombs, and artillery shells.

===V-series===
The &quot;V-series&quot; is the second family of nerve agents and contains five well known members: VE, VG, VM, VR, and VX, along with several more obscure analogues.

The most studied agent in this family, VX (it is thought that the &#x27;X&#x27; in its name comes from its overlapping isopropyl radicals), was invented in the 1950s at Porton Down in Wiltshire, England. Ranajit Ghosh, a chemist at the Plant Protection Laboratories of Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) was investigating a class of organophosphate compounds (organophosphate esters of substituted aminoethanethiols). Like Schrader, Ghosh found that they were quite effective pesticides. In 1954, ICI put one of them on the market under the trade name Amiton. It was subsequently withdrawn, as it was too toxic for safe use. The toxicity did not escape military notice and some of the more toxic materials had been sent to Porton Down for evaluation. After the evaluation was complete, several members of this class of compounds became a new group of nerve agents, the V agents (depending on the source, the V stands for Victory, Venomous, or Viscous). The best known of these is probably VX, with VR (&quot;Russian V-gas&quot;) coming a close second (Amiton is largely forgotten as VG, with G probably coming from &quot;G&quot;hosh). All of the V-agents are persistent agents, meaning that these agents do not degrade or wash away easily and can therefore remain on clothes and other surfaces for long periods. In use, this allows the V-agents to be used to blanket terrain to guide or curtail the movement of enemy ground forces. The consistency of these agents is similar to oil; as a result, the contact hazard for V-agents is primarily – but not exclusively – dermal. VX was the only V-series agent that was fielded by the US as a munition, in rockets, artillery shells, airplane spray tanks, and landmines.

Analyzing the structure of thirteen V agents, the standard composition, which makes a compound enter this group, is the absence of halides. It is clear that many agricultural pesticides can be considered as V agents if they are notoriously toxic. The agent is not required to be a phosphonate and presents a dialkylaminoethyl group. The toxicity requirement is waived as the VT agent and its salts (VT-1 and VT-2) are &quot;non-toxic&quot;. Replacing the sulfur atom with selenium increases the toxicity of the agent by orders of magnitude.

===Novichok agents===

The Novichok (Russian: , &quot;newcomer&quot;) agents, a series of organophosphate compounds, were developed in the Soviet Union and in Russia from the mid-1960s to the 1990s. The Novichok program aimed to develop and manufacture highly deadly chemical weapons that were unknown to the West. The new agents were designed to be undetectable by standard NATO chemical-detection equipment and overcome contemporary chemical-protective equipment.

In addition to the newly developed &quot;third generation&quot; weapons, binary versions of several Soviet agents were developed and were designated as &quot;Novichok&quot; agents.

===Carbamates===
Contrary to some claims, not all nerve agents are organophosphates. The starting compound studied by the United States was the carbamate EA-1464, of notorious toxicity. Compounds similar in structure and effect to EA-1464 formed a large group, including compounds such as EA-3990 and EA-4056. The Family Practice Notebook claims carbamate-based nerve agents can be three times as toxic as VX. Both the United States and the Soviet Union
developed carbamate-based nerve agents during the Cold War. Carbamate-based nerve agents are sometimes grouped in academic literature with Fourth Generation Novichok agents, as they were added to the CWC schedule on banned agents at the same time, despite their significant differences in chemical makeup and mechanisms of action. Carbamate-based nerve agents have been identified as Schedule 1 Nerve Agents, the highest classification possible under the CWC, reserved for agents with no identified alternate use, and those that can cause the most harm.

===Insecticides===
Some insecticides, including carbamates and organophosphates such as dichlorvos, malathion and parathion, are nerve agents. The metabolism of insects is sufficiently different from mammals that these compounds have little effect on humans and other mammals at proper doses, but there is considerable concern about the effects of long-term exposure to these chemicals by farm workers and animals alike. At high enough doses, acute toxicity and death can occur through the same mechanism as other nerve agents. Some insecticides such as demeton, dimefox and paraoxon are sufficiently toxic to humans that they have been withdrawn from agricultural use, and were at one stage investigated for potential military applications.
Paraoxon was allegedly used as an assassination weapon by the apartheid South African government as part of Project Coast. Organophosphate pesticide poisoning is a major cause of disability in many developing countries and is often the preferred method of suicide.

==Methods of dissemination==
Many methods exist for spreading nerve agents such as:
*uncontrolled aerosol munitions
*smoke generation
*explosive dissemination
*atomizers, humidifiers and foggers
The method chosen will depend on the physical properties of the nerve agent(s) used, the nature of the target, and the achievable level of sophistication.

==History==
=== Discovery ===

This first class of nerve agents, the G-series, was accidentally discovered in Germany on December 23, 1936, by a research team headed by Gerhard Schrader working for IG Farben. Since 1934, Schrader had been working in a laboratory in Leverkusen to develop new types of insecticides for IG Farben. While working toward his goal of improved insecticide, Schrader experimented with numerous compounds, eventually leading to the preparation of Tabun.

In experiments, Tabun was extremely potent against insects: as little as 5 ppm of Tabun killed all the leaf lice he used in his initial experiment. In January 1937, Schrader observed the effects of nerve agents on human beings first-hand when a drop of Tabun spilled onto a lab bench. Within minutes he and his laboratory assistant began to experience miosis (constriction of the pupils of the eyes), dizziness and severe shortness of breath. It took them three weeks to recover fully.

In 1935 the Nazi government had passed a decree that required all inventions of possible military significance to be reported to the Ministry of War, so in May 1937 Schrader sent a sample of Tabun to the chemical warfare (CW) section of the Army Weapons Office in Berlin-Spandau. Schrader was summoned to the Wehrmacht chemical lab in Berlin to give a demonstration, after which Schrader&#x27;s patent application and all related research was classified as secret. Colonel Rüdiger, head of the CW section, ordered the construction of new laboratories for the further investigation of Tabun and other organophosphate compounds and Schrader soon moved to a new laboratory at Wuppertal-Elberfeld in the Ruhr valley to continue his research in secret throughout World War II. The compound was initially codenamed Le-100 and later Trilon-83.

Sarin was discovered by Schrader and his team in 1938 and named in honor of its discoverers: Gerhard Schrader, Otto Ambros, , and Hans-Jürgen von der Linde. It was codenamed T-144 or Trilon-46. It was found to be more than ten times as potent as Tabun.

Soman was discovered by Richard Kuhn in 1944 as he worked with the existing compounds; the name is derived from either the Greek &#x27;to sleep&#x27; or the Latin &#x27;to bludgeon&#x27;. It was codenamed T-300.

Cyclosarin was also discovered during WWII but the details were lost and it was rediscovered in 1949.

The G-series naming system was created by the United States when it uncovered the German activities, labeling Tabun as GA (German Agent A), Sarin as GB and Soman as GD. Ethyl Sarin was tagged GE and CycloSarin as GF.

===During World War II===
In 1939, a pilot plant for Tabun production was set up at Munster-Lager, on Lüneburg Heath near the German Army proving grounds at . In January 1940, construction began on a secret plant, code named &quot;Hochwerk&quot; (&quot;High factory&quot;), for the production of Tabun at &quot;Dyhernfurth an der Oder&quot; (now Brzeg Dolny in Poland), on the Oder River from Breslau (now Wrocław) in Silesia.

The plant was large, covering an area of and was completely self-contained, synthesizing all intermediates as well as the final product, Tabun. The factory even had an underground plant for filling munitions, which were then stored at Krappitz (now Krapkowice) in Upper Silesia. The plant was operated by , a subsidiary of IG Farben, as were all other chemical weapon agent production plants in Germany at the time.

Because of the plant&#x27;s deep secrecy and the difficult nature of the production process, it took from January 1940 until June 1942 for the plant to become fully operational. Many of Tabun&#x27;s chemical precursors were so corrosive that reaction chambers not lined with quartz or silver soon became useless. Tabun itself was so hazardous that the final processes had to be performed while enclosed in double glass-lined chambers with a stream of pressurized air circulating between the walls.

Three thousand German nationals were employed at Hochwerk, all equipped with respirators and clothing constructed of a poly-layered rubber/cloth/rubber sandwich that was destroyed after the tenth wearing. Despite all precautions, there were over 300 accidents before production even began and at least ten workers died during the two and a half years of operation. Some incidents cited in &quot;A Higher Form of Killing: The Secret History of Chemical and Biological Warfare&quot; are as follows:
*Four pipe fitters had liquid Tabun drain onto them and died before their rubber suits could be removed.
*A worker had two liters of Tabun pour down the neck of his rubber suit. He died within two minutes.
*Seven workers were hit in the face with a stream of Tabun of such force that the liquid was forced behind their respirators. Only two survived despite resuscitation measures.

 and moved, probably to Dzerzhinsk, USSR.

In 1940 the German Army Weapons Office ordered the mass production of Sarin for wartime use. A number of pilot plants were built and a high-production facility was under construction (but was not finished) by the end of World War II. Estimates for total Sarin production by Nazi Germany range from 500 kg to 10 tons.

During that time, German intelligence believed that the Allies also knew of these compounds, assuming that because these compounds were not discussed in the Allies&#x27; scientific journals information about them was being suppressed. Though Sarin, Tabun and Soman were incorporated into artillery shells, the German government ultimately decided not to use nerve agents against Allied targets. The Allies did not learn of these agents until shells filled with them were captured towards the end of the war. German forces used chemical warfare against partisans during the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula in 1942, but did not use any nerve agent.

This is detailed in Joseph Borkin&#x27;s book &quot;The Crime and Punishment of IG Farben&quot;:

===Post–World War II===
Since World War II, Iraq&#x27;s use of mustard gas against Iranian troops and Kurds (Iran–Iraq War of 1980–1988) has been the only large-scale use of any chemical weapons. On the scale of the single Kurdish village of Halabja within its own territory, Iraqi forces did expose the populace to some kind of chemical weapons, possibly mustard gas and most likely nerve agents.

Operatives of the Aum Shinrikyo religious group made and used Sarin several times on other Japanese, most notably the Tokyo subway sarin attack.

In the Gulf War, no nerve agents (nor other chemical weapons) were used, but a number of U.S. and UK personnel were exposed to them when the Khamisiyah chemical depot was destroyed. This and the widespread use of anticholinergic drugs as a protective treatment against any possible nerve gas attack have been proposed as a possible cause of Gulf War syndrome.

Sarin gas was deployed in a 2013 attack on Ghouta during the Syrian Civil War, killing several hundred people. Most governments contend that forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad deployed the gas; however, the Syrian Government has denied responsibility.

On 13 February 2017, the nerve agent VX was used in the assassination of Kim Jong-nam, half-brother of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, at Kuala Lumpur International Airport in Malaysia.

On 4 March 2018, a former Russian agent (who was convicted of high treason but allowed to live in the United Kingdom via a spy swap agreement), Sergei Skripal, and his daughter, who was visiting from Moscow, were both poisoned by a Novichok nerve agent in the English city of Salisbury. They survived, and were subsequently released from hospital. In addition, a Wiltshire Police officer, Nick Bailey, was exposed to the substance. He was one of the first to respond to the incident. Twenty-one members of the public received medical treatment following exposure to the nerve agent. Despite this, only Bailey and the Skripals remained in critical condition. On 11 March 2018, Public Health England issued advice for the other people believed to have been in the Mill pub (the location where the attack is believed to have been carried out) or the nearby Zizzi Restaurant. On 12 March 2018, British Prime Minister Theresa May stated that the substance used was a Novichok nerve agent.

On 30 June 2018, two British nationals, Charlie Rowley and Dawn Sturgess, were poisoned by a Novichok nerve agent of the same kind that was used in the Skripal poisoning, which Rowley had found in a discarded perfume bottle and gifted to Sturgess. Whilst Rowley survived, Sturgess died on 8 July. Metropolitan Police believe that the poisoning was not a targeted attack, but a result of the way the nerve agent was disposed of after the poisoning in Salisbury.

===Ocean disposal===
In 1972, the United States Congress banned the practice of disposing chemical weapons into the ocean. Thirty-two thousand tons of nerve and mustard agents had already been dumped into the ocean waters off the United States by the U.S. Army, primarily as part of Operation CHASE. According to a 1998 report by William Brankowitz, a deputy project manager in the U.S. Army Chemical Materials Agency, the Army created at least 26 chemical weapons dump sites in the ocean off at least 11 states on both the west and east coasts. Due to poor records, they currently only know the rough whereabouts of half of them.
There is currently a lack of scientific data regarding the ecological and health effects of this dumping. In the event of leakage, many nerve agents are soluble in water and would dissolve in a few days, while other substances like sulfur mustard could last longer. There have also been a few incidents of chemical weapons washing ashore or being accidentally retrieved, for example during dredging or trawl fishing operations.

== Detection ==

=== Detection of gaseous nerve agents ===
The methods of detecting gaseous nerve agents include but are not limited to the following.

==== Laser photoacoustic spectroscopy ====
Laser photoacoustic spectroscopy (LPAS) is a method that has been used to detect nerve agents in the air. In this method, laser light is absorbed by gaseous matter. This causes a heating/cooling cycle and changes in pressure. Sensitive microphones convey sound waves that result from the pressure changes. Scientists at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory engineered an LPAS system that can detect multiple trace amounts of toxic gases in one air sample.

This technology contained three lasers modulated to different frequency, each producing a different sound wave tone. The different wavelengths of light were directed into a sensor referred to as the photoacoustic cell. Within the cell were the vapors of different nerve agents. The traces of each nerve agent had a signature effect on the &quot;loudness&quot; of the lasers&#x27; sound wave tones. Some overlap of nerve agents&#x27; effects did occur in the acoustic results. However, it was predicted that specificity would increase as additional lasers with unique wavelengths were added. Yet, too many lasers set to different wavelengths could result in overlap of absorption spectra. Citation LPAS technology can identify gases in parts per billion (ppb) concentrations.

The following nerve agent simulants have been identified with this multiwavelength LPAS:

* dimethyl methyl phosphonate (DMMP)
* diethyl methyl phosphonate (DEMP)
* diisopropyl methyl phosphonate (DIMP)
* dimethylpolysiloxane (DIME), triethyl phosphate (TEP)
* tributyl phosphate (TBP)
* two volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
* acetone (ACE)
* isopropanol (ISO), used to construct Sarin 

Other gases and air contaminants identified with LPAS include:

* CO2 Carbon dioxide
* Benzene
* Formaldehyde
* Acetaldehyde
* Ammonia
* NOx Nitrogen oxide
* SO2 Sulphur oxide
* Ethylene Glycol
* TATP
* TNT

==== Non-dispersive infrared ====
Non-dispersive infrared techniques have been reported to be used for gaseous nerve agent detection.

==== IR absorption ====
Traditional IR absorption has been reported to detect gaseous nerve agents.

==== Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy ====
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy has been reported to detect gaseous nerve agents.

== References ==
==Sources==
* 

== External links ==
* ATSDR Case Studies in Environmental Medicine: Cholinesterase Inhibitors, Including Pesticides and Chemical Warfare Nerve Agents U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
* Nervegas: America&#x27;s Fifteen-year Struggle for Modern Chemical Weapons Army Chemical Review
* History Note: The CWS Effort to Obtain German Chemical Weapons for Retaliation Against Japan CBIAC Newsletter
* AChE inhibitors and substrates – 2wfz, 2wg0, 2wg1, 1som in Proteopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="0" end="12" title="Nerve agent" label="Nerve agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612896" start="36" end="47" title="Nerve agent" label="nerve gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="64" end="81" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="199" end="219" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="231" end="237" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="270" end="283" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="287" end="303" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592323" start="335" end="365" title="acetylcholinesterase inhibitor" label="acetylcholinesterase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="375" end="381" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q173318" start="436" end="441" title="pupil" label="pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="452" end="462" title="salivation" label="salivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852376" start="464" end="474" title="convulsion" label="convulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="493" end="502" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="507" end="517" title="defecation" label="defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="589" end="601" title="asphyxiation" label="asphyxiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="605" end="619" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q472287" start="690" end="701" title="Respiration (physiology)" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="764" end="771" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="830" end="848" title="respiratory system" label="respiratory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q271779" start="1002" end="1012" title="respirator" label="respirator"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="1243" end="1248" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="1253" end="1255" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q143289" start="1270" end="1275" title="Tabun (nerve agent)" label="Tabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="1307" end="1312" title="Soman" label="Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="1326" end="1333" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="1388" end="1402" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002709" start="1455" end="1473" title="cholinergic crisis" label="cholinergic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q427492" start="1480" end="1487" title="Enzyme inhibitor" label="inhibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="1499" end="1519" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="1563" end="1576" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="1590" end="1597" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="2081" end="2089" title="asphyxia" label="asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="2097" end="2111" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="2242" end="2247" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q596899" start="2295" end="2321" title="miosis" label="constriction of the pupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="2493" end="2503" title="salivation" label="salivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76469" start="2505" end="2516" title="tears" label="lacrimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="2518" end="2527" title="urination" label="urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="2529" end="2539" title="defecation" label="defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2542" end="2558" title="gastrointestinal" label="gastrointestinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="2568" end="2576" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q276469" start="2598" end="2605" title="Blister" label="Blister"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="2696" end="2711" title="myoclonic jerks" label="myoclonic jerks"/>
<link wikidata="Q980709" start="2739" end="2757" title="status epilepticus" label="status epilepticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="2893" end="2915" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="2923" end="2932" title="thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="3119" end="3130" title="psychiatric" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="3241" end="3250" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="tiredness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="3283" end="3295" title="palpitations" label="palpitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="3297" end="3310" title="Insomnia" label="sleeplessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q749159" start="3335" end="3345" title="eye strain" label="eye strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="3382" end="3387" title="Serum (blood)" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="3392" end="3403" title="Red blood cell" label="erythrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422765" start="3590" end="3601" title="motor nerve" label="motor nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="3633" end="3649" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="3650" end="3663" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="3752" end="3772" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="3979" end="3992" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q423026" start="4002" end="4013" title="active site" label="active site"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="4074" end="4084" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="4575" end="4596" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153685" start="5004" end="5013" title="Organophosphate poisoning" label="poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q113259" start="5037" end="5052" title="anticholinergic" label="anticholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182738" start="5084" end="5089" title="oxime" label="oxime"/>
<link wikidata="Q423026" start="5236" end="5247" title="active site" label="active site"/>
<link wikidata="Q415635" start="5255" end="5269" title="cholinesterase" label="cholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q786860" start="5372" end="5384" title="autoinjector" label="autoinjector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654746" start="5391" end="5396" title="ATNAA" label="ATNAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26272" start="5441" end="5449" title="Atropine" label="Atropine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="5569" end="5602" title="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q414914" start="5692" end="5701" title="biperiden" label="biperiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="5816" end="5835" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735334" start="6106" end="6126" title="Pralidoxime chloride" label="Pralidoxime chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q412256" start="6617" end="6636" title="nicotinic receptors" label="nicotinic receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="6711" end="6731" title="muscarinic receptors" label="muscarinic receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="6734" end="6748" title="Anticonvulsant" label="Anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q419472" start="6980" end="7002" title="Pyridostigmine" label="Pyridostigmine bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="7019" end="7030" title="United States Armed Forces" label="US military"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="7038" end="7052" title="Gulf War" label="first Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="7075" end="7080" title="Soman" label="Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="7101" end="7119" title="median lethal dose" label="median lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768174" start="7233" end="7244" title="Mark I NAAK" label="Mark I NAAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q970826" start="7541" end="7558" title="Gulf War syndrome" label="Gulf War syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679015" start="7561" end="7582" title="Butyrylcholinesterase" label="Butyrylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="7643" end="7655" title="prophylactic" label="prophylactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123516842" start="7656" end="7670" title="countermeasure" label="countermeasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="7679" end="7694" title="organophosphate" label="organophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676679" start="7823" end="7843" title="acetylcholinesterase" label="acetylcholinesterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="7986" end="8000" title="stoichiometry" label="stoichiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="8249" end="8265" title="pharmacokinetics" label="pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="8648" end="8652" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9027" end="9039" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q77539" start="9048" end="9064" title="Gerhard Schrader" label="Gerhard Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="9096" end="9105" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q143289" start="9216" end="9221" title="Tabun (nerve agent)" label="Tabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="9236" end="9241" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="9288" end="9293" title="Soman" label="Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q418763" start="9337" end="9347" title="Cyclosarin" label="Cyclosarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137468" start="9436" end="9448" title="aerial bombs" label="aerial bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="9454" end="9469" title="artillery shell" label="artillery shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068904" start="9588" end="9590" title="VE (nerve agent)" label="VE"/>
<link wikidata="Q419110" start="9592" end="9594" title="VG (nerve agent)" label="VG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068532" start="9596" end="9598" title="VM (nerve agent)" label="VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052560" start="9600" end="9602" title="VR (nerve agent)" label="VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="9608" end="9610" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="9695" end="9697" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232208" start="9825" end="9836" title="Porton Down" label="Porton Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="9840" end="9849" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="9925" end="9953" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="Imperial Chemical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q419110" start="10208" end="10214" title="VG (nerve agent)" label="Amiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="10645" end="10647" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052560" start="10654" end="10656" title="VR (nerve agent)" label="VR"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="11314" end="11329" title="artillery shell" label="artillery shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="11358" end="11366" title="landmine" label="landmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="11501" end="11508" title="Halide" label="halides"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="12002" end="12017" title="organophosphate" label="organophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12051" end="12063" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="12628" end="12643" title="organophosphate" label="organophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422899" start="12705" end="12714" title="carbamate" label="carbamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51136329" start="12850" end="12857" title="EA-3990" label="EA-3990"/>
<link wikidata="Q51054289" start="12862" end="12869" title="EA-4056" label="EA-4056"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13065" end="13073" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="13594" end="13605" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422899" start="13618" end="13628" title="carbamates" label="carbamates"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="13633" end="13649" title="organophosphates" label="organophosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q420622" start="13658" end="13668" title="dichlorvos" label="dichlorvos"/>
<link wikidata="Q423005" start="13670" end="13679" title="malathion" label="malathion"/>
<link wikidata="Q412556" start="13684" end="13693" title="parathion" label="parathion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="13731" end="13737" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="13770" end="13776" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="13821" end="13827" title="humans" label="humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="13838" end="13845" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060555" start="13959" end="13971" title="farm workers" label="farm workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="13976" end="13983" title="animals" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="14013" end="14018" title="acute (medical)" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41524502" start="14124" end="14131" title="demeton" label="demeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q424882" start="14133" end="14140" title="dimefox" label="dimefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q416108" start="14145" end="14153" title="paraoxon" label="paraoxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="14346" end="14359" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="14374" end="14383" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q966295" start="14420" end="14433" title="Project Coast" label="Project Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q839525" start="14451" end="14470" title="pesticide poisoning" label="pesticide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="14676" end="14683" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14738" end="14747" title="aerosol#Generation and applications" label="atomizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073283" start="14749" end="14759" title="humidifier" label="humidifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464087" start="14765" end="14771" title="fogger" label="fogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q77539" start="15098" end="15114" title="Gerhard Schrader" label="Gerhard Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="15127" end="15136" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938" start="15195" end="15205" title="Leverkusen" label="Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="15230" end="15241" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="15247" end="15256" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q143289" start="15401" end="15406" title="Tabun (nerve agent)" label="Tabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="15484" end="15487" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="15512" end="15521" title="aphids" label="leaf lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q596899" start="15761" end="15767" title="miosis" label="miosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="15908" end="15912" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471063" start="16029" end="16044" title="Ministry of the Reichswehr" label="Ministry of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="16100" end="16116" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q655369" start="16137" end="16156" title="Waffenamt" label="Army Weapons Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q569827" start="16160" end="16174" title="Berlin-Spandau" label="Berlin-Spandau"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="16291" end="16297" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="16569" end="16578" title="Wuppertal" label="Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q702259" start="16579" end="16588" title="Elberfeld" label="Elberfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="16596" end="16607" title="Ruhr valley" label="Ruhr valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16654" end="16666" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="16734" end="16739" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77539" start="16827" end="16843" title="Gerhard Schrader" label="Gerhard Schrader"/>
<link wikidata="Q96000" start="16845" end="16856" title="Otto Ambros" label="Otto Ambros"/>
<link wikidata="Q408044" start="16988" end="16993" title="Soman" label="Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q78483" start="17012" end="17024" title="Richard Kuhn" label="Richard Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="17111" end="17116" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="17145" end="17150" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418763" start="17201" end="17211" title="Cyclosarin" label="Cyclosarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="17565" end="17570" title="factory" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17606" end="17619" title="Munster Training Area#Munsterlager" label="Munster-Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="17624" end="17638" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17753" end="17761" title="Hochwerk" label="Hochwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q995429" start="17868" end="17879" title="Brzeg Dolny" label="Brzeg Dolny"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="17883" end="17889" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="17899" end="17909" title="Oder River" label="Oder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="17915" end="17922" title="Breslau" label="Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="17928" end="17935" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="17940" end="17947" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q983729" start="18199" end="18209" title="Krapkowice" label="Krapkowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="18273" end="18282" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="18302" end="18323" title="chemical weapon agent" label="chemical weapon agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q271779" start="18943" end="18954" title="respirators" label="respirators"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="18959" end="18967" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491454" start="19721" end="19734" title="resuscitation" label="resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76493" start="19770" end="19780" title="Dzerzhinsk, Russia" label="Dzerzhinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19782" end="19786" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q655369" start="19801" end="19827" title="German Army Weapons Office" label="German Army Weapons Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20009" end="20021" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="20091" end="20093" title="Kilogram" label="kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="20100" end="20103" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="20132" end="20144" title="intelligence (information gathering)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="20163" end="20169" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="20395" end="20404" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q119625147" start="20680" end="20709" title="Battle of the Kerch Peninsula" label="Battle of the Kerch Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="20953" end="20958" title="Kurdish people" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="20960" end="20973" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q605544" start="21093" end="21100" title="Halabja" label="Halabja"/>
<link wikidata="Q217408" start="21268" end="21281" title="Aum Shinrikyo" label="Aum Shinrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="21312" end="21317" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146739" start="21368" end="21393" title="Tokyo subway sarin attack" label="Tokyo subway sarin attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="21403" end="21411" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399971" start="21537" end="21547" title="Khamisiyah" label="Khamisiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q970826" start="21737" end="21754" title="Gulf War syndrome" label="Gulf War syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="21757" end="21762" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626794" start="21783" end="21796" title="Ghouta chemical attack" label="a 2013 attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522001" start="21800" end="21806" title="Ghouta" label="Ghouta"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="21818" end="21834" title="Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="21924" end="21939" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q113519305" start="21971" end="21988" title="Syrian Government" label="Syrian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q421809" start="22054" end="22056" title="VX (nerve agent)" label="VX"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836436" start="22073" end="22102" title="assassination of Kim Jong-nam" label="assassination of Kim Jong-nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226" start="22144" end="22155" title="Kim Jong-un" label="Kim Jong-un"/>
<link wikidata="Q500253" start="22160" end="22194" title="Kuala Lumpur International Airport" label="Kuala Lumpur International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="22198" end="22206" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22311" end="22325" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001775" start="22332" end="22340" title="spy swap" label="spy swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742411" start="22353" end="22367" title="Sergei Skripal" label="Sergei Skripal"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415393" start="22417" end="22461" title="Poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal" label="were both poisoned by a Novichok nerve agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160642" start="22485" end="22494" title="Salisbury" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363266" start="22572" end="22588" title="Wiltshire Police" label="Wiltshire Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257402" start="22885" end="22906" title="Public Health England" label="Public Health England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072944" start="23063" end="23068" title="Zizzi" label="Zizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="23122" end="23133" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q55381117" start="23268" end="23307" title="2018 Amesbury poisonings" label="were poisoned by a Novichok nerve agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="23491" end="23510" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="23799" end="23802" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354667" start="23939" end="23954" title="Operation CHASE" label="Operation CHASE"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="24519" end="24533" title="sulfur mustard" label="sulfur mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729329" start="24689" end="24702" title="Trawling" label="trawl fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="24911" end="24916" title="Laser" label="Laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q900415" start="24917" end="24943" title="photoacoustic spectroscopy" label="photoacoustic spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="25060" end="25067" title="gaseous" label="gaseous"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="25068" end="25074" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="25127" end="25135" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="25147" end="25158" title="microphones" label="microphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="25166" end="25177" title="sound waves" label="sound waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889516" start="25235" end="25264" title="United States Army Research Laboratory" label="U.S. Army Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="25370" end="25380" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="25404" end="25413" title="Modulation" label="modulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="25427" end="25436" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="25994" end="26005" title="wavelengths" label="wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="26033" end="26051" title="absorption spectra" label="absorption spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="26091" end="26096" title="gases" label="gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="26100" end="26117" title="parts per billion" label="parts per billion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26233" end="26260" title="dimethyl methyl phosphonate" label="dimethyl methyl phosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26270" end="26296" title="diethyl methyl phosphonate" label="diethyl methyl phosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26306" end="26336" title="diisopropyl methyl phosphonate" label="diisopropyl methyl phosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411955" start="26346" end="26366" title="dimethylpolysiloxane" label="dimethylpolysiloxane"/>
<link wikidata="Q613394" start="26402" end="26420" title="tributyl phosphate" label="tributyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="26469" end="26476" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16392" start="26485" end="26496" title="isopropanol" label="isopropanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187695" start="26522" end="26527" title="Sarin" label="Sarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="26600" end="26614" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="26617" end="26624" title="Benzene" label="Benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="26627" end="26639" title="Formaldehyde" label="Formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="26642" end="26654" title="Acetaldehyde" label="Acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="26657" end="26664" title="Ammonia" label="Ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="26671" end="26685" title="Nitrogen oxide" label="Nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q601852" start="26692" end="26705" title="Sulphur oxide" label="Sulphur oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q194207" start="26708" end="26723" title="Ethylene Glycol" label="Ethylene Glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q329022" start="26726" end="26730" title="TATP" label="TATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="26733" end="26736" title="TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132942" start="26772" end="26795" title="Nondispersive infrared sensor" label="Non-dispersive infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="26909" end="26911" title="Infrared spectroscopy" label="IR"/>
<link wikidata="Q901559" start="27024" end="27050" title="Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy" label="Fourier transform infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="27311" end="27350" title="Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407965" start="27622" end="27633" title="Proteopedia" label="Proteopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21711" wikidata="Q662" url="?curid=21711" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion">
<text>, also known as Evangelion or Eva, is a Japanese mecha anime television series produced by Gainax, animated by Tatsunoko, and directed by Hideaki Anno. It was broadcast on TV Tokyo from October 1995 to March 1996. The story is set fifteen years after a worldwide cataclysm in the futuristic fortified city of Tokyo-3. The protagonist is Shinji Ikari, a teenage boy recruited by his father Gendo to the mysterious organization Nerv. Shinji must pilot an Evangelion, a giant biomechanical mecha, to fight beings known as Angels.

The series explores the experiences and emotions of the Evangelion pilots and Nerv members as they battle Angels. They are called upon to understand the ultimate cause of events and the motives behind human action. The series has been described as a deconstruction of the mecha genre, and features archetypal imagery derived from Shinto cosmology and mystical Judeo-Christian traditions, including Midrashic tales and Kabbalah. The psychoanalytic accounts of human behavior put forward by Freud and Jung are prominently featured.

&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; is widely considered one of the greatest anime series of all time. Its final two episodes drew controversy, as many viewers found the ending confusing and abstract. In 1997, Anno and Gainax released the feature film &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;, serving as an alternate ending. A series of four films, &quot;Rebuild of Evangelion&quot;, retelling the events of the series with different plot elements and a new ending, were released between 2007 and 2021. Film, manga, home video, and other products in the &quot;Evangelion&quot; franchise have achieved record sales in Japanese markets and strong sales in overseas markets, with related goods selling over by 2007 and &quot;Evangelion&quot; pachinko machines generating by 2015.

==Plot==

In 2015, 15 years after a global cataclysm called the Second Impact, teenager Shinji Ikari is summoned to the futuristic city of Tokyo-3 by his estranged father Gendo Ikari, who is the director of the special paramilitary force Nerv. Shinji witnesses United Nations forces battling an Angel named Sachiel, one of a race of monstrous beings whose awakening was foretold in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Because of the Angels&#x27; near-impenetrable force fields known as Absolute Terror Fields, or simply AT Fields, Nerv&#x27;s Evangelion bio-machines, which are synchronized to their pilots&#x27; nervous systems and possess their own force fields, are the only weapons capable of fighting the Angels. Nerv officer Misato Katsuragi escorts Shinji into the Nerv complex beneath Tokyo-3, where Gendo pressures him into piloting Evangelion Unit-01 against the Angel. Without training, Shinji is unable to fight the Angel and Unit-01 suffers cranial damage. Because of the nervous system synchronization, Shinji is overwhelmed by the pain and loses consciousness, causing the Evangelion to go berserk and savagely kill the Angel on its own.

Following hospitalization, Shinji moves in with Misato and settles into life in Tokyo-3. In his second battle, Shinji defeats the Angel Shamshel but runs away afterward, distraught. Misato confronts Shinji, and he decides to remain a pilot. Shinji and Nerv&#x27;s crew must defeat the remaining fourteen Angels to prevent the Third Impact, a global cataclysm that would destroy the world. Evangelion Unit-00 is repaired shortly afterward, and Shinji tries to befriend its pilot Rei Ayanami, a mysterious and socially isolated teenage girl. With Rei&#x27;s help, Shinji defeats the Angel Ramiel. They are joined by Evangelion Unit-02&#x27;s pilot, the multitalented but insufferable teenager Asuka Langley Sōryu, who is German-Japanese-American. The three of them manage to defeat several Angels, and as Shinji adjusts to his new role as a pilot, he gradually becomes more confident and self-assured. Asuka moves in with Shinji, and they begin to develop confusing feelings for one another, kissing at her provocation.

After being absorbed by the Angel Leliel, Shinji breaks free thanks to Eva-01 acting on its own. He is later forced to fight Evangelion Unit-03, who has become infected, and its pilot, his friend and classmate Toji Suzuhara, becomes incapacitated and permanently disabled. Asuka loses her self-confidence following a defeat and spirals into depression, which is worsened by her next fight against the Angel Arael who attacks her mind. It forces her to relive her worst fears and childhood trauma, resulting in a mental breakdown. In the next battle, Rei sacrifices herself to self-destruct Unit-00 and save Shinji. Misato and Shinji visit the hospital, where they find Rei alive, but claiming she is &quot;the third Rei&quot;. Misato forces the scientist Ritsuko Akagi to reveal the dark secrets of Nerv, the Evangelion boneyard, and the Dummy Plug system, which operates using clones of Rei, who was created using the DNA of Shinji&#x27;s mother, Yui Ikari. This succession of events leaves Shinji emotionally scarred and alienated from the rest of the characters. Kaworu Nagisa replaces the catatonic Asuka as Unit-02&#x27;s pilot and befriends Shinji, gaining his trust. He is revealed to be the final foretold Angel, Tabris, and fights Shinji, realizing that he must die to allow humanity to survive. He asks Shinji to kill him, and he hesitates but eventually kills Kaworu; an event that causes him to be overridden with guilt.

After the final Angel is defeated, Gendo triggers the &quot;Human Instrumentality Project&quot;, a forced evolution of humanity in which the souls of mankind are merged for benevolent purposes. He believes that if unified, humanity could overcome the loneliness and alienation that has eternally plagued them. Shinji&#x27;s soul grapples with the reason for his existence and reaches an epiphany that he needs others to thrive and to accept himself by seeing a potential Shinji in another reality. This enables him to destroy the wall of negative emotions that torment him and unite with the others, who congratulate him.

==Characters==

Hideaki Anno attempted to create characters that reflected parts of his own personality. The characters of &quot;Evangelion&quot; struggle with their interpersonal relationships, their personal problems, and traumatic events in their past. The human qualities of the characters have enabled some viewers of the show to identify with the characters on a personal level, while others interpret them as historical, religious, or philosophical symbols.

Shinji Ikari is the series protagonist and the designated pilot of Evangelion Unit-01. After witnessing his mother Yui Ikari&#x27;s death as a child, Shinji is abandoned by his father, Gendo Ikari. He is emotionally hypersensitive and sometimes does as expected out of fear of rejection, but he has often rebelled and refused to pilot the Eva because of the excruciating harm that has been done to him or to his friends. Throughout the series, he says to himself &quot;I mustn&#x27;t run away&quot; as a means of encouraging himself to face the threats of the day, and this sometimes actually gives him bravery in battle, but he has a lingering habit of withdrawing in response to traumatic events. Anno has described Shinji as a boy who &quot;shrinks from human contact&quot; and has &quot;convinced himself that he is a completely unnecessary person&quot;.

The withdrawn and mysterious pilot of Evangelion Unit-00, Rei Ayanami, is a clone made from the salvaged remains of Yui and is plagued by a sense of negative self-worth stemming from the realization that she is an expendable asset. She at first despises Shinji for his lack of trust in his father Gendo, with whom Rei is very close. However, after Shinji and Rei successfully defeat the Angel Ramiel, she takes a friendly liking to him. Towards the end of the series, it is revealed that she is one of many clones, whose use is to replace the currently existing Rei if she is killed.

Asuka Langley Soryu is a child prodigy who pilots Evangelion Unit-02 and possesses a fiery temper and an overabundance of pride and self-confidence, which often gets her in trouble and difficulty, especially during battles. As a little girl, Asuka discovered the body of her mother shortly after she committed suicide, leading the child to repress her emotions and vow never to cry. Asuka and Shinji develop intense but ambiguous feelings toward each other and have difficulty reaching out to others. Their relationship was initially modeled on the one between Jean, Nadia&#x27;s love interest and eventual husband in the earlier &quot;&quot;. Similarly to Shinji, Asuka and Rei are presented with their own flaws and difficulty relating to other people.

Misato Katsuragi is the caretaker and commanding officer for Shinji and Asuka. Her professional demeanor at Nerv contrasts dramatically with her carefree and irresponsible behavior at home. Character designer Yoshiyuki Sadamoto conceived her as an older &quot;girl next door&quot; and promiscuous loser who failed to take life seriously. Hideaki Anno described Shinji and Misato as &quot;afraid of being hurt&quot; and &quot;unsuitable—lacking the positive attitude—for what people call heroes of an adventure.&quot;

The teenage Evangelion pilots are ordered into battle by the steely Gendo Ikari, Shinji&#x27;s father and the commander of Nerv. He abandoned Shinji and recalled him only to serve as an Evangelion pilot. Gendo salvaged the remains of his dead wife&#x27;s body to create Rei, whom he viewed as a mere tool at his disposal to defeat the Angels and enact Instrumentality. Similar to Shinji, he is somewhat asocial and is afraid of being insulted by others and often runs away from such, often committing immoralities in the process. This fear is also what drove him to abandon Shinji. He is depicted as relentless in his drive to win, a man who &quot;takes drastic and extreme measures, by fair means or foul, or by hook or by crook, in order to accomplish his own purpose.&quot; According to Yoshiyuki Sadamoto, the characters of Gendo and Fuyutsuki are based on Ed Straker and Alec Freeman of the television series &quot;UFO&quot;. Sadamoto designed the visual appearance of the characters so that their personalities &quot;could be understood more or less at a glance&quot;. The distinctive aesthetic appeal of the female lead characters&#x27; designs contributed to the high sales of &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; merchandise. The design of Rei, in particular, became so popular that the media referred to the character as &quot;Premium Girl&quot; due to the high sales of books with Rei on the cover.

==Production==
Director Hideaki Anno fell into a depression following the completion of work on &quot;&quot; and the 1992 failure of the &quot;Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise&quot; sequel project, &quot;Uru in Blue&quot;. According to Yasuhiro Takeda, after the failure of &quot;Uru in Blue&quot;, Anno agreed to a collaboration between King Records and Gainax as he drank with King representative Toshimichi Ōtsuki; King Records guaranteed Anno a time slot for &quot;something, anything&quot;. Anno began the development of the new series in 1993 around the notion of not running away, the underlying theme of &quot;Uru in Blue&quot;, focusing on a protagonist accustomed to avoiding personal responsibility who finds himself trying to save the heroine of the story. Early into the production, he stated his intent was to have &quot;Evangelion&quot; increase the number of anime fans, named otaku in Japanese, and attract interest in the anime medium, bringing a breath of fresh air to the mecha genre. In the early design phase of the &quot;Evangelion&quot; project, several formats were considered, including a film, a television series, and an original video animation (OVA) series. The producers finally opted for the television series, as it was the most widely accessible medium in Japan at that time. Anno also originally proposed the title &quot;Alcion&quot; for the new series, but this was rejected due to its lack of hard consonant sounds. He conceived the series as a metaphor of his four-year depression, as he tried to put his whole self into the work and imprint his own feelings on the film.

Critics noted how &quot;Evangelion&quot; borrowed certain scenarios and the use of introspection as a narrative device from a previous Anno project entitled &quot;Gunbuster&quot;. He also incorporated the narrative structure of &quot;Nadia&quot; and multiple frames of reference, leaving the story open to interpretation. The production was complex and saw several changes to the scenario initially imagined by Gainax. A female protagonist was initially proposed for the series, but the idea was scrapped. In the first scenario, the first episode presented the battle between an Angel and Rei, while the character of Shinji was only introduced after the Angel had been temporarily defeated. Further changes to the plot were made following the Aum Shinrikyo sect&#x27;s sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway in March. Cultural critic Hiroki Azuma has said that the original &quot;Evangelion&quot; story was &quot;too close to reality&quot; from Anno&#x27;s point of view. Anno thought that the original scenario was not suitable for broadcasting, and he feared censorship. However, he also criticized Aum Shinrikyo, because &quot;they lost any contact with reality&quot;. For this reason, Azuma stated that &quot;Evangelion&quot; &quot;is an intrinsic critique of Aum&quot;.

The final version of the story reflects inspiration drawn from numerous other anime and fictional works. Chief among these are &quot;Space Battleship Yamato&quot;, &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam&quot;, &quot;Devilman&quot; and &quot;Space Runaway Ideon&quot;. The series also incorporates tributes to &quot;Childhood&#x27;s End&quot;, the novels of Ryū Murakami, &quot;The Andromeda Strain&quot;, &quot;The Divine Invasion&quot;, the poem &quot;Pippa Passes&quot;, &quot;The Hitcher&quot;, and several television series including &quot;The Prisoner&quot;, &quot;Thunderbirds&quot;, &quot;Ultraman&quot;, and &quot;Ultraseven&quot;.

The development of the &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; series ran close to deadlines throughout its production run. The initial cuts of the first two episodes were screened at the second Gainax festival in July 1995, only three months before they were aired on television. By the thirteenth episode, &quot;Lilliputian Hitcher&quot;, the series began to deviate significantly from the original story, and the initial project was abandoned. The number of Angels was reduced to seventeen instead of the original twenty-eight. The writers also changed the story&#x27;s ending, originally describing the failure of the Human Instrumentality Project after an Angel attack from the Moon. Not only did the series suffer from scheduling issues, but according to Anno, despite Gainax being the lead studio for the series, the company itself had inadequate materials and staff for the full production of the series. Only three staff members from Gainax were working on the series at any given time, and most of the series&#x27; production was outsourced to Tatsunoko Production.

Starting with the sixteenth episode, &quot;Splitting of the Breast&quot;, the show changed drastically, discarding the grand narrative concerning salvation for a narrative focusing more closely on the individual characters. This change coincided with Anno&#x27;s development of an interest in psychology after a friend lent him a book on mental illness. This focus culminated in the two final episodes filmed from a completely introspective perspective. Necessity forced Anno to abandon the script of the twenty-fifth episode to work with a new one. These episodes feature heavy use of abstract animation, flashbacks, simple line drawings, photographs, and fixed image scenes with voice-over dialogue. Some critics speculated that these unconventional animation choices resulted from budget cuts, but Toshio Okada stated that it was not only a problem of schedule or budget, since Anno &quot;couldn&#x27;t decide the ending until the time came. That&#x27;s his style&quot;. These two episodes sparked controversy and condemnation among fans and critics of the series. In 1997, Hideaki Anno and Gainax thus released two animated feature films, providing another ending for the show, named &quot;Death &amp; Rebirth&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;.

==Themes==
References to mystical traditions in Judaism and Christianity, including Midrashic literature and Kabbalah, are threaded liberally through the series. Complicating viewers&#x27; attempts to form an unambiguous interpretation, the series reworks Midrash stories, Zohar images and other Kabbalistic ideas developed from the Book of Genesis to create a new &quot;Evangelion&quot;-specific mythology. The plot also combines elements of esotericism and mysticism of the Jewish Kabbalah, including the Angels, which have common and individual features with the Angels of the religious tradition, such as Sachiel, Sandalphon and Ramiel. Assistant director Kazuya Tsurumaki stated the religious visual references were intended to make the series more &quot;interesting&quot; and &quot;exotic&quot; for a Japanese audience, denying the existence of a religious meaning for the use of Christian visual symbols in the show. According to Anno, &quot;as the symbols are mixed together, for the first time something like an interrelationship or a meaning emerges&quot;.

According to Patrick Drazen, numerous allusions to the &quot;Kojiki&quot; and the &quot;Nihongi&quot; have a prominent role in &quot;Evangelion&quot;, along with the Shinto vision of the primordial cosmos and the mythical lances of the Shinto deities Izanagi and Izanami. Elements of the Judeo-Christian tradition also feature prominently throughout the series, including references to Adam, Lilith, Eve, the Lance of Longinus, the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Kabbalistic concept of Adam Kadmon, and the Tree of Life. The merging of all human souls into one through the Human Instrumentality Project at the end of the series has been compared to the Kabbalistic concept of tikkun olam. The Evangelions have been likened to the golem of Jewish folklore, and their visual design resembles the traditional depictions of &quot;oni&quot;, Japanese demons or ogres.

&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; has been interpreted as a deeply personal expression of Hideaki Anno&#x27;s own emotional struggles with depression. During the production of the series, he became interested in mental illness and psychology. According to him, Rei is a schizophrenic character and a representation of Shinji&#x27;s unconscious, while Shinji has an Oedipus complex and is characterized by a libido-destrudo conflict. Similarly, Ritsuko has an Electra complex, in which she loves Gendo, a sort of substitute for her father figure. Anno himself stated that he identifies with Shinji in both a conscious and unconscious manner, while Rei is Anno&#x27;s &quot;deepest part&quot; and Kaworu his Jungian shadow. Shinji&#x27;s entering into Unit-01 has been interpreted as a Freudian &quot;return to the womb&quot;, and his struggle to be free of the Eva as his &quot;rite of passage&quot; into manhood. The series also contains references to philosophical and psychoanalytic concepts, such as the oral stage, introjection, oral personality, ambivalence, and the death drive, including elements of the works of Sigmund Freud, Arthur Schopenhauer, and Søren Kierkegaard.

==Related media==
===Films===
In May 1996, Gainax announced an &quot;Evangelion&quot; film in response to fan dissatisfaction with the series finale. On March 15, 1997, Gainax released &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death &amp; Rebirth&quot;, consisting of 60 minutes of clips taken from the first 24 episodes of the series and the first 30 minutes of the new ending due to production issues. The second film, &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;, which premiered on July 19, 1997, provided the complete new ending as a retelling of the final two episodes of the television series. Rather than depicting the series&#x27; climax within the characters&#x27; minds, the film provides a more conventional, action-based resolution to the series&#x27; plot lines. The film won numerous awards and grossed ¥1.45 billion within six months of its release. Ex.org ranked the film in 1999 as the fifth best &#x27;All-Time Show&#x27;, with the television series at the second. In 2009, &quot;CUT&quot; magazine ranked it the third greatest anime film of all time. In July 1998, the films were re-released as &quot;Revival of Evangelion&quot; which combined &quot;Death(true)²&quot; (the director&#x27;s cut of &quot;Death&quot;) with &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;.

A new animated film series called &quot;Rebuild of Evangelion&quot; by Gainax was made, consisting of four films. The first film retells the first six episodes from the series but from the second film onward the story is different, including new characters, Evas and Angels. The first film, &quot;&quot;, was released in Japan on September 1, 2007, with &quot;&quot; released on June 27, 2009, and &quot;&quot; released on November 17, 2012. The final film, titled &quot;&quot;, was released on March 8, 2021, after two delays. In 2015, &quot;Evangelion:Another Impact&quot;, a 3D-rendered short film collaboration between the Khara studio and the media company Dwango was directed by Shinji Aramaki, released and streamed as the twelfth anime short from the Japan Animator Expo on February 8. It depicts &quot;the story of an Evangelion&#x27;s activation, rampage and howling in another world&quot;.

===Manga and books===

Ten months prior to the television broadcast of &quot;Evangelion&quot;, the character designer Yoshiyuki Sadamoto illustrated a manga version of the story, initially a supplement meant to promote the anime series. The first installment of the manga was published in the February issue of &quot;Shōnen Ace&quot; in December 1994 with subsequent installments produced on an irregular basis over an eighteen-year period. The final installment was published in June 2013. Several publishers were initially concerned at the selection of Sadamoto to develop the manga adaptation, viewing him as &quot;too passé to be bankable&quot;. The first ten volumes sold over 15 million copies, and the eleventh volume reached number one on the Tohan charts, selling an additional two million copies. The manga series won the 1996 &quot;Comicker&quot; fan manga poll. The story has been adapted into several other manga series in addition to the original Sadamoto project, including &quot;Campus Apocalypse&quot;, a mystery story that omits the Evangelion units, and &quot;Petit Eva: Evangelion@School&quot;, a parody series which received its own original net animation serial show.

===Soundtracks and music===

Shirō Sagisu composed most of the original music for the series. The soundtracks released to high rankings on the Oricon charts, with &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion III&quot; reaching the number one slot for highest sales in 1997; that same year, Sagisu received the Kobe Animation award for &quot;Best Music Score&quot; for his work on &quot;Evangelion&quot;. Classical music by Ludwig van Beethoven, Johann Sebastian Bach, Giuseppe Verdi and George Frideric Handel were also featured throughout the series and the movies.

Additional classical works and original symphonic compositions were used to score later movies produced within the &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; franchise. In total, the series&#x27; discography includes twenty-one full studio, live, compilation and soundtrack albums and six CD singles. The series&#x27; opening theme is &quot;A Cruel Angel&#x27;s Thesis&quot;, performed by Yoko Takahashi. It ranked on two TV Asahi polls, reaching 55th for best anime theme songs of all time, and eighteenth for best anime theme songs of the 1990s. Fifteen years after its release, the theme won JASRAC&#x27;s annual award for the royalties it continues to generate from its usage in pachinko, pachislo, karaoke and other venues. The ending theme of the series is &quot;Fly Me to the Moon&quot;, sung by Claire Littley and various other singers from the main vocal cast.

===Video games===

Several video games based on the series have been developed, ranging from RPG and adventure games to mahjong and card games. The series has also spawned visual novels, two of which inspired the romance and comedy-focused manga series &quot;Angelic Days&quot; and &quot;Shinji Ikari Raising Project&quot;.

==Releases==
===Japan===

The original home video releases in Japan included VHS and Laserdisc sets using a release structured around &quot;Genesis 0:(volume number)&quot;, with each of the first twelve releases containing two episodes each. Each of the episodes received minor changes and episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-fourth were extended with new scenes. &quot;Genesis 0:13&quot; and &quot;Genesis 0:14&quot; contained the original and the alternate versions of the last two episodes first presented in &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion: The End of Evangelion&quot;. A fifteenth and final release for Laserdisc, entitled &quot;Genesis 0:X&quot;, contained the broadcast versions of the episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-fourth and was a special mail-in offer for fans who purchased all fourteen discs.

The first Japanese DVD release was spread across seven volumes; all contained four episodes, with the seventh volume containing both the original and alternate versions of the last two episodes. This version was identical to the previous laserdisc and VHS release. The movies were also released as a special set, just like before. In 2000 and 2001, three box sets were released to commemorate the fictional Second Impact which occurred in the year 2000 in the series. The &quot;Second Impact Box&quot; contained the original episodes and both movies on nine DVDs — three per Box. The versions were the original broadcast and theatrical versions respectively and therefore different from the previous DVD release. In addition, the video game &quot;Girlfriend of Steel&quot; was included in the third box set.

The Japanese-only, nine-volume &quot;Renewal of Evangelion&quot; DVDs were released on June 25, 2003, with improved acoustic effects, remixed dialogue and remastered soundtrack for 5.1 stereo sound. The first eight volumes covered the original twenty-six episodes, including two versions of episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-fourth: the extended video version that was available in previous releases, and a reconstruction of the shorter broadcast version, which was made available for the first time since the Genesis 0:X laserdisc and also was not censored like in the original broadcast. The ninth volume contained &quot;Death(true)²&quot;, while the tenth included &quot;End of Evangelion&quot; (omitting &quot;Rebirth&quot;). The &quot;Renewal Project&quot; release formed the basis for the western &quot;Platinum Edition&quot;. On December 1, 2014, Studio Khara announced a Blu-ray boxset containing a new HD-remastering of the television series, the video versions of the episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-fourth, as well as the two movies, both as &quot;Revival of Evangelion&quot;, the director&#x27;s cut, which was available in the &quot;Renewal&quot; DVDs, and as their original theatrical versions &quot;Death and Rebirth&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;.

Another DVD set, titled &quot;Archives of Evangelion&quot;, was announced. It contains the original unaltered broadcast version of the television series as well as the broadcast version of &quot;Death (True) &amp; Rebirth&quot; that aired on January 2, 1998. Both sets were released on August 26, 2015, to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the TV series. Following the bankruptcy and closure of Gainax between May and June 2024, Anno&#x27;s current animation producer, Studio Khara, officially gained the full copyright of the &quot;Evangelion&quot; franchise.

===ADV Films===
The series was distributed in North America and Europe by ADV Films. The thirteen English VHS tapes, released from August 20, 1996, to July 7, 1998, contained two episodes each and were released using the same &quot;Genesis 0:(volume number)&quot; titling convention as the first Japanese home video release. Two laserdisc collections were released as &quot;Collection 1 Deluxe Edition&quot; and &quot;Collection 2 Deluxe Edition&quot;, containing episodes one to four and five to eight, respectively. The first DVD release by ADV Films was the eight-disk &quot;Perfect Collection&quot; in 2002, containing the original installments. In 2004, ADV released two DVD compilations titled &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion: Resurrection&quot; and &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion: Genesis Reborn&quot;, encompassing the directors&#x27; cuts of episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-fourth, additionally including the original versions of episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-sixth.

The &quot;Platinum Edition&quot; release was announced by ADV in 2004, consisting of seven DVDs released between July 27, 2004, and April 19, 2005. The &quot;Platinum Edition&quot; contained the original twenty-six episodes and the four &quot;Director&#x27;s cut&quot; versions of episodes from the twenty-first to the twenty-fourth. A six-disc version of the Platinum Edition, the &quot;Platinum Complete Edition&quot;, was released on November 22, 2005, and omitted several extras included in other versions, including commentary and trailers. A seven-disc &quot;Platinum Perfect Collection&quot; tin case version was released on November 27, 2007, and included the extras that were omitted from the &quot;Platinum Complete Edition&quot;. On November 18, 2008, a seven-disc &quot;Holiday Edition&quot; DVD was released; this would be the final DVD release of the series from ADV Films. In late November 2011, it was announced the series was going out of print.

===Madman Anime===
Madman has held the rights to the series since 1998 in New Zealand and Australia, where &quot;Evangelion&quot; was broadcast in 1999 by the Special Broadcasting Service. Madman Anime also holds the home video licenses for the &quot;Rebuild of Evangelion&quot; films.

===Netflix===
On November 26, 2018, streaming company Netflix announced that it had acquired the worldwide streaming rights to the original anime series, as well as &quot;Evangelion: Death (True)²&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;, for release in Q2 2019. On March 22, 2019, Netflix announced a June 21, 2019, premiere date for the titles. Following the dissolution of ADV Films in late 2009, the Netflix release includes a re-translated script from Studio Khara&#x27;s in-house translator Dan Kanemitsu and a new English-language cast chosen by Khara. The new dub received praise for the actors&#x27; performances, but the new script received some criticism for straightwashing the relationship between the characters Shinji and Kaworu. The Netflix release omits &quot;Fly Me to the Moon&quot; in regions outside of Japan due to licensing issues.

===Anime Limited and GKIDS===
On May 30, 2020, British anime distributor Anime Limited announced it had acquired home video distribution rights for the original series, &quot;Evangelion: Death (True)²&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot; in the United Kingdom and Ireland, with an &quot;Ultimate Edition Blu-ray&quot; release scheduled for 2021, marking the international release of the original series on Blu-ray. On October 3, 2020, North American anime distributor GKIDS announced it had licensed the original TV series, &quot;Death (True)²&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot; for home video, theatrical, and digital download release with an Ultimate Edition to be released in 2021, making this the first Blu-ray release of the franchise in North America. On August 30, 2021, GKIDS announced a Collector&#x27;s Edition and a Standard edition release in addition to the Ultimate Edition. The Collector&#x27;s/Ultimate edition had the &quot;Classic Dub and Subtitled Version&quot;, including the ADV and Manga English dubs and subs, while the standard edition was only included the Netflix English dub and sub. &quot;Fly Me to the Moon&quot; was not included in any of the GKIDS/All the Anime releases due to licensing issues. The Standard edition was released on November 9, 2021, while the Collector&#x27;s/Ultimate edition was released on December 8, 2021. On November 2, 2021, GKIDS released the TV series, &quot;Death (True)²&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot; on all major digital download services six days ahead of the Standard Blu-ray release. This release, like the Standard BD, only contains the Netflix dub and sub.

==Reception==
&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; received acclaim both domestically and internationally during its initial broadcast and in the decades since. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the series has an approval rating of 100% based on 31 reviews, with an average rating of 8.3/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot;, both a cultural touchstone for Japan and an uncompromising auteurist vision by creator Hideaki Anno, doubles as an enthralling apex for the mecha anime genre and as a harrowing exploration of depression – making for a wholly singular epic about angels and inner demons.&quot; &quot;Paste&quot;, &quot;IGN&quot;, and &quot;Comic Book Resources&quot; have named it as one of the best anime series of all time.

The &quot;richness&quot; of the characters and &quot;complex and layered&quot; narrative has received praise by critics. In 1998, Max Autohead of &quot;Hyper&quot; rated it 10 out of 10, praising the &quot;brilliant and fantastic storyline, with amazing characters who pull you not only into their world, but into their psyche as well&quot;. The same year, Shidoshi of &quot;GameFan&quot; magazine gave it an A rating, calling it an &quot;awesome&quot; series. Mike Hale of &quot;The New York Times&quot; described it in 2009 as &quot;a superior anime, a giant-robot tale of unusual depth, feeling and detail.&quot;

Following the conclusion of the series&#x27; original television broadcast, the public and critical reception to &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; was polarized, particularly with regard to the final two episodes. The experimental style of the finale confused or alienated many fans and spawned debate and controversy; the criticism was largely directed toward the lack of storyline resolution in the final two episodes. Opinion on the finale was mixed, with the audience broadly divided between those who considered the episodes &quot;deep&quot;, and those who felt their meaning was &quot;more apparent than real&quot;. The English voice actors admitted that they also had trouble understanding the series&#x27; conclusion. The &quot;Mainichi Times&quot; wrote that broadcast of the penultimate episode, &quot;nearly all viewers felt betrayed ... When commentator Eiji Ōtsuka sent a letter to the &quot;Yomiuri Shimbun&quot;, complaining about the end of the &quot;Evangelion&quot; series, the debate went nationwide.&quot; Despite the criticism, Anno stood by his artistic choices for the series&#x27; conclusion. Critic Zac Bertschy remarked in 2003 that &quot;Most of the backlash against &quot;Evangelion&quot; existed because people don&#x27;t like to think&quot;. The initial controversy surrounding the end of &quot;Evangelion&quot; has had no lasting negative influence on the popularity of the series.

&quot;Evangelion&quot; has developed into a social phenomenon beyond its primary fan base, generating national discussion in Japan. The series has also been the subject of numerous media reports, debates, and research studies worldwide. The show has received review by critics, academics and sociologists alike, including by Susan J. Napier, William Rout, Mick Broderick, Mari Kotani, Shinji Miyadai, Hiroki Azuma, Yuriko Furuhata, and Marc Steinberg. The series has been described as both a critique and deconstruction of the mecha genre. Japanese critic Manabu Tsuribe considered that &quot;Evangelion&quot; was &quot;extremely interior and is lacking in sociality, so that it seems to reflect pathology of the times.&quot; Anime News Network&#x27;s Martin Theron described the character design as &quot;distinctive, designed to be sexy rather than cutesy&quot;, and the mecha designs as &quot;among the most distinctive ever produced for an anime series, with sleek, lithe appearances that look monstrous, fearsome, and nimble rather than boxy and knight-like&quot;. Mike Crandol stated &quot;It no longer seems contrite to say that &quot;Evangelion&quot; is surely one of the all-time great works of animation&quot;. In February 2004 &quot;Cinefantastique&quot; listed the anime as one of the &quot;10 Essential Animations&quot;.

===Awards===
&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; has scored highly in popularity polls. In 1996, the series won first place in the &quot;Best Loved Series&quot; category of the Anime Grand Prix, a reader-polled award series published in &quot;Animage&quot; magazine. The show was again awarded this prize in 1997 by a large margin. The &quot;End of Evangelion&quot; won first place in 1998, making &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; the first anime franchise to win three consecutive first place awards. The website &quot;IGN&quot; ranked &quot;Evangelion&quot; as the tenth best animated series in its &quot;Top 100 Animated TV Series&quot; list. The series also placed third in &quot;Animage&quot;″s &quot;anime that should be remembered in the 21st Century&quot;. In 1998, EX.org&#x27;s readers voted &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; the best US anime release and in 1999, the second-best show of all time. In 2007, a large-scale survey poll by TV Asahi voted &quot;Evangelion&quot; as the second most appreciated anime in Japan. The series was also ranked as the most popular of all time in a 2006 survey of 80,000 attendees at the Japan Media Arts Festival.

&quot;Evangelion&quot; won the Animation Kobe award in 1996, and 1997. The series was also awarded the eighteenth Nihon SF Taisho Award and the Excellence Award at the first Japan Media Arts Festival in 1997, while the film ranked sixth on &quot;Wizard&#x27;s Anime&quot; Magazine on their &quot;Top 50 Anime released in North America&quot;. In the August 1996 issue of &quot;Animage&quot;, &quot;Evangelion&quot; characters placed high in the rankings of best characters with Rei ranked first, Asuka third, Kaworu fourth and Shinji sixth. Rei Ayanami won in the Female Character category in 1995 and 1996 and Shinji Ikari won the Male Character category in 1996 and 1997. In 2010, &quot;Newtype&quot; magazine recognized Rei Ayanami as the most popular character of the 1990s in the female category, and Shinji Ikari in the male category. &quot;A Cruel Angel&#x27;s Thesis&quot; won the Animage award in the Best Song category in 1996, and TV Asahi recognized it as the eighteenth best anime song since 1990. &quot;TV Asahi&quot; also recognized the &quot;suicide of Ayanami Rei&quot; as the ninth most touching anime scene ever.

==Influence and legacy==
&quot;Evangelion&quot; has had a significant impact on Japanese popular culture. The series also had a strong influence on anime, at a time when the anime industry and televised anime series were in a slump period. CNET reviewer Tim Hornyak credits the series with revitalizing and transforming the giant mecha genre. In the 1980s and 1990s, Japanese animation saw decreased production following the economic crash in Japan. This was followed by a crisis of ideas in the years to come. Against this background, &quot;Evangelion&quot; imposed new standards for the animated serial, ushering in the era of the &quot;new Japanese animation serial&quot;, characterized by innovations that allowed a technical and artistic revival of the industry. The production of anime serials began to reflect greater author control, the concentration of resources in fewer but higher quality episodes, typically ranging from thirteen to twenty-six, a directorial approach similar to live film, and greater freedom from the constraints of merchandising.

According to TV Tokyo&#x27;s Keisuke Iwata, the global spread of Japanese animation dramatically expanded due to the popularity of &quot;Evangelion&quot;. In Japan, &quot;Evangelion&quot; prompted a review of the cultural value of anime, and its success, according to Roland Kelts, made the medium more accessible to the international youth scene. With the interest in the series, otaku culture became a mass social phenomenon. The show&#x27;s regular reruns increased the number of otaku, while John Lynden links its popularity to a boom in interest in literature on the Dead Sea Scrolls, Kabbalah and Christianity.

Critics traced &quot;Evangelion&quot;&#x27;s influence on subsequent anime series, including &quot;Serial Experiments Lain&quot;, &quot;RahXephon&quot;, &quot;Texhnolyze&quot;, &quot;Gasaraki&quot;, 
&quot;Guilty Crown&quot;, &quot;Boogiepop Phantom&quot;, &quot;Blue Submarine No. 6&quot;, &quot;Martian Successor Nadesico&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Gurren Lagann&quot;, &quot;Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure&quot;, &quot;Argento Soma&quot;, &quot;Pilot Candidate&quot;, &quot;Generator Gawl&quot;, and &quot;Dai-Guard&quot;. References, homages and tributes to the series are also contained in Japanese and Western media such as the third episode of &quot;Magical Shopping Arcade Abenobashi&quot;, &quot;Koi Koi Seven&quot;, &quot;Hayate the Combat Butler&quot;, &quot;Baka and Test&quot;, &quot;Regular Show&quot;, &quot;My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic&quot;, &quot;Gravity Falls&quot;, &quot;Sgt. Frog&quot;, &quot;Rick and Morty&quot;, &quot;One Hour Photo&quot;, &quot;Steven Universe&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Nope&quot;. The show&#x27;s mixture of religion and mecha also influenced subsequent Japanese video games, including &quot;Xenogears&quot; and &quot;El Shaddai: Ascension of the Metatron&quot;.

The design and personality traits of the character Rei Ayanami were reused for many anime and manga characters of the late 1990s, such as Ruri Hoshino of &quot;Nadesico&quot;, Ruriko Tsukushima (&quot;Droplet&quot;), Miharu (&quot;Gasaraki&quot;), Anthy Himemiya (&quot;Revolutionary Girl Utena&quot;), and Lain Iwakura (&quot;Serial Experiments Lain&quot;). The character of Asuka was parodied by Excel (&quot;Excel Saga&quot;), and some of her traits were used to create the character of Mai in &quot;Gunparade March&quot;. According to Italian critic Guido Tavassi, &quot;Evangelion&quot;&#x27;s mecha design, characterized by a greater resemblance to the human figure, and the abstract designs of the Angels, also had a significant impact on the designs of future anime productions. Nobuhiro Watsuki designed several characters for &quot;Rurouni Kenshin&quot; based on characters from &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot;, namely Uonuma Usui, Honjō Kamatari and Fuji. Other artists have cited the series as an inspiration, including Makoto Shinkai and Gege Akutami for their manga &quot;Jujutsu Kaisen&quot;. In the aftermath of &quot;Evangelion&quot;, Anno reused stylistic conceits from the series in the live-action &quot;Love &amp; Pop&quot; and the anime romance &quot;Kare Kano&quot;. &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; also influenced music artists, such as the British band Fightstar and its debut album, &quot;Grand Unification&quot;, and the Japanese band Rey, which derived its name from the character of Rei Ayanami.

==Merchandising==

The popularity of &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; extends to its merchandising, which exceeded $400 million within two years of its release. The series has established itself greatly on the Japanese market, developing a varied range of products for adult consumers, such as cell phones, laptop computers, many soundtracks, DVDs, action figures, telephone cards and an official set of Japanese coins. The stylized mecha design that would later earn praise for &quot;Evangelion&quot; was initially criticized by certain toy companies as being too difficult to manufacture, with some expressing concern that models of the Evangelion &quot;mecha&quot; &quot;would never sell.&quot; Eventually, Sega agreed to license all toy and video game sales. At the time of the release of the Japanese film &quot;Death &amp; Rebirth&quot; and &quot;The End of Evangelion&quot;, estimated sales of &quot;Evangelion&quot; merchandise topped $300 million, of which 70% derived from sales of video and laser discs, soundtrack CDs, single CDs, computer software and the three-volume manga.

The commercial exploitation of the series for the home video market achieved record sales and remained strong over a decade later. The fame of the show has grown through home video sales, which exceeded two or three times the sales of other contemporary anime series and films. According to anime critic Guido Tavassi, the series contributed significantly to the spread of the DVD format in Japan and generated a considerable impact on the Japanese economy, calculated in billions of yen. In 2006, Matt Greenfield stated that the franchise had earned over . A 2007 estimate placed total sales of 6,000 related goods at over . By 2015, more than two million &quot;Evangelion&quot; pachinko and pachislot machines had been sold, generating in revenue.

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Patrick Drazen: &quot;Evangelion&quot;; in &quot;Anime Explosion! – The What? Why? &amp; Wow! of Japanese Animation&quot;. Stone Bridge Press, 2014, 

* Endo, Toru. &quot;Konna kitanai kirei na hi ni wa&quot; (&quot;On a day so beautiful and so ugly&quot;). &quot;Poppu karuchaa kuritiiku&quot; (&quot;Pop Culture Critique&quot;), volume 0. 1997. 
* Gainax, &quot;Newtype&quot;. &quot;E-Mono: Neon Genesis Evangelion: All Goods Catalog&quot;. . 
* &quot;June&quot; magazine, ed. &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion June Tokuhon: Zankoku-Na Tenshi no These&quot; (&quot;The Neon Genesis Evangelion JUNE Reader: Zankoku na Tenshi no These&quot;). .
* Kotani, Mari. &quot;Seibo Evangelion&quot; (&quot;Evangelion as the Immaculate Virgin&quot;). Tokyo: Magajin Hausu. 1997.
* Kotani, Mari. &quot;A New Millennialist Perspective On The Daughters Of Eve&quot;. . 
* Lippit, Seiji M. &quot;Topographies of Japanese Modernism&quot;. New York: Columbia UP, 2000.
* Morikawa, Kaichiro (ed.). &quot;The Evangelion Style&quot;. .
* Yamashita, Ikuto and Seiji, Kio. &quot;Sore Wo Nasumono: Neon Genesis Evangelion Concept Design Works&quot;. .
* &quot;Evangelion Special: Genesis of a major manga&quot;—&quot;Mainichi Daily News&quot;
* &quot;Evangelion Special: For producer Otsuki, success not always a bed of roses&quot;—&quot;Mainichi Daily News&quot;
* &quot;Understanding Evangelion&quot; —Anime News Network

==External links==
===Official websites===
* &quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot;—Gainax official &quot;Evangelion&quot; page 
* Madman Entertainment &quot;Evangelion&quot; page
* 新世紀エヴァンゲリオン —King Records &quot;Evangelion&quot; page 

===Articles and information===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4292083" start="49" end="60" title="Mecha anime and manga" label="mecha anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q834328" start="91" end="97" title="Gainax" label="Gainax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323459" start="111" end="120" title="Tatsunoko Production" label="Tatsunoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q23261" start="138" end="150" title="Hideaki Anno" label="Hideaki Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="172" end="180" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143582" start="337" end="349" title="Shinji Ikari" label="Shinji Ikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721109" start="389" end="394" title="Gendo Ikari" label="Gendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351172" start="453" end="463" title="Evangelion (mecha)" label="Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="487" end="492" title="mecha" label="mecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331128" start="519" end="525" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)" label="Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="778" end="792" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="826" end="836" title="archetype" label="archetypal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16169347" start="837" end="844" title="Themes of Neon Genesis Evangelion" label="imagery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="858" end="874" title="Shinto#Cosmology and afterlife" label="Shinto cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="879" end="887" title="mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297875" start="888" end="903" title="Christianity and Judaism" label="Judeo-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="926" end="933" title="Midrash" label="Midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="946" end="954" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="960" end="974" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="1017" end="1022" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="1027" end="1031" title="Carl Gustav Jung" label="Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151814" start="1317" end="1338" title="The End of Evangelion" label="The End of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142690" start="1408" end="1429" title="Rebuild of Evangelion" label="Rebuild of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="1562" end="1567" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q66834583" start="1607" end="1639" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Evangelion&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q836661" start="1792" end="1800" title="pachinko" label="pachinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143582" start="1919" end="1931" title="Shinji Ikari" label="Shinji Ikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721109" start="2002" end="2013" title="Gendo Ikari" label="Gendo Ikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331128" start="2126" end="2131" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2138" end="2145" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)#Sachiel" label="Sachiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="2217" end="2233" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351172" start="2360" end="2370" title="Evangelion (mecha)" label="Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203370" start="2548" end="2564" title="Misato Katsuragi" label="Misato Katsuragi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2670" end="2677" title="Evangelion (mecha)#Evangelion Unit-01" label="Unit-01"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3107" end="3115" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)#Shamshel" label="Shamshel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3371" end="3378" title="Evangelion (mecha)#Evangelion Unit-00" label="Unit-00"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140524" start="3449" end="3460" title="Rei Ayanami" label="Rei Ayanami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3558" end="3564" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)#Ramiel" label="Ramiel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3596" end="3603" title="Evangelion (mecha)#Evangelion Unit-02" label="Unit-02"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355816" start="3662" end="3681" title="Asuka Langley Sōryu" label="Asuka Langley Sōryu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4024" end="4030" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)#Leliel" label="Leliel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4126" end="4133" title="Evangelion (mecha)#Evangelion Unit-03" label="Unit-03"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4200" end="4213" title="List of Neon Genesis Evangelion characters#Toji Suzuhara" label="Toji Suzuhara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4397" end="4402" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)#Arael" label="Arael"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607365" start="4469" end="4485" title="childhood trauma" label="childhood trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="4502" end="4518" title="mental breakdown" label="mental breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142683" start="4745" end="4758" title="Ritsuko Akagi (Neon Genesis Evangelion)" label="Ritsuko Akagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142683" start="4938" end="4947" title="Yui Ikari" label="Yui Ikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182993" start="5056" end="5069" title="Kaworu Nagisa" label="Kaworu Nagisa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5211" end="5217" title="Angels (Neon Genesis Evangelion)#Tabris" label="Tabris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312056" start="5811" end="5819" title="Epiphany (feeling)" label="epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143582" start="6513" end="6525" title="Shinji Ikari" label="Shinji Ikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140524" start="7431" end="7442" title="Rei Ayanami" label="Rei Ayanami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355816" start="7958" end="7977" title="Asuka Langley Soryu" label="Asuka Langley Soryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203370" start="8714" end="8730" title="Misato Katsuragi" label="Misato Katsuragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q282121" start="8923" end="8941" title="Yoshiyuki Sadamoto" label="Yoshiyuki Sadamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q308087" start="8974" end="8988" title="girl next door" label="girl next door"/>
<link wikidata="Q940655" start="10152" end="10155" title="UFO (British TV series)" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10785" end="10827" title="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise" label="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11621474" start="10856" end="10867" title="Uru in Blue" label="Uru in Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049992" start="10888" end="10903" title="Yasuhiro Takeda" label="Yasuhiro Takeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328605" start="10990" end="11002" title="King Records (Japan)" label="King Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q194448" start="11545" end="11550" title="otaku" label="otaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="11801" end="11825" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196284" start="12426" end="12435" title="Gunbuster" label="Gunbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q39030248" start="12796" end="12809" title="Angel Attack" label="first episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q217408" start="13006" end="13019" title="Aum Shinrikyo" label="Aum Shinrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146739" start="13032" end="13068" title="sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway" label="sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q921584" start="13095" end="13107" title="Hiroki Azuma (critic)" label="Hiroki Azuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292" start="13670" end="13693" title="Space Battleship Yamato" label="Space Battleship Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134906" start="13707" end="13725" title="Mobile Suit Gundam" label="Mobile Suit Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632547" start="13739" end="13747" title="Devilman" label="Devilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316125" start="13764" end="13783" title="Space Runaway Ideon" label="Space Runaway Ideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q466057" start="13838" end="13858" title="Childhood&amp;#x27;s End" label="Childhood&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q380265" start="13880" end="13892" title="Ryū Murakami" label="Ryū Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q513036" start="13900" end="13920" title="The Andromeda Strain" label="The Andromeda Strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189364" start="13934" end="13953" title="The Divine Invasion" label="The Divine Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389048" start="13976" end="13988" title="Pippa Passes" label="Pippa Passes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536239" start="14002" end="14013" title="The Hitcher (1986 film)" label="The Hitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q714753" start="14067" end="14079" title="The Prisoner" label="The Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q288085" start="14093" end="14105" title="Thunderbirds (TV series)" label="Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058534" start="14119" end="14127" title="Ultraman (1966 TV series)" label="Ultraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531879" start="14145" end="14155" title="Ultraseven" label="Ultraseven"/>
<link wikidata="Q39037416" start="14474" end="14493" title="Lilliputian Hitcher" label="Lilliputian Hitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323459" start="15214" end="15234" title="Tatsunoko Production" label="Tatsunoko Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q39037691" start="15280" end="15303" title="Splitting of the Breast" label="Splitting of the Breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137564" start="16038" end="16050" title="Toshio Okada" label="Toshio Okada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16431" end="16450" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death &amp;amp; Rebirth" label="Death &amp;amp; Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151814" start="16467" end="16488" title="The End of Evangelion" label="The End of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="16522" end="16530" title="mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="16606" end="16614" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="16770" end="16775" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="16830" end="16845" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="16940" end="16951" title="Western esotericism" label="esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="16956" end="16965" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497854" start="17106" end="17113" title="Sachiel" label="Sachiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001159" start="17115" end="17125" title="Sandalphon" label="Sandalphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069028" start="17130" end="17136" title="Ramiel" label="Ramiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q742757" start="17157" end="17173" title="Kazuya Tsurumaki" label="Kazuya Tsurumaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q813031" start="17626" end="17632" title="Kojiki" label="Kojiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q813935" start="17653" end="17660" title="Nihongi" label="Nihongi"/>
<link wikidata="Q813858" start="17816" end="17823" title="Izanagi" label="Izanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q682306" start="17828" end="17835" title="Izanami" label="Izanami"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="17951" end="17955" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180627" start="17957" end="17963" title="Lilith" label="Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q830183" start="17965" end="17968" title="Eve" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q478195" start="17974" end="17991" title="Lance of Longinus" label="Lance of Longinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="17997" end="18013" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q350669" start="18042" end="18053" title="Adam Kadmon" label="Adam Kadmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746743" start="18063" end="18075" title="Tree of life (Kabbalah)" label="Tree of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q164290" start="18232" end="18243" title="tikkun olam" label="tikkun olam"/>
<link wikidata="Q215085" start="18286" end="18291" title="golem" label="golem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748613" start="18295" end="18310" title="Jewish folklore" label="Jewish folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q730052" start="18382" end="18385" title="oni" label="oni"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="18692" end="18705" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="18754" end="18765" title="unconscious mind" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="18787" end="18802" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipus complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="18829" end="18835" title="libido" label="libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="18836" end="18844" title="destrudo" label="destrudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q324081" start="18881" end="18896" title="Electra complex" label="Electra complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q286363" start="19128" end="19142" title="shadow (psychology)" label="Jungian shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496249" start="19429" end="19439" title="oral stage" label="oral stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340448" start="19441" end="19453" title="introjection" label="introjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928045" start="19473" end="19484" title="ambivalence" label="ambivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570600" start="19494" end="19505" title="death drive" label="death drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="19557" end="19576" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="19582" end="19599" title="Søren Kierkegaard" label="Søren Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19793" end="19837" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death &amp;amp; Rebirth" label="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death &amp;amp; Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151814" start="20018" end="20039" title="The End of Evangelion" label="The End of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20701" end="20722" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Death &amp;amp; Rebirth#Revival of Evangelion" label="Revival of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142690" start="20897" end="20918" title="Rebuild of Evangelion" label="Rebuild of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911860" start="21435" end="21446" title="3D rendering" label="3D-rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482244" start="21542" end="21556" title="Shinji Aramaki" label="Shinji Aramaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q18644963" start="21616" end="21635" title="Japan Animator Expo" label="Japan Animator Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282121" start="21877" end="21895" title="Yoshiyuki Sadamoto" label="Yoshiyuki Sadamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977621" start="21910" end="21915" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion (manga)" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q938736" start="22076" end="22086" title="Shōnen Ace" label="Shōnen Ace"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22754" end="22771" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Campus Apocalypse" label="Campus Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22838" end="22866" title="Petit Eva: Evangelion@School" label="Petit Eva: Evangelion@School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="22913" end="22935" title="original net animation" label="original net animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456797" start="22979" end="22991" title="Shirō Sagisu" label="Shirō Sagisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q476215" start="23093" end="23099" title="Oricon" label="Oricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q547818" start="23245" end="23259" title="Kobe Animation" label="Kobe Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="23358" end="23378" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="23380" end="23401" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="23403" end="23417" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="23422" end="23444" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q378523" start="23837" end="23864" title="A Cruel Angel&amp;#x27;s Thesis" label="A Cruel Angel&amp;#x27;s Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q679797" start="23885" end="23899" title="Yoko Takahashi" label="Yoko Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="23918" end="23926" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q774842" start="24091" end="24097" title="JASRAC" label="JASRAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q836661" start="24179" end="24187" title="pachinko" label="pachinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q33972" start="24189" end="24197" title="pachislo" label="pachislo"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="24199" end="24206" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066479" start="24265" end="24283" title="Fly Me to the Moon" label="Fly Me to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13539250" start="24394" end="24425" title="List of Neon Genesis Evangelion video games" label="video games based on the series"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="24460" end="24463" title="role-playing video game" label="RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="24468" end="24482" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q12263" start="24487" end="24494" title="mahjong" label="mahjong"/>
<link wikidata="Q142714" start="24499" end="24508" title="card game" label="card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q689445" start="24539" end="24551" title="visual novel" label="visual novel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24626" end="24638" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Angelic Days" label="Angelic Days"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24655" end="24683" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: Shinji Ikari Raising Project" label="Shinji Ikari Raising Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="24777" end="24786" title="Laserdisc" label="Laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25219" end="25265" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion: The End of Evangelion" label="Neon Genesis Evangelion: The End of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203676" start="27194" end="27206" title="Studio Khara" label="Studio Khara"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="27219" end="27226" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203676" start="28107" end="28119" title="Khara (studio)" label="Studio Khara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293215" start="28274" end="28283" title="ADV Films" label="ADV Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="30325" end="30353" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="Special Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618413" start="30355" end="30367" title="Madman Anime" label="Madman Anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142690" start="30417" end="30438" title="Rebuild of Evangelion" label="Rebuild of Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="30507" end="30514" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064174" start="31126" end="31141" title="straightwashing" label="straightwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619118" start="31385" end="31398" title="Anime Limited" label="Anime Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513576" start="31787" end="31792" title="GKIDS" label="GKIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902765" start="32332" end="32337" title="Manga Entertainment" label="Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="33129" end="33146" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="33147" end="33162" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811336" start="33631" end="33636" title="Paste (magazine)" label="Paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="33650" end="33653" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="33671" end="33691" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056823" start="33910" end="33915" title="Hyper (magazine)" label="Hyper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094955" start="34133" end="34140" title="GameFan" label="GameFan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="34238" end="34256" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136866" start="35113" end="35127" title="Mainichi Shimbun" label="Mainichi Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049381" start="35243" end="35254" title="Eiji Ōtsuka" label="Eiji Ōtsuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q645218" start="35282" end="35297" title="Yomiuri Shimbun" label="Yomiuri Shimbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q931951" start="36116" end="36131" title="Susan J. Napier" label="Susan J. Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760918" start="36163" end="36174" title="Mari Kotani" label="Mari Kotani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497592" start="36176" end="36190" title="Shinji Miyadai" label="Shinji Miyadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="36517" end="36535" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120662" start="37035" end="37050" title="Cinefantastique" label="Cinefantastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201306" start="37369" end="37376" title="Animage" label="Animage"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="37649" end="37652" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="38078" end="38086" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371522" start="38266" end="38291" title="Japan Media Arts Festival" label="Japan Media Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q547818" start="38325" end="38339" title="Animation Kobe" label="Animation Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10311458" start="38408" end="38429" title="Nihon SF Taisho Award" label="Nihon SF Taisho Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q482793" start="38982" end="38989" title="Newtype" label="Newtype"/>
<link wikidata="Q378523" start="39140" end="39167" title="A Cruel Angel&amp;#x27;s Thesis" label="A Cruel Angel&amp;#x27;s Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="39506" end="39530" title="Japanese popular culture" label="Japanese popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="39666" end="39670" title="CNET" label="CNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="39851" end="39874" title="Lost Decade (Japan)" label="economic crash in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q734663" start="40501" end="40509" title="TV Tokyo" label="TV Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858387" start="41205" end="41228" title="Serial Experiments Lain" label="Serial Experiments Lain"/>
<link wikidata="Q95072" start="41242" end="41251" title="RahXephon" label="RahXephon"/>
<link wikidata="Q777898" start="41265" end="41275" title="Texhnolyze" label="Texhnolyze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495051" start="41289" end="41297" title="Gasaraki" label="Gasaraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q494610" start="41312" end="41324" title="Guilty Crown" label="Guilty Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140751" start="41338" end="41355" title="Boogiepop Phantom" label="Boogiepop Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q885903" start="41369" end="41389" title="Blue Submarine No. 6" label="Blue Submarine No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q701317" start="41403" end="41429" title="Martian Successor Nadesico" label="Martian Successor Nadesico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277" start="41457" end="41470" title="Gurren Lagann" label="Gurren Lagann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171190" start="41484" end="41516" title="Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure" label="Dual! Parallel Trouble Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q174410" start="41530" end="41542" title="Argento Soma" label="Argento Soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q699961" start="41556" end="41571" title="The Candidate for Goddess" label="Pilot Candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759591" start="41585" end="41599" title="Generator Gawl" label="Generator Gawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111448" start="41617" end="41626" title="Dai-Guard" label="Dai-Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465820" start="41765" end="41799" title="Magical Shopping Arcade Abenobashi" label="Magical Shopping Arcade Abenobashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314517" start="41813" end="41826" title="Koi Koi Seven" label="Koi Koi Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q116122" start="41840" end="41864" title="Hayate the Combat Butler" label="Hayate the Combat Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q483263" start="41878" end="41891" title="Baka and Test" label="Baka and Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q82617" start="41905" end="41917" title="Regular Show" label="Regular Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41931" end="41966" title="My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic" label="My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q550555" start="41980" end="41993" title="Gravity Falls" label="Gravity Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q582630" start="42007" end="42016" title="Sgt. Frog" label="Sgt. Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q15659308" start="42030" end="42044" title="Rick and Morty" label="Rick and Morty"/>
<link wikidata="Q990976" start="42058" end="42072" title="One Hour Photo" label="One Hour Photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615342" start="42086" end="42101" title="Steven Universe" label="Steven Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q107176162" start="42133" end="42137" title="Nope (film)" label="Nope"/>
<link wikidata="Q583360" start="42256" end="42265" title="Xenogears" label="Xenogears"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42282" end="42319" title="El Shaddai: Ascension of the Metatron" label="El Shaddai: Ascension of the Metatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499489" start="42529" end="42536" title="Shizuku (video game)" label="Droplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q696377" start="42598" end="42622" title="Revolutionary Girl Utena" label="Revolutionary Girl Utena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338812" start="42739" end="42749" title="Excel Saga" label="Excel Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065678" start="42831" end="42846" title="Gunparade March" label="Gunparade March"/>
<link wikidata="Q316970" start="43115" end="43131" title="Nobuhiro Watsuki" label="Nobuhiro Watsuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q216439" start="43170" end="43185" title="Rurouni Kenshin" label="Rurouni Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574735" start="43261" end="43272" title="Uonuma Usui" label="Uonuma Usui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574735" start="43274" end="43288" title="Honjō Kamatari" label="Honjō Kamatari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574735" start="43293" end="43297" title="Fuji (Rurouni Kenshin)" label="Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q335080" start="43364" end="43378" title="Makoto Shinkai" label="Makoto Shinkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q60231010" start="43383" end="43395" title="Gege Akutami" label="Gege Akutami"/>
<link wikidata="Q55522899" start="43418" end="43432" title="Jujutsu Kaisen" label="Jujutsu Kaisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090711" start="43556" end="43570" title="Love &amp;amp; Pop" label="Love &amp;amp; Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q696567" start="43605" end="43614" title="Kare Kano" label="Kare Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357682" start="43714" end="43723" title="Fightstar" label="Fightstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758626" start="43751" end="43768" title="Grand Unification (Fightstar album)" label="Grand Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319394" start="43798" end="43801" title="Rey (band)" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="44214" end="44227" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122035" start="44230" end="44245" title="telephone cards" label="telephone cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="44269" end="44283" title="Japanese yen" label="Japanese coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="44575" end="44579" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="45005" end="45015" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788728" start="45453" end="45468" title="Matt Greenfield" label="Matt Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33972" start="45648" end="45657" title="pachislot" label="pachislot"/>
<link wikidata="Q482793" start="46166" end="46173" title="Newtype" label="Newtype"/>
<link wikidata="Q864821" start="46250" end="46275" title="June (manga magazine)" label="&amp;quot;June&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760918" start="46445" end="46457" title="Mari Kotani" label="Kotani, Mari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21712" wikidata="Q1179138" url="?curid=21712" title="Null">
<text>Null may refer to:
==Science, technology, and mathematics==
===Astronomy===
*Nuller, an optical tool using interferometry to block certain sources of light
===Computing===
*Null (SQL) (or NULL), a special marker and keyword in SQL indicating that a data value does not exist, is not known, or is missing.
*Null character, the zero-valued ASCII character, also designated by , often used as a terminator, separator or filler. This symbol has no visual representation.
*Null device, a virtual file that discards data written to it, on Unix systems codice_1
*Null pointer or reference (sometimes written codice_2, codice_3, or codice_4), an object pointer (or reference) not currently set to point (or refer) to a valid object

===Mathematics===
*Null (mathematics), a zero value in several branches of mathematics

===Physics===
*Null (physics), a point in a field where the field quantity is zero
*Null (radio), a concept in electromagnetism

==Arts and media==
*The Null Corporation, an imprint of the band Nine Inch Nails
*&quot;Null&quot; (Intronaut EP), 2006
*&quot;Null&quot; (Foetus EP), 1995
*Null, an identity of the character Gray Fox in the &quot;Metal Gear Solid: Portable Ops&quot; video game
*Null, a villain from &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures&quot;
*Null (&quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot;), the main antagonist of &quot;The Legend of Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom&quot;
*Null, a mysterious character from Baldi&#x27;s Basics.

==People with the surname==
*Ashley Null, American Anglican theologian
*Christopher Null (born 1971), American writer and film critic
*Eduard van der Nüll (1812–1868), Austrian architect
*Gary Null (born 1945), American radio host and author of works about alternative medicine
*Keith Null (born 1985), American football player
*Luke Null (born 1990), American actor and comedian

==See also==
*Ø (disambiguation)
*Null symbol (disambiguation)
*0 (disambiguation)
*Nil (disambiguation)
*Nul (disambiguation)
*Nullity
*Nullification
*Nothing (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1179138" start="0" end="4" title="Null" label="Null"/>
<link wikidata="Q392290" start="77" end="83" title="Nuller" label="Nuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q371029" start="173" end="183" title="Null (SQL)" label="Null (SQL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q861529" start="306" end="320" title="Null character" label="Null character"/>
<link wikidata="Q14671" start="468" end="479" title="Null device" label="Null device"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848926" start="556" end="568" title="Null pointer" label="Null pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999388" start="744" end="762" title="Null (mathematics)" label="Null (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068940" start="828" end="842" title="Null (physics)" label="Null (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068944" start="897" end="909" title="Null (radio)" label="Null (radio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="1007" end="1022" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879320" start="1024" end="1055" title="Null (Intronaut EP)" label="&amp;quot;Null&amp;quot; (Intronaut EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068937" start="1063" end="1091" title="Null (Foetus EP)" label="&amp;quot;Null&amp;quot; (Foetus EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051172" start="1134" end="1142" title="Gray Fox (Metal Gear)" label="Gray Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342463" start="1232" end="1271" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q126722717" start="1279" end="1317" title="Null (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Null (&amp;quot;The Legend of Zelda&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54882623" start="1427" end="1446" title="Baldi&amp;#x27;s Basics in Education and Learning" label="Baldi&amp;#x27;s Basics"/>
<link wikidata="Q113005900" start="1478" end="1489" title="Ashley Null" label="Ashley Null"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112977" start="1521" end="1537" title="Christopher Null" label="Christopher Null"/>
<link wikidata="Q78979" start="1584" end="1603" title="Eduard van der Nüll" label="Eduard van der Nüll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525675" start="1637" end="1646" title="Gary Null" label="Gary Null"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384838" start="1728" end="1738" title="Keith Null" label="Keith Null"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253257" start="1778" end="1787" title="Luke Null" label="Luke Null"/>
<link wikidata="Q295567" start="1844" end="1862" title="Ø (disambiguation)" label="Ø (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068973" start="1864" end="1892" title="Null symbol (disambiguation)" label="Null symbol (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q199453" start="1894" end="1912" title="0 (disambiguation)" label="0 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q342513" start="1914" end="1934" title="Nil (disambiguation)" label="Nil (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q234763" start="1936" end="1956" title="Nul (disambiguation)" label="Nul (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069000" start="1958" end="1965" title="Nullity (disambiguation)" label="Nullity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068998" start="1967" end="1980" title="Nullification (disambiguation)" label="Nullification"/>
<link wikidata="Q422255" start="1982" end="2006" title="Nothing (disambiguation)" label="Nothing (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21713" wikidata="Q47887" url="?curid=21713" title="Nijmegen">
<text>Nijmegen ( , ; Nijmeegs: ) is the largest city in the Dutch province of Gelderland and the tenth largest of the Netherlands as a whole. Located on the Waal River close to the German border, Nijmegen is one of the oldest cities in the Netherlands and the first to be recognized as such in Roman times. In 2005, it celebrated 2,000 years of existence.

Nijmegen became a free imperial city in 1230 and in 1402 a Hanseatic city. Since 1923 it has been a university city with the opening of a Catholic institution now known as the Radboud University Nijmegen. The city is well known for the annual International Four Days Marches Nijmegen event.

Its population as of 2024 was 187,011.

== Population centres ==
The municipality is formed by the city of Nijmegen, incorporating the former villages of Hatert, Hees and Neerbosch, as well as the urban expansion projects in Veur-Lent, Nijmegen-Oosterhout and Nijmegen–Ressen, all situated north of the river Waal.

=== Proximity of border with Germany ===
The city lies a few kilometers from the border with Germany, and to some extent the westernmost villages in the municipality of Kranenburg, Germany, function as dormitories for people who work in the Dutch city of Nijmegen in part due to the immigration of Dutch people from the region who were attracted by the lower house pricing just across the border.

The German city of Duisburg (in the Ruhr region) is about away, while the German town of Kleve (in the Lower Rhine region) is about away.

== History ==

=== Antiquity ===
The first mention of Nijmegen in history is in the first century BCE, when the Romans built a military camp on the place where Nijmegen was to appear; the location had great strategic value because of the surrounding hills, which give a good view over the river Waal and Rhine valley.

By 69, when the Batavi, the original inhabitants of the Rhine and Meuse (&quot;Maas&quot;) delta, revolted, a village called &quot;Oppidum Batavorum&quot; had formed near the Roman camp. This village was destroyed in the revolt, but when it had ended the Romans built another, bigger camp where the Legio X &quot;Gemina&quot; was stationed. Soon after, another village formed around this camp.

In 98, Nijmegen was the first of two settlements in what is now the Kingdom of the Netherlands to receive Roman city rights.

In 103, the X &quot;Gemina&quot; was restationed in Vindobona, now Vienna, which may have been a major blow to the economy of the village around the camp, losing around 5000 inhabitants. In 104 Emperor Trajan renamed the town, which became known as &quot;Ulpia Noviomagus Batavorum&quot;, Noviomagus for short, the ultimate origin of the current name.

A collection of artifacts from Roman antiquity were compiled by Johannes Smetius in the 17th century, called the Smetius Collection.

In January 2022, archeologists led by Pepijn van de Geer announced the discovery of an intact 2,000-year-old blue glass bowl with a vertical stripe pattern in Nijmegen. Researchers assume that this well-preserved bowl was made in a glass workshop. According to van de Geer, this type of bowl was made by allowing molten glass to cool and harden over a mold.

=== Middle Ages ===
Beginning in the latter half of the 4th century, Roman power decreased and Noviomagus eventually became part of Francia. It also appeared around this time on the . In the 8th century Emperor Charlemagne maintained his &quot;palatium&quot; in Nijmegen in 777, and possibly on at least three more occasions. During his brief deposition of 830, the emperor Louis the Pious was sent to Nijmegen by his son, Lothair I. Thanks to the Waal, trade flourished.

Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, was born at Nijmegen in 1165. In 1230 his son Frederick II granted Nijmegen city rights. In 1247, the city was ceded to the count of Guelders as collateral for a loan. The loan was never repaid, and Nijmegen has been a part of Gelderland ever since. This did not hamper trade; Nijmegen even became part of the Hanseatic League in 1364.

The arts also flourished in this period. Famous medieval painters like the Limbourg brothers were born and educated in Nijmegen. Some of Hieronymus Bosch&#x27;s ancestors also came from the city.

=== Early modern period ===
During the Dutch Revolt, trade came to a halt and even though Nijmegen became a part of the Republic of United Provinces after its capture from the Spanish in 1591, it remained a border town and had to endure multiple sieges. 

In 1678 Nijmegen was host to the negotiations between the European powers that aimed to put an end to the constant warfare that had ravaged the continent for years. The result was the Treaty of Nijmegen that failed to provide for a lasting peace.

In 1702, at the start of the War of the Spanish Succession, the French nearly took Nijmegen by surprise. Only because of the intervention of an Anglo-Dutch army under the Earl of Athlone and the bravery of the citizens of Nijmegen was the Assault on Nijmegen repulsed.

In the second half of the 19th century, the fortifications around the city became a major problem. There were too many inhabitants inside the walls, but the fortifications could not be demolished because Nijmegen was deemed as being of vital importance to the defence of the Netherlands. When events in the Franco-Prussian war proved that old-fashioned fortifications were no longer of use, this policy was changed and the fortifications were dismantled in 1874. The old castle had already been demolished in 1797, so that its bricks could be sold.

Through the second half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, Nijmegen grew steadily. In 1923 the current Radboud University Nijmegen was founded and in 1927 a channel was dug between the Waal and Meuse (&quot;Maas&quot;) rivers.

The Waal was bridged in 1878 by a rail bridge and in 1936 by a road bridge, which was claimed to be Europe&#x27;s biggest bridge at the time. In November 2013 a second road bridge (), 2 km downstream, was opened to ease congestion.

=== World War II ===
In 1940, the Netherlands was invaded by Germany, with Nijmegen being the first Dutch city to fall into German hands. On 22 February 1944, Nijmegen was heavily bombed by American planes, causing great damage to the city centre. It was subsequently claimed by the Allies that the American pilots thought they were bombing the German city of Kleve, while the Germans alleged that it was a planned operation authorised by the Dutch government in exile. The Dutch organization for investigating wartime atrocities, the NIOD, announced in January 2005 that its study of the incident confirmed that it was an accident caused by poor communications and chaos in the airspace. Over 750 people died in the bombardment.

During September 1944, the city saw heavy fighting during Operation Market Garden. The objective of the Battle of Nijmegen was mainly to prevent the Germans from destroying the bridges. Capturing the road bridge allowed the British Army XXX Corps to attempt to reach the 1st British Airborne Division in Arnhem. The bridge was heavily defended by over 300 German troops on both the north and south sides with close to 20 anti-tank guns and two anti-aircraft guns, supported with artillery. The Germans&#x27; late attempt to blow the road bridge was possibly foiled by a local Dutch resistance hero, Jan van Hoof, who is said to have cut the wires to the bridge. The Germans made repeated attacks on the bridge using bombs attached to driftwood, midget submarines and later resorted to shelling the bridge with 88mm barrages. Troops were positioned on the bridge giving an excellent arc of fire in case of attack. Troops that could not fit onto the bridge were positioned in a bombed-out house slightly upstream of the bridge. During the shelling, the house was hit, killing six soldiers and wounding one. Nijmegen was liberated from German occupation by the British Grenadier Guards of the Guards Armoured Division, as well as elements of the American 82nd Airborne Division in September 1944. The city was later used as a springboard for Operation Veritable, the invasion across the Rhine River by Allied Troops.

=== Post-war period ===
From 1946 to 1948 Mariënbosch concentration camp, near Nijmegen, was used to house German nationals who were to be deported from the Netherlands.

On 23 February 1981, the Nijmegen police department and the Dutch Army stormed the Piersonstraat and Zeigelhof, a squatted housing block in the city centre of Nijmegen. Using 200 riot vans, three Leopard 1s, three armoured personnel carriers, a helicopter, 1,200 policemen, and 750 members of the armed forces, they evicted the squatters and demolished the block, while clouding the entire area in teargas and CS gas. This received enormous backlash in local politics. While the city government wanted the squatters out to build a parking garage, most of the population wanted affordable housing to be built in the area.

The city council was largely dominated by left-wing and progressive parties such as the Green Party, Democrats 66, Socialist Party, and Labour. At times Nijmegen has been the only major city in the Netherlands with a solely left-wing government, and received the nickname &#x27;Havana on the Waal&#x27;.

Nijmegen celebrated its 2000th year of existence in 2005. It is considered the oldest city in the Netherlands. In gaining this qualification, it has competed with the city of Maastricht.

In November 2005, the city centre of Nijmegen was the site of the assassination of political activist Louis Sévèke by a former activist, Marcel Teunissen, who was arrested in 2007 in Spain and extradited to the Netherlands. Teunissen has also been accused of bank robbery. He committed his acts out of revenge for a forcible eviction from the squatter scene by Louis Sévèke.

== Geography ==

=== Climate ===
Nijmegen has an oceanic climate (&quot;Cfb&quot;). It is one of the warmest cities of the Netherlands, especially during summer, when the highest temperatures in the country are usually measured in the triangle Roermond–Nijmegen–Eindhoven. The lack of north–south oriented mountain ranges in Europe make this area prone to sudden shifts in weather, giving the region a semi-continental climate.

Some of the northernmost wineries in the world are found just outside Nijmegen, around Groesbeek, a suburban village south-east of Nijmegen.

During the 2006 European heat wave, closest official weather station Volkel reached a high of on 19 July. The heat wave coincided with that year&#x27;s Four Day Marches, which were cancelled after the first day, when two people died of hyperthermia-related causes. Temperatures on that day, 18 July, reached around in the city.

=== Historical remains ===
Few Roman remains are visible today; a fragment of the old city wall can be seen near the casino and the foundations of the amphitheatre are traced in the paving of the present-day Rembrandtstraat. The Valkhof Museum, on the Valkhof, has a permanent display of the history of Nijmegen, including artifacts from the Roman era. Additionally, they usually have temporary exhibitions of more and less famous artists. During building works in the Waalsprong area, ruins from before the Roman times were found which were identified in 2022 as those of a sauna. This 3,600 year-old sauna is the first of its kind in mainland Europe.

Not many very old buildings are left in town: first the Americans bombed it in February 1944, later the Germans shelled it for about five months after the liberation in September 1944, and finally there were a number of vigorous city planners in the 1950s, 60s and 70s who finished the demolition. There are still a few noteworthy sights, however. Valkhof hill downtown features a Carolingian chapel (eighth, ninth century AD) and a small remainder of an imperial castle that was demolished in 1798. The 750-year old Stevenskerk had to be reconstructed after WWII.

== Demographics ==
As of 2023, Nijmegen has a total population of about 182,465.
== Politics ==
The city is governed by a council of 39 councillors, elected every four years.

After the 2022 municipal elections, the three largest parties, GroenLinks (9 seats), Stadspartij Nijmegen (7 seats) and the D66 (6 seats) formed a coalition. Since 2012 the mayor has been Hubert Bruls of the Christian Democratic Appeal party (CDA), the city council approving a third six-year term from 2024.

In addition to the city council, since 1988 Nijmegen has been part of a regional body. Since 2021 this has been the Arnhem-Nijmegen Green Metropolitan Region (), which aids co-operation in planning and development in the region&#x27;s eighteen municipalities.

=== Twin and sister cities ===
Nijmegen is twinned with:
* Albany, New York
* Gaziantep, Turkey
* Higashimatsuyama, Japan
* Masaya, Nicaragua
* Oulu, Finland
* Pskov, Russia
* Suzhou, China

== Culture ==

=== Events ===
==== Four Days Marches ====
Nijmegen has hosted since 1925 the annual Four Days Marches (Vierdaagse), as a means of promoting sport and exercise. Beginning on the third Tuesday of each July, over 40,000 participants from about 70 countries undertake four days of walking with distances ranging from a day. The marches are supplemented with festivities such as the &quot;Vierdaagse Festival&quot;.

=== People ===


==== Natives ====
* Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor (1165–1197)
* Jean Malouel (1365-1416), painter
* Limbourg brothers (1385–1416), medieval painters
* Giovanni Antoniano (died 1588), Patristic scholar
* Petrus Canisius (1521–1597), Catholic saint
* Henriette Pressburg (1788–1863), mother of Karl Marx
* Sophie Pressburg (1797–1854), grandmother of Anton and Gerard Philips who founded Philips Electronics
* Pieter Claude Bijleveld (1828–1898), mayor 
* Carli Biessels (1936–2016), writer
* Roosje Glaser (1914–2000), dancer and Holocaust survivor
* Daphne Deckers (born 1968), model, host, writer and occasional actress
* Princess Margarita of Bourbon-Parma (born 1972), member of the Dutch royal family
* Prince Hugo de Bourbon de Parme (born 1997), member of the Dutch royal family
* Jos Hermens (born 1950), athlete
* Alex Van Halen (born 1953), musician
* Eddie Van Halen (1955-2020), musician
* Frank Boeijen (born 1957), musician
* Anne Quist (born 1957), Olympic rower
* Ron de Groot (born 1960), footballer
* Pie Geelen (born 1972), Olympic swimmer
* Princess Margarita of Bourbon-Parma (born 1972), member of the Dutch royal family
* Roxane van Iperen (born 1976), writer
* Frank Demouge (born 1982), footballer
* Saadia Himi (born 1984), Miss Netherlands Earth 2004
* Nacer Barazite (born 1990), footballer
* Amira Willighagen (born 2004), classical singer
* Prince Bernhard of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven (born 1969), racing driver, entrepreneur and member of the Dutch royal family
* Prince Pieter-Christiaan of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven (born 1972), racing driver and member of the Dutch royal family

==== Other residents ====
* Titus Brandsma – (1881–1942), Carmelite friar, philosopher and Resistance member
* Dries van Agt – (1931–2024), politician, Prime Minister of the Netherland
* Nina Simone – (1933–2003), jazz musician
* Edward Ka-Spel – (born 1954), vocalist of The Legendary Pink Dots
* Perry Ubeda – (born 1971), kickboxer
* Karapet Karapetyan – (born 1982), kickboxer
* Sóley Tómasdóttir - (born 1974), activist and former Icelandic politician

=== Religion ===

In 1968, theologians in the Catholic Church issued what is now known as the Nijmegen Statement, demanding sweeping reforms in the Vatican&#x27;s Holy Office, previously known as The Inquisition, and calling for greater scope for theological inquiry. Among its signatories was theologian Fr. Joseph Ratzinger, then a member of the faculty at the University of Tübingen, but later the head of the successor to the Holy Office, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, and later still Pope Benedict XVI.

The Nijmegen Statement said: &quot;Any form of Inquisition however subtle, not only harms the development of sound theology, it also causes irreparable damage to the credibility of the church&quot;. The signatories, a group of predominantly German-speaking theologians asserted that &quot;the freedom of theologians, and theology in the service of the church, regained by Vatican II, must not be jeopardised again.&quot; The signatories pledged their loyalty to the Pope, but argued that the teaching office of pope and bishops &quot;cannot and must not supersede, hamper and impede the teaching task of theologians as scholars.&quot;

=== Sport ===
Sport in the city is principally focused on its football club NEC Nijmegen or just NEC, short for Nijmegen Eendracht Combinatie, which plays at the 12,500-seat Stadion de Goffert. The club plays in the Eredivisie.

Bandy Vereniging Nijmegen is the biggest bandy club in the country. The national team got celebrated by over a hundred fans and Mayor Hubert Bruls after winning Division B of the 2018 Bandy World Championship.

The city is also home to one of the country&#x27;s oldest cricket clubs, Quick 1888, a current member of the KNCB. Formed in 1888, it is the largest cricket club in the east of the country and was formed 13 years after the first club, Utile Dulci from Deventer. The cricket club has two men&#x27;s teams. The city also has the Nijmegen Devils, an Ice hockey club. Nijmegen also plays host to the annual Zevenheuvelenloop (&quot;Seven Hills Run&quot;), an annual run recognised by the IAAF as a Bronze Label race.

== Economy and infrastructure ==

=== Economy ===
The three main employers in Nijmegen are:

1. Radboud University;

2. The three hospitals in the city: Radboud University Medical Center, Sint Maartenskliniek, and Canisius-Wilhelmina Ziekenhuis (CWZ);

3. The semiconductor industry. Nexperia and Ampleon (both spun off from NXP Semiconductors) are headquartered in the city. Multinational companies such as Qualcomm, Photronics Inc, and Applied Materials also have facilities in Nijmegen.

Other notable companies headquartered in Nijmegen include Synthon, a Dutch multinational pharmaceutical company and Vaxxinova, an EW group subsidiary which produces animal vaccines.

=== More room for the river Waal ===
To prevent flooding in the near future, the Dutch government is changing the course of more than 30 rivers throughout the country. These measures, taken along the rivers IJssel, Lek, Maas and Waal, are known as ‘Room for the River’. Room for the river Waal as it passes Nijmegen is one of these measures. As part of this, the artificial island Veur-Lent was created in 2015.

The river Waal not only has a sharp bend near Nijmegen, it also forms a bottleneck. In 1993 and 1995, this led to high water and floods. To prevent this from happening again, and to protect inhabitants of the city and its surroundings against the water, work has been done to relocate the Waal dike in Lent and to excavate a large ancillary channel in the flood plains, creating an island in the Waal opposite Nijmegen. The large-scale project involved the construction of three bridges, new dikes and concrete water barriers. The island contains an urban river park with possibilities for recreation, culture, water and nature.
=== Transport ===
Nijmegen has five railway stations: Nijmegen, Nijmegen Dukenburg, Nijmegen Heyendaal, Nijmegen Lent and Nijmegen Goffert. The central station is connected to the national Intercity network. The bus company Breng operates the city buses in the Arnhem-Nijmegen metropolitan area.

Like most Dutch cities, bicycles are an important mode of transport. The city is connected to Arnhem, to the north, by a &quot;fietssnelweg&quot; (fast cycle highway) which crosses the Snelbinder bridge in the city. During 2010–2012 the cycle highway received upgrades to further encourage the use of bicycles for transport between Nijmegen and Arnhem. In May 2016, the Dutch Fietsersbond (Cyclists&#x27; Union) awarded the 2016 Fietsstad (Cycling City) award to the city of Nijmegen.

Kaizer Karelplein (English &quot;The Plaza of Emperor Charlemagne&quot;), a roundabout in the center of the city with seven busy connecting or almost connecting roads, is one of the most accident-prone roads in the Netherlands, and Nijmegen has an extensive, overcrowded road network that splits up the city in separate parts instead of having the busy roads out-of-center away from densely populated areas as is the norm in the rest of the country. The roundabout surrounds a park which is not used because it would be life-threatening to attempt to cross the road of the roundabout to get to and from the park. There is also a Kaizer Karelplein in Maastricht.

The river is a busy freight transport route, with barges passing through on the way between the industrial regions of Germany and the docks at Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Hook of Holland. The Maas–Waal Canal also carries freight through the city.

== Education ==

Nijmegen is host to Radboud University Nijmegen. Founded in 1923 as the first Catholic university in the Netherlands, it used to be called &quot;Catholic University of Nijmegen&quot; until 2004, when it took its current name. , it had 22,142 students and 4,921 staff. Radboud University runs the High Field Magnetic Laboratory which is able to achieve some of the highest fields available in Europe at 38 teslas (continuous). The facility is available to outside users, primarily for research purposes.

The education and social work departments of the HAN University of Applied Sciences, school for higher-level vocational training are also located in Nijmegen, as are that school&#x27;s medical departments.

In addition to these institutions, there is also an intermediate-level vocational school and a number of secondary schools: Groenschool Nijmegen, Kandinsky College, Nijmeegse Scholengemeenschap Groenewoud (NSG), Citadel College, Stedelijke Scholengemeenschap Nijmegen (SSGN), Canisius College, St. Jorisschool, Mondial College, the Stedelijk Gymnasium (formally the &quot;Latijnse school&quot;, founded in the 16th century), the Karel de Grote College, Montessori College and the Dominicus College. Of note is also Leefwerkschool Eigenwijs, which caters to students from all over the Netherlands who have been repeatedly expelled from &quot;regular&quot; high schools. Leefwerkschool Eigenwijs has its roots in the local activist movement of the early 1980s and is the only school of its kind recognised in the Netherlands.

Nijmegen is also an important centre of Psycholinguistics, home to the Max Planck Institute of Psycholinguistics and the F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging.

The Nobel Prize for Physics in 2010 was awarded to Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov while at Radboud University &quot;for groundbreaking experiments regarding the two-dimensional material graphene.&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
Literature

== Bibliography ==
== External links ==
* 
* https://en.intonijmegen.com
*https://www.nijmegenmijnstad.nl</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="0" end="8" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189384" start="15" end="23" title="Kleverlandish" label="Nijmeegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q775" start="72" end="82" title="Gelderland" label="Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="112" end="123" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216171" start="151" end="161" title="Waal (river)" label="Waal River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088701" start="175" end="188" title="Germany–Netherlands border" label="German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="369" end="387" title="free imperial city" label="free imperial city"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="410" end="419" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q632004" start="527" end="554" title="Radboud University Nijmegen" label="Radboud University Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472255" start="594" end="634" title="International Four Days Marches Nijmegen" label="International Four Days Marches Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280121" start="797" end="803" title="Hatert" label="Hatert"/>
<link wikidata="Q21612753" start="868" end="877" title="Veur-Lent" label="Veur-Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804415" start="903" end="918" title="Ressen, Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen–Ressen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216171" start="946" end="956" title="Waal (river)" label="river Waal"/>
<link wikidata="Q243266" start="1128" end="1138" title="Kranenburg, North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Kranenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="1161" end="1172" title="commuter town" label="dormitories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100" start="1376" end="1384" title="Duisburg" label="Duisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="1393" end="1397" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842" start="1446" end="1451" title="Kleve" label="Kleve"/>
<link wikidata="Q445609" start="1460" end="1478" title="Lower Rhine region" label="Lower Rhine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1608" end="1614" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1800" end="1805" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="1831" end="1837" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1871" end="1876" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="1881" end="1886" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="1913" end="1921" title="Revolt of the Batavi" label="revolted"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="1946" end="1953" title="Oppidum" label="Oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q253539" start="2114" end="2140" title="Legio X Gemina" label="Legio X &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="2278" end="2304" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q213468" start="2316" end="2333" title="municipium" label="Roman city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q871525" start="2388" end="2397" title="Vindobona" label="Vindobona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="2403" end="2409" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="2538" end="2544" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14632953" start="2753" end="2769" title="Johannes Smetius" label="Johannes Smetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544500" start="2802" end="2820" title="Smetius Collection" label="Smetius Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="3314" end="3321" title="Francia" label="Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="3393" end="3404" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="3556" end="3571" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q150735" start="3605" end="3614" title="Lothair I" label="Lothair I"/>
<link wikidata="Q216171" start="3630" end="3634" title="Waal (river)" label="Waal"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="3655" end="3683" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="3731" end="3743" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626147" start="3761" end="3772" title="City rights in the Low Countries" label="city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q152420" start="3818" end="3826" title="Guelders" label="Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q694563" start="3830" end="3840" title="collateral (finance)" label="collateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="3995" end="4011" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q217816" start="4097" end="4114" title="Limbourg brothers" label="Limbourg brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130531" start="4159" end="4175" title="Hieronymus Bosch" label="Hieronymus Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="4258" end="4270" title="Dutch Revolt" label="Dutch Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949665" start="4378" end="4410" title="Siege of Nijmegen (1591)" label="capture from the Spanish in 1591"/>
<link wikidata="Q902814" start="4426" end="4437" title="border town" label="border town"/>
<link wikidata="Q316900" start="4659" end="4677" title="Treaty of Nijmegen" label="Treaty of Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="4752" end="4781" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910657" start="4894" end="4909" title="Godert de Ginkel, 1st Earl of Athlone" label="Earl of Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q116798779" start="4962" end="4981" title="Assault on Nijmegen (1702)" label="Assault on Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="5300" end="5319" title="Franco-Prussian war" label="Franco-Prussian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q632004" start="5671" end="5698" title="Radboud University Nijmegen" label="Radboud University Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216171" start="5753" end="5757" title="Waal (river)" label="Waal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="5762" end="5767" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311533" start="5830" end="5841" title="Nijmegen railway bridge" label="rail bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570859" start="5859" end="5870" title="Waalbrug" label="road bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649081" start="6059" end="6086" title="Battle of the Netherlands" label="the Netherlands was invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229399" start="6188" end="6215" title="Bombing of Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen was heavily bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842" start="6389" end="6394" title="Kleve" label="Kleve"/>
<link wikidata="Q474823" start="6564" end="6568" title="NIOD" label="NIOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="6818" end="6841" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q30120149" start="6864" end="6882" title="Battle of Nijmegen" label="Battle of Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487699" start="6997" end="7006" title="XXX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XXX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q161891" start="7031" end="7060" title="1st British Airborne Division" label="1st British Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310" start="7064" end="7070" title="Arnhem" label="Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="7181" end="7195" title="anti-tank guns" label="anti-tank guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="7204" end="7222" title="anti-aircraft guns" label="anti-aircraft guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468893" start="7359" end="7371" title="Jan van Hoof" label="Jan van Hoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q154137" start="7570" end="7574" title="88mm" label="88mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744583" start="7642" end="7653" title="arc of fire" label="arc of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="7926" end="7942" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350356" start="7950" end="7974" title="Guards Armoured Division" label="Guards Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="8012" end="8034" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q708235" start="8099" end="8118" title="Operation Veritable" label="Operation Veritable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8217" end="8247" title="Mariënbosch concentration camp" label="Mariënbosch concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123768" start="8406" end="8416" title="Royal Netherlands Army" label="Dutch Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022340" start="8429" end="8442" title="Piersonstraat riots" label="Piersonstraat"/>
<link wikidata="Q153440" start="8542" end="8551" title="Leopard 1" label="Leopard 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="8560" end="8586" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q209357" start="8756" end="8762" title="CS gas" label="CS gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="8972" end="8984" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="9056" end="9067" title="GroenLinks" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q747910" start="9069" end="9081" title="Democrats 66" label="Democrats 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q849580" start="9083" end="9098" title="Socialist Party (Netherlands)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="9104" end="9110" title="Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="9246" end="9252" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="9448" end="9458" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941892" start="9563" end="9575" title="Louis Sévèke" label="Louis Sévèke"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="9886" end="9901" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146984" start="10353" end="10362" title="Groesbeek" label="Groesbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511876" start="10419" end="10442" title="2006 European heat wave" label="2006 European heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="10644" end="10656" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="10854" end="10860" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="10888" end="10900" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127079" start="10966" end="10980" title="Valkhof Museum" label="Valkhof Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="12196" end="12206" title="GroenLinks" label="GroenLinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q747910" start="12257" end="12260" title="Democrats 66" label="D66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407958" start="12321" end="12333" title="Hubert Bruls" label="Hubert Bruls"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="12341" end="12368" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12515" end="12528" title="City region#Netherlands" label="regional body"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="12747" end="12754" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="12763" end="12779" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338" start="12782" end="12791" title="Gaziantep" label="Gaziantep"/>
<link wikidata="Q823907" start="12802" end="12818" title="Higashimatsuyama" label="Higashimatsuyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001914" start="12828" end="12834" title="Masaya" label="Masaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="12848" end="12852" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214" start="12864" end="12869" title="Pskov" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="12880" end="12886" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472255" start="12995" end="13012" title="International Four Days Marches Nijmegen" label="Four Days Marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="13360" end="13388" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q703287" start="13403" end="13415" title="Jean Malouel" label="Jean Malouel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217816" start="13439" end="13456" title="Limbourg brothers" label="Limbourg brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563669" start="13490" end="13508" title="Giovanni Antoniano" label="Giovanni Antoniano"/>
<link wikidata="Q44624" start="13542" end="13557" title="Petrus Canisius" label="Petrus Canisius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="13580" end="13585" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q19841721" start="13588" end="13607" title="Henriette Pressburg" label="Henriette Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="13631" end="13640" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13643" end="13659" title="Henriette Pressburg#Sophie Pressburg and Lion Philips" label="Sophie Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q592767" start="13688" end="13693" title="Anton Philips" label="Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351930" start="13698" end="13712" title="Gerard Philips" label="Gerard Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="13725" end="13744" title="Philips Electronics" label="Philips Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689420" start="13747" end="13770" title="Pieter Claude Bijleveld" label="Pieter Claude Bijleveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q41556240" start="13793" end="13807" title="Carli Biessels" label="Carli Biessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q42214260" start="13830" end="13843" title="Roosje Glaser" label="Roosje Glaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q82020" start="13889" end="13903" title="Daphne Deckers" label="Daphne Deckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765834" start="13962" end="13997" title="Princess Margarita of Bourbon-Parma" label="Princess Margarita of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="14025" end="14043" title="Dutch royal family" label="Dutch royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q75317573" start="14046" end="14077" title="Prince Hugo de Bourbon de Parme" label="Prince Hugo de Bourbon de Parme"/>
<link wikidata="Q713390" start="14126" end="14137" title="Jos Hermens" label="Jos Hermens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949093" start="14161" end="14175" title="Alex Van Halen" label="Alex Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q272012" start="14200" end="14215" title="Eddie Van Halen" label="Eddie Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q469341" start="14240" end="14253" title="Frank Boeijen" label="Frank Boeijen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768737" start="14278" end="14288" title="Anne Quist" label="Anne Quist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401558" start="14318" end="14330" title="Ron de Groot" label="Ron de Groot"/>
<link wikidata="Q514091" start="14357" end="14367" title="Pie Geelen" label="Pie Geelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765834" start="14399" end="14434" title="Princess Margarita of Bourbon-Parma" label="Princess Margarita of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q79027785" start="14483" end="14500" title="Roxane van Iperen" label="Roxane van Iperen"/>
<link wikidata="Q573275" start="14523" end="14536" title="Frank Demouge" label="Frank Demouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410656" start="14563" end="14574" title="Saadia Himi" label="Saadia Himi"/>
<link wikidata="Q314779" start="14618" end="14632" title="Nacer Barazite" label="Nacer Barazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442354" start="14659" end="14676" title="Amira Willighagen" label="Amira Willighagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878458" start="14709" end="14758" title="Prince Bernhard of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven" label="Prince Bernhard of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999473" start="14839" end="14897" title="Prince Pieter-Christiaan of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven" label="Prince Pieter-Christiaan of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q454645" start="14991" end="15005" title="Titus Brandsma" label="Titus Brandsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q318334" start="15074" end="15087" title="Dries van Agt" label="Dries van Agt"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="15150" end="15161" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529809" start="15193" end="15207" title="Edward Ka-Spel" label="Edward Ka-Spel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424355" start="15235" end="15258" title="The Legendary Pink Dots" label="The Legendary Pink Dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940829" start="15261" end="15272" title="Perry Ubeda" label="Perry Ubeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987790" start="15300" end="15318" title="Karapet Karapetyan" label="Karapet Karapetyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16428488" start="15346" end="15363" title="Sóley Tómasdóttir" label="Sóley Tómasdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15515" end="15533" title="Nijmegen Statement" label="Nijmegen Statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="15730" end="15746" title="Joseph Ratzinger" label="Joseph Ratzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="15784" end="15806" title="University of Tübingen" label="University of Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="15851" end="15862" title="Holy Office" label="Holy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="15868" end="15910" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="15928" end="15945" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="16320" end="16330" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q318348" start="16660" end="16672" title="NEC Nijmegen" label="NEC Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q720983" start="16758" end="16776" title="Stadion de Goffert" label="Stadion de Goffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="16800" end="16810" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16813" end="16838" title="Bandy Vereniging Nijmegen" label="Bandy Vereniging Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="16854" end="16859" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543859" start="16881" end="16898" title="Netherlands national bandy team" label="The national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q28545324" start="16992" end="17021" title="2018 Bandy World Championship" label="2018 Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="17082" end="17089" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969376" start="17097" end="17107" title="Quick 1888" label="Quick 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086290" start="17133" end="17137" title="Koninklijke Nederlandse Cricket Bond" label="KNCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q10001" start="17276" end="17284" title="Deventer" label="Deventer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852381" start="17351" end="17366" title="Nijmegen Devils" label="Nijmegen Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="17371" end="17381" title="Ice hockey" label="Ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q197052" start="17427" end="17444" title="Zevenheuvelenloop" label="Zevenheuvelenloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="17508" end="17512" title="IAAF" label="IAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q632004" start="17634" end="17652" title="Radboud University" label="Radboud University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594321" start="17691" end="17724" title="Radboud University Medical Center" label="Radboud University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17726" end="17746" title=":nl:Sint Maartenskliniek" label="Sint Maartenskliniek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17752" end="17782" title=":nl:Canisius-Wilhelmina Ziekenhuis" label="Canisius-Wilhelmina Ziekenhuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020892" start="17822" end="17830" title="Nexperia" label="Nexperia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401733" start="17835" end="17842" title="Ampleon" label="Ampleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="17863" end="17881" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q544847" start="17946" end="17954" title="Qualcomm" label="Qualcomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187948" start="17956" end="17970" title="Photronics Inc" label="Photronics Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q621610" start="17976" end="17993" title="Applied Materials" label="Applied Materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632549" start="18087" end="18094" title="Synthon (company)" label="Synthon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18145" end="18154" title="Vaxxinova" label="Vaxxinova"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18159" end="18167" title=":de:EW Group" label="EW group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21612753" start="18593" end="18602" title="Veur-Lent" label="Veur-Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q801257" start="19308" end="19316" title="Nijmegen railway station" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034574" start="19318" end="19336" title="Nijmegen Dukenburg railway station" label="Nijmegen Dukenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960492" start="19338" end="19356" title="Nijmegen Heyendaal railway station" label="Nijmegen Heyendaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351088" start="19358" end="19371" title="Nijmegen Lent railway station" label="Nijmegen Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282156" start="19376" end="19392" title="Nijmegen Goffert railway station" label="Nijmegen Goffert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968918" start="19478" end="19483" title="Breng" label="Breng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854934" start="19927" end="19939" title="Fietsersbond" label="Fietsersbond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19980" end="19989" title="Cycling in the Netherlands#The Fietsstad (Bicycle city) awards" label="Fietsstad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20037" end="20054" title="Kaizer Karelplein (Nijmegen)" label="Kaizer Karelplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="20056" end="20063" title="English (language)" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="20091" end="20102" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20666" end="20683" title="Kaizer Karelplein (Maastricht)" label="Kaizer Karelplein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476744" start="20889" end="20904" title="Maas–Waal Canal" label="Maas–Waal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q632004" start="20982" end="21009" title="Radboud University Nijmegen" label="Radboud University Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21040" end="21048" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="21367" end="21373" title="tesla (unit)" label="teslas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623378" start="21515" end="21549" title="HAN University of Applied Sciences" label="HAN University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22188" end="22212" title="Leefwerkschool Eigenwijs" label="Leefwerkschool Eigenwijs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="22538" end="22555" title="Psycholinguistics" label="Psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="22569" end="22589" title="Max Planck Institute" label="Max Planck Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423685" start="22619" end="22665" title="F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging" label="F.C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q104104" start="22719" end="22729" title="Andre Geim" label="Andre Geim"/>
<link wikidata="Q106494" start="22734" end="22754" title="Konstantin Novoselov" label="Konstantin Novoselov"/>
<link wikidata="Q169917" start="22859" end="22867" title="graphene" label="graphene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21714" wikidata="Q27381" url="?curid=21714" title="North Africa">
<text>North Africa (sometimes Northern Africa) is a region encompassing the northern portion of the African continent. There is no singularly accepted scope for the region, and it is sometimes defined as stretching from the Atlantic shores of the Western Sahara in the west, to Egypt and Sudan&#x27;s Red Sea coast in the east.

The most common definition for the region&#x27;s boundaries includes Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, and Western Sahara, the territory disputed between Morocco and the partially recognized Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic. The United Nations’ definition includes all these countries as well as Sudan. The African Union defines the region similarly, only differing from the UN in excluding the Sudan and including Mauritania. The Sahel, south of the Sahara Desert, can be considered as the southern boundary of North Africa. North Africa includes the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla, and the plazas de soberanía. It can also be considered to include Malta, as well as other Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish regions such as Lampedusa and Lampione, Madeira, and the Canary Islands, which are all closer or as close to the African continent than Europe.

Northwest Africa has been inhabited by Berbers since the beginning of recorded history, while the eastern part of North Africa has been home to the Egyptians. In the seventh and eighth centuries, Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula swept across the region during the early Muslim conquests. The Arab migrations to the Maghreb began immediately after, which started a long process of Islamization and Arabization that has defined the cultural landscape of North Africa ever since. Many but not all Berbers and Egyptians gradually merged into Arab-Islamic culture.

The countries and people of North Africa share a large amount of their genetic, ethnic, cultural and linguistic identity and influence with the Middle East/West Asia, a process that began with the Neolithic Revolution and pre Dynastic Egypt. The countries of North Africa are also a major part of the Arab world. The Islamic and Arab influence in North Africa has remained dominant ever since, with the region being major part of the Muslim world. North Africa is associated with the Middle East in the realm of geopolitics to form the Middle East-North Africa region.

==Geography==
North Africa has three main geographic features: the Sahara desert in the south, the Atlas Mountains in the west, and the Nile River and delta in the east. The Atlas Mountains extend across much of northern Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia. These mountains are part of the fold mountain system that also runs through much of Southern Europe. They recede to the south and east, becoming a steppe landscape before meeting the Sahara desert, which covers more than 75 percent of the region. The tallest peaks are in the High Atlas range in south-central Morocco, which has many snow-capped peaks.

South of the Atlas Mountains is the dry and barren expanse of the Sahara desert, the largest sand desert in the world. In places the desert is cut by irregular watercourses called wadis—streams that flow only after rainfall but are usually dry. The Sahara&#x27;s major landforms include ergs, large seas of sand that sometimes form into huge dunes; the hammada, a level rocky plateau without soil or sand; and the reg, a desert pavement. The Sahara covers the southern part of Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, and most of Libya. Only two regions of Libya are outside the desert: Tripolitania in the northwest and Cyrenaica in the northeast. Most of Egypt is also desert, with the exception of the Nile River and the irrigated land along its banks. The Nile Valley forms a narrow fertile thread that runs along the length of the country.

Sheltered valleys in the Atlas Mountains, the Nile Valley and Delta, and the Mediterranean coast are the main sources of fertile farming land. A wide variety of valuable crops including cereals, rice and cotton, and woods such as cedar and cork, are grown. Typical Mediterranean crops, such as olives, figs, dates and citrus fruits, also thrive in these areas. The Nile Valley is particularly fertile and most of Egypt lives close to the river. Elsewhere, irrigation is essential to improve crop yields on the desert margins.
==Demographics==


=== Ethnic groups ===

The inhabitants of North Africa are roughly divided in a manner corresponding to the principal geographic regions of North Africa: the Maghreb, the Nile valley, and the Sahel. The countries making up North Africa all have Modern Standard Arabic as their official language. Additionally, Algeria and Morocco recognize Berber as a second official language after Arabic. French also serves as an administrative language in Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. The most spoken dialects are Maghrebi Arabic, a form of ancient Arabic dating back from the 8th century AD, and Egyptian Arabic. The largest and most numerous ethnic group in North Africa are the Arabs. In Algeria and Morocco, Berbers are the second largest ethnic group after the Arab majority. Arabs constitute 70% to 80% of the population of Algeria, 92% 97% of Libya, 67% to 70% of Morocco and 98% of Tunisia&#x27;s population. The Berbers comprise 20% of Algeria, 10% of Libya, 35% of Morocco and 1% of Tunisia&#x27;s population. The region is predominantly Muslim with a Jewish minority in Morocco and Tunisia, and significant Christian minority—the Copts—in Egypt, Algeria, Morocco, Libya, and Tunisia. In 2001, the number of Christians in North Africa was estimated at 9 million, the majority of whom live in Egypt, with the remainder live in Maghreb countries.

The inhabitants of the Spanish Canary Islands are of mixed Spanish and North African Berber ancestry, and the people of Malta are of primarily Southern Italian/Sicilian, as well as, to a lesser extent, North African and Middle Eastern ancestry and speak a derivative of Arabic. However, these areas are not generally considered part of North Africa, but rather Southern Europe, due to their proximity to mainland Europe and their European-based cultures and religion.

=== Historic movements ===
The Maghreb or western North Africa on the whole is believed to have been inhabited by Berbers and their ancestors since at least 10,000 B.C., while the eastern part of North Africa or the Nile Valley has mainly been home to the Egyptians and Nubians. Ancient Egyptians record extensive contact in their Western desert with people that appear to have been Berber or proto-Berber. As the Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer and other rock art findings in the Sahara have shown, the Sahara also hosted various populations before its rapid desertification in 3500 B.C and even today continues to host small populations of nomadic trans-Saharan peoples. Laboratory examination of the Uan Muhuggiag child mummy and Tin Hanakaten child, suggested that the Central Saharan peoples from the Epipaleolithic, Mesolithic, and Pastoral periods possessed dark skin complexions. The archaeological evidence from the Holocene period has shown that Nilo-Saharan speaking groups had populated the central and southern Sahara before the influx of Berber and Arabic speakers, around 1500 years ago, who now largely populate the Sahara in the modern era.
After migrating to North Africa in the 1st millennium BC, Semitic Phoenician settlers from the Levant established over 300 coastal colonies throughout the region and built a powerful empire that controlled most of the region from the 8th century BC until the middle of the 2nd century BC.

Several waves of Arab migrations to the Maghreb began in the 7th century, including the migration of the Banu Hilal and the Banu Sulaym westward into the Maghreb in the eleventh century, which introduced Arab culture and language to the countryside. Historians mark their movement as a critical moment in the Arabization of North Africa. As Arab nomads spread, the territories of the local Berber tribes were moved and shrank. The Zenata were pushed to the west and the Kabyles were pushed to the north. The Berbers took refuge in the mountains whereas the plains were Arabized. This heavily shifted the demographics of the Maghreb.

The trans-Saharan slave trade resulted in increased levels of sub-Saharan African ancestry in North Africa. The Haratin are commonly perceived as an endogamous group of former slaves or descendants of slaves.

===Genetic history===

DNA studies of Iberomaurusian peoples at Taforalt, Morocco dating to around 15,000 years ago have found them to have a distinctive Maghrebi ancestry formed from a mixture of Near Eastern and African ancestry, which is still found as a part of the genome of modern Northwest Africans. Later during the Neolithic, from around 7,500 years ago onwards, there was a migration into Northwest Africa of European Neolithic Farmers from the Iberian Peninsula (who had originated in Anatolia several thousand years prior), as well as pastoralists from the Levant, both of whom also significantly contributed to the ancestry of modern Northwest Africans. The proto-Berber tribes evolved from these prehistoric communities during the late Bronze- and early Iron ages.

==Culture==


The majority of the people of the Maghreb and the Sahara regions speak varieties of Arabic and almost exclusively follow Islam. The Arabic and Berber languages are distantly related, both being members of the Afroasiatic language family. The Tuareg Berber languages are notably more conservative than those of the coastal cities.

Over the years, Berbers have been influenced by contact with other cultures: Egyptians, Greeks, Punic people, Romans, Vandals, Arabs, Europeans, and Africans. The cultures of the Maghreb and the Sahara therefore combines Arab, indigenous Berber and African elements. In the Sahara, the distinction between sedentary oasis inhabitants and nomadic Bedouin Arabs and Tuaregs is particularly marked.

Egyptians over the centuries have shifted their language from Egyptian (in its late form, varieties of Coptic) to modern Egyptian Arabic while retaining a sense of national identity that has historically set them apart from other people in the region. Most Egyptians are Sunni Muslim, although there is a significant minority of Coptic Christians. The Copts are the largest Christian denomination in the Middle East and North Africa.

The Maghreb formerly had a significant Jewish population, almost all of whom emigrated to France or Israel when the North African nations gained independence. Prior to the modern establishment of Israel, there were about 500,000 Jews in Northern Africa, including both Sephardi Jews (refugees from Spain, France and Portugal from the Renaissance era) as well as indigenous Mizrahi Jews. Today, less than 3,000 remain in the region, almost all in Morocco and Tunisia, and are mostly part of a French-speaking urban elite. (See Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries.)

==History==

===Prehistory===

Due to the recent African origin of modern humans, the history of Prehistoric North Africa is important to the understanding of pre-hominid and early modern human history in Africa.
Some researchers have postulated that North Africa rather than East Africa served as the exit point for the modern humans who first trekked out of the continent in the Out of Africa migration.

The earliest inhabitants of central North Africa have left behind significant remains: early remnants of hominid occupation in North Africa, for example, were found in Ain-Hnech in Setif dating back 2.6 million years, near Saïda (); in fact, more recent investigations have found signs of Oldowan technology there, and indicate a date of up to 1.8 million BCE.

Recent finds in Jebel Irhoud in Morocco have been found to contain some of the oldest &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; remains; This suggests that, rather than arising only in East Africa around 200,000 years ago, early &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; may already have been present across the length of Africa 100,000 years earlier. According to study author Jean-Jacques Hublin, &quot;The idea is that early &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; dispersed around the continent and elements of human modernity appeared in different places, and so different parts of Africa contributed to the emergence of what we call modern humans today.&quot; Early humans may have comprised a large, interbreeding population dispersed across Africa whose spread was facilitated by a wetter climate that created a &quot;green Sahara&quot;, around 330,000 to 300,000 years ago. The rise of modern humans may thus have taken place on a continental scale rather than being confined to a particular corner of Africa. 
In September 2019, scientists reported the computerized determination, based on 260 CT scans, of a virtual skull shape of the last common human ancestor to modern humans/&quot;H. sapiens&quot;, representative of the earliest modern humans, and suggested that modern humans arose between 260,000 and 350,000 years ago through a merging of populations in East and Southern Africa.
The cave paintings found at Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer, north of Tamanrasset, Algeria, and at other locations depict vibrant and vivid scenes of everyday life in central North Africa during the Neolithic Subpluvial period (about 8000 to 4000 BCE). Some parts of North Africa began to participate in the Neolithic revolution in the 6th millennium BCE, just before the rapid desertification of the Sahara around 3500 B.C. largely due to a tilt in the Earth&#x27;s orbit. It was during this period that domesticated plants and animals were introduced in the region, spreading from the north and east to the southwest. There has been an inferred connection between areas of rapid drying and the introduction of livestock in which the natural (orbital) aridification was amplified by the spread of shrubs and open land due to grazing. Nevertheless, changes in northern Africa&#x27;s ecology after 3500 BCE provided the backdrop for the formation of dynastic civilizations and the construction of monumental architecture such as the Pyramids of Giza.

Archaeological evidence has attested that population settlements occurred in Nubia as early as the Late Pleistocene era and from the 5th millennium BC onwards, whereas there is &quot;no or scanty evidence&quot; of human presence in the Egyptian Nile Valley during these periods, which may be due to problems in site preservation. Several scholars have argued that the African origins of the Egyptian civilisation derived from pastoral communities which emerged in both the Egyptian and Sudanese regions of the Nile Valley in the fifth millennium BCE.

When Egypt entered the Bronze Age, the Maghreb remained focused on small-scale subsistence in small, highly mobile groups. Some Phoenician and Greek colonies were established along the Mediterranean coast during the 7th century BCE.

===Antiquity and ancient Rome===

The most notable nations of antiquity in western North Africa are Carthage, Numidia and Mauretania. The Phoenicians colonized much of North Africa including Carthage and parts of present-day Morocco (including Chellah, Essaouira and Volubilis). The Carthaginians were of Phoenician origin, with the Roman myth of their origin being that Dido, a Phoenician princess, was granted land by a local ruler based on how much land she could cover with a piece of cowhide. She ingeniously devised a method to extend the cowhide to a high proportion, thus gaining a large territory. She was also rejected by the Trojan prince Aeneas according to Virgil, thus creating a historical enmity between Carthage and Rome, as Aeneas would eventually lay the foundations for Rome. Ancient Carthage was a commercial power and had a strong navy, but relied on mercenaries for land soldiers. The Carthaginians developed an empire in the Iberian Peninsula, Malta, Sardinia, Corsica and northwest Sicily, the latter being the cause of First Punic War with the Romans.

Over a hundred years and more, all Carthaginian territory was eventually conquered by the Romans, resulting in the Carthaginian North African territories becoming the Roman province of Africa in 146 B.C. This led to tension and eventually conflict between Numidia and Rome. The Numidian wars are notable for launching the careers of both Gaius Marius, and Sulla, and stretching the constitutional burden of the Roman republic as Marius required a professional army, something previously contrary to Roman values, to overcome the talented military leader Jugurtha. Kingdom of Mauretania remained independent until being annexed to the Roman Empire by Emperor Claudius in 42 AD.

North Africa remained a part of the Roman Empire, producing notable citizens, including Augustine of Hippo, until incompetent leadership from Roman commanders in the early fifth century allowed the Germanic peoples, the Vandals, to cross the Strait of Gibraltar, whereupon they overcame the fickle Roman defense. The loss of North Africa is considered a pinnacle point in the fall of the Western Roman Empire as Africa had previously been an important grain province that maintained Roman prosperity despite the barbarian incursions, and the wealth required to create new armies. The issue of regaining North Africa became paramount to the Western Empire, but was frustrated by Vandal victories. The focus of Roman energy had to be on the emerging threat of the Huns. In 468 AD, the Romans made one last serious attempt to invade North Africa but were repelled. This perhaps marks the point of terminal decline for the Western Roman Empire.

The last Roman emperor was deposed in 476 by the Heruli general Odoacer. Trade routes between Europe and North Africa remained intact until the coming of Islam. Some Berbers were members of the Early African Church (but evolved their own Donatist doctrine), some were Berber Jews, and some adhered to traditional Berber religion. African pope Victor I served during the reign of Roman emperor Septimius Severus. Furthermore, during the rule of the Romans, Byzantines, Vandals, Ottomans and Carthaginians the Kabyle people were the only or one of the few in North Africa who remained independent.

The Kabyle people were incredibly resistible so much so that even during the Arab conquest of North Africa they still had control and possession over their mountains.

===Arab conquest to modern times===


The early Muslim conquests included North Africa by 640. By 700, most of North Africa had come under Muslim rule. Indigenous Berbers subsequently started to form their own polities in response in places such as Fez and Sijilmasa. In the eleventh century, a reformist movement made up of members that called themselves the Almoravid dynasty expanded south into Sub-Saharan Africa.

North Africa&#x27;s populous and flourishing civilization collapsed after exhausting its resources in internal fighting and suffering devastation from the invasion of the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal. Ibn Khaldun noted that the lands ravaged by Banu Hilal invaders had become completely arid desert.
After the Middle Ages much of the area was loosely under the control of the Ottoman Empire. The Barbary pirates operated from the largely independent Barbary states located on the coast of North Africa. The Spanish Empire conquered several coastal cities between the 16th and 18th centuries. After the 19th century, the imperial and colonial presence of France, the United Kingdom, Spain and Italy left the entirety of the region under one form of European occupation.

In World War II from 1940 to 1943 the area was the setting for the North African Campaign. During the 1950s and 1960s all of the North African states gained independence. There remains a dispute over Western Sahara between Morocco and the Algerian-backed Polisario Front.

The wider protest movement known as the Arab Spring began with revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt which ultimately led to the overthrow of their governments, as well as civil war in Libya. Large protests also occurred in Algeria and Morocco to a lesser extent. Many hundreds died in the uprisings.

==Country statistics==
==Architecture==
&quot;Further information in the sections of Architecture of Africa:&quot;
* Prehistoric North African Architecture
* Ancient North African Architecture
* Medieval North African Architecture

==Science and technology==
&quot;Further information in the sections of History of science and technology in Africa:&quot;

* Education
* Astronomy
* Mathematics
* Metallurgy
* Medicine
* Agriculture
* Textiles
* Maritime technology
* Architecture
* Communication systems
* Warfare
* Commerce
* By country
==See also==

* Culture of Egypt
* Demographics of the Middle East and North Africa
* European Digital Archive on Soil Maps of the World
* List of modern conflicts in North Africa
* List of Roman Latin poets and writers from North Africa

==References==
==Further reading==
* Cesari, Jocelyne. &quot;The awakening of Muslim democracy: Religion, modernity, and the state&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
* Fischbach, ed. Michael R. &quot;Biographical encyclopedia of the modern Middle East and North Africa&quot; (Gale Group, 2008).
* Ilahiane, Hsain. &quot;Historical dictionary of the Berbers (Imazighen)&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2017).
* Issawi, Charles. &quot;An economic history of the Middle East and North Africa&quot; (Routledge, 2013).
* Naylor, Phillip C. &quot;North Africa, Revised Edition: A History from Antiquity to the Present&quot; (University of Texas Press, 2015).
*Willie Molesi, &quot;Black Africa versus Arab North Africa: The Great Divide&quot;, 
*Willie Molesi, &quot;Relations Between Africans and Arabs: Harsh Realities&quot;,

==External links==
* North Africa&#x27;s Weather Forecasts and Weather Conditions
* North Africa news and analysis
* Africa Interactive Map from the United States Army Africa (archived 17 January 2010)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="0" end="12" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="24" end="39" title="North Africa" label="Northern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="94" end="100" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="241" end="255" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="295" end="302" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="392" end="399" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="401" end="406" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="408" end="413" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="415" end="422" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="424" end="431" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="437" end="451" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="467" end="475" title="territorial dispute" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="500" end="520" title="list of states with limited recognition" label="partially recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="521" end="553" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="559" end="573" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="626" end="631" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="637" end="650" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="745" end="755" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="761" end="766" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="781" end="794" title="Sahara" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="900" end="905" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="910" end="917" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191011" start="927" end="946" title="plazas de soberanía" label="plazas de soberanía"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="985" end="990" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q107338" start="1058" end="1067" title="Lampedusa" label="Lampedusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q168820" start="1072" end="1080" title="Lampione" label="Lampione"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="1082" end="1089" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="1099" end="1113" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="1226" end="1233" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="1257" end="1273" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057805" start="1285" end="1297" title="Northeast Africa" label="eastern part"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="1335" end="1344" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1383" end="1388" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="1398" end="1415" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="1451" end="1473" title="early Muslim conquests" label="early Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="1479" end="1509" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="Arab migrations to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="1567" end="1579" title="Islamization" label="Islamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="1584" end="1595" title="Arabization" label="Arabization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="1725" end="1729" title="Arab culture" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340372" start="1730" end="1745" title="Islamic culture" label="Islamic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1892" end="1903" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="1904" end="1913" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="1945" end="1965" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="2049" end="2059" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="2065" end="2070" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2077" end="2081" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="2182" end="2194" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2232" end="2243" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="2260" end="2271" title="geopolitics" label="geopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="2284" end="2308" title="MENA" label="Middle East-North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="2385" end="2391" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="2417" end="2432" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2454" end="2464" title="Nile" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="2492" end="2507" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="2539" end="2546" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="2548" end="2555" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="2561" end="2568" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83384" start="2602" end="2615" title="fold mountains" label="fold mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="2654" end="2669" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="2717" end="2723" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q584279" start="2846" end="2856" title="High Atlas" label="High Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="3022" end="3028" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="3057" end="3063" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q187971" start="3104" end="3108" title="wadi" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319120" start="3211" end="3215" title="Erg (landform)" label="ergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="3266" end="3270" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q757301" start="3277" end="3284" title="Hamada" label="hammada"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="3300" end="3307" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3338" end="3341" title="Desert pavement#Reg" label="reg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477455" start="3345" end="3360" title="desert pavement" label="desert pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="3500" end="3512" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="3534" end="3543" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="3821" end="3826" title="Nile Delta" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="3989" end="3994" title="Cedrus" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q156137" start="3999" end="4003" title="Quercus suber" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="4462" end="4469" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4475" end="4479" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="4496" end="4501" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="4549" end="4571" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="4644" end="4650" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194795" start="4806" end="4821" title="Maghrebi Arabic" label="Maghrebi Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="4889" end="4904" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4973" end="4978" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="5004" end="5011" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="5340" end="5346" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5354" end="5360" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="5373" end="5380" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="5385" end="5392" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="5433" end="5438" title="Copts" label="Copts"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="5442" end="5447" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="5449" end="5456" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="5628" end="5635" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="5679" end="5693" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="5768" end="5773" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="5904" end="5924" title="Maltese language" label="derivative of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="6231" end="6238" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="6333" end="6344" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="6373" end="6382" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140604" start="6387" end="6394" title="Nubians" label="Nubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="6531" end="6551" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="6610" end="6616" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="6666" end="6681" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="6748" end="6777" title="Tuareg people" label="nomadic trans-Saharan peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352659" start="6809" end="6822" title="Uan Muhuggiag" label="Uan Muhuggiag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6823" end="6834" title="Uan Muhuggiag#Tashwinat Mummy" label="child mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q829005" start="6912" end="6926" title="Epipaleolithic" label="Epipaleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="6928" end="6938" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008600" start="6944" end="6952" title="Pastoral Period" label="Pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="7062" end="7074" title="Nilo-Saharan" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="7158" end="7164" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="7169" end="7175" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122423389" start="7270" end="7295" title="Phoenician settlement of North Africa" label="migrating to North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="7322" end="7329" title="Semitic people" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="7330" end="7339" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="7359" end="7365" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="7438" end="7453" title="Ancient Carthage" label="powerful empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="7571" end="7601" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="Arab migrations to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="7659" end="7669" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="7678" end="7689" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="7985" end="7991" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q648255" start="8024" end="8031" title="Kabyle people" label="Kabyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104778119" start="8192" end="8217" title="trans-Saharan slave trade" label="trans-Saharan slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584897" start="8300" end="8307" title="Haratin" label="Haratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057915" start="8364" end="8370" title="Slavery in Africa" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470903" start="8436" end="8450" title="Iberomaurusian" label="Iberomaurusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167862" start="8462" end="8470" title="Taforalt" label="Taforalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="8595" end="8604" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="8722" end="8731" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758238" start="8817" end="8843" title="Early European Farmers" label="European Neolithic Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="8894" end="8902" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="8967" end="8973" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855698" start="9069" end="9081" title="Proto-Berber language" label="proto-Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="9148" end="9154" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="9166" end="9170" title="Iron Age" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422423" start="9263" end="9282" title="varieties of Arabic" label="varieties of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="9401" end="9428" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q34065" start="9434" end="9440" title="Tuareg languages" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="9600" end="9609" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="9611" end="9617" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="9619" end="9631" title="Punic people" label="Punic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="9633" end="9639" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="9641" end="9648" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="9650" end="9655" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="9657" end="9666" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9672" end="9678" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="9839" end="9844" title="oasis" label="oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="9869" end="9876" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="9887" end="9894" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuaregs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="9920" end="9929" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="9982" end="9990" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="10010" end="10029" title="Coptic language" label="varieties of Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="10041" end="10056" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="10191" end="10203" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="10249" end="10266" title="Coptic Christians" label="Coptic Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q770213" start="10324" end="10352" title="Christianity in the Middle East" label="Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="10455" end="10461" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="10624" end="10637" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="10728" end="10740" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="10881" end="10925" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="10971" end="11009" title="recent African origin of modern humans" label="recent African origin of modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="11205" end="11216" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="11310" end="11323" title="recent African origin of modern humans" label="Out of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q244004" start="11517" end="11522" title="Sétif" label="Setif"/>
<link wikidata="Q401452" start="11559" end="11564" title="Saïda, Algeria" label="Saïda"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="11625" end="11632" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="11866" end="11877" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="12753" end="12760" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="12776" end="12787" title="Human skull" label="skull shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="12825" end="12837" title="modern human" label="modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="13022" end="13026" title="East Africa" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="13031" end="13046" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653440" start="13052" end="13066" title="Saharan rock art" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="13076" end="13096" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60259056" start="13236" end="13263" title="African humid period" label="Neolithic Subpluvial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12508" start="14069" end="14085" title="Giza pyramid complex" label="Pyramids of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="14192" end="14203" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="14768" end="14777" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="14783" end="14797" title="Greek colonies" label="Greek colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="14974" end="14982" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="14984" end="14991" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="14996" end="15006" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314811" start="15118" end="15125" title="Chellah" label="Chellah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216939" start="15127" end="15136" title="Essaouira" label="Essaouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q391215" start="15141" end="15150" title="Volubilis" label="Volubilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="15179" end="15188" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q905162" start="15245" end="15249" title="Dido" label="Dido"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="15510" end="15516" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="15524" end="15530" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="15544" end="15550" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="15607" end="15611" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="15670" end="15686" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Ancient Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="15823" end="15840" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="15842" end="15847" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="15849" end="15857" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="15859" end="15866" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="15881" end="15887" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="15919" end="15934" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="15944" end="15950" title="Roman Republic" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="16120" end="16144" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Roman province of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="16192" end="16200" title="war" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="16209" end="16216" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="16291" end="16303" title="Gaius Marius" label="Gaius Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="16309" end="16314" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="16491" end="16499" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q156173" start="16507" end="16515" title="Jugurtha" label="Jugurtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="16528" end="16538" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="16611" end="16619" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="16719" end="16737" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="16829" end="16845" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="16851" end="16858" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="16873" end="16892" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="17393" end="17397" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="17550" end="17570" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q220643" start="17622" end="17628" title="Herules" label="Heruli"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="17637" end="17644" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="17646" end="17657" title="Trade route" label="Trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="17667" end="17673" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326579" start="17767" end="17787" title="Early African Church" label="Early African Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q203204" start="17811" end="17828" title="Donatism" label="Donatist doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152757" start="17841" end="17852" title="Berber Jews" label="Berber Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712462" start="17874" end="17901" title="traditional Berber religion" label="traditional Berber religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077738" start="17903" end="17915" title="African pope" label="African pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q127989" start="17916" end="17924" title="Pope Victor I" label="Victor I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="17966" end="17983" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="18380" end="18402" title="early Muslim conquests" label="early Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="18587" end="18590" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="18595" end="18604" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="18698" end="18715" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="18736" end="18754" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="18928" end="18939" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="18944" end="18954" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="19065" end="19076" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="19131" end="19145" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="19151" end="19166" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="19205" end="19219" title="Barbary states" label="Barbary states"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="19262" end="19276" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="19409" end="19415" title="French colonial empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="19417" end="19435" title="British Empire" label="the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="19437" end="19442" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="19447" end="19452" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="19528" end="19540" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="19592" end="19614" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="19725" end="19739" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="19748" end="19755" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="19764" end="19771" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q240425" start="19780" end="19795" title="Polisario Front" label="Polisario Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="19838" end="19849" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q46959" start="19876" end="19883" title="Tunisian Revolution" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="19888" end="19893" title="Egyptian revolution of 2011" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="19965" end="19974" title="First Libyan Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q511049" start="20180" end="20202" title="Architecture of Africa" label="Architecture of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20212" end="20250" title="Architecture of Africa#North Africa" label="Prehistoric North African Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20253" end="20287" title="Architecture of Africa#North Africa 2" label="Ancient North African Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20290" end="20325" title="Architecture of Africa#North Africa 3" label="Medieval North African Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166074" start="20399" end="20442" title="History of science and technology in Africa" label="History of science and technology in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20453" end="20462" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley" label="Education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20465" end="20474" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 2" label="Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20477" end="20488" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 3" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20491" end="20501" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 4" label="Metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20504" end="20512" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 5" label="Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20515" end="20526" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 6" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20529" end="20537" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa" label="Textiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20540" end="20559" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 7" label="Maritime technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20562" end="20574" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 8" label="Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20577" end="20598" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 9" label="Communication systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20601" end="20608" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa, Nile Valley, and the Sahel" label="Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20611" end="20619" title="History of science and technology in Africa#Northern Africa and the Nile Valley 10" label="Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20622" end="20632" title="History of science and technology in Africa#North Africa" label="By country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655498" start="20649" end="20665" title="Culture of Egypt" label="Culture of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042911" start="20668" end="20716" title="Demographics of the Middle East and North Africa" label="Demographics of the Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075156" start="20719" end="20769" title="European Digital Archive on Soil Maps of the World" label="European Digital Archive on Soil Maps of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628890" start="20772" end="20812" title="List of modern conflicts in North Africa" label="List of modern conflicts in North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911576" start="20815" end="20870" title="List of Roman Latin poets and writers from North Africa" label="List of Roman Latin poets and writers from North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181197" start="21852" end="21877" title="United States Army Africa" label="United States Army Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21719" wikidata="Q193390" url="?curid=21719" title="New England Patriots">
<text>The New England Patriots are a professional American football team based in the Greater Boston area. The Patriots compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) East division. The Patriots play home games at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, Massachusetts, which is southwest of Boston. The franchise is owned by Robert Kraft, who purchased the team in 1994. As of 2024, the Patriots are the sixth-most valuable sports team in the world and have sold out every home game since 1994.

Founded in 1959 as the Boston Patriots, the team was a charter member of the American Football League (AFL) before joining the NFL in 1970 through the AFL–NFL merger. The Patriots played their home games at various stadiums throughout Boston, including Fenway Park from 1963 to 1969 until the franchise moved to Foxborough in 1971. As part of the move, the team changed its name to the New England Patriots. Home games were played at Foxboro Stadium until 2002 when the stadium was demolished alongside the opening of Gillette Stadium. The team began utilizing Gillette Stadium for home games the same year.

The Patriots hold the records for most Super Bowl wins (6, tied with the Pittsburgh Steelers), appearances (11), and losses (5, tied with the Denver Broncos). Generally unsuccessful prior to the 21st century, the franchise enjoyed a period of dominance under head coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady from 2001 to 2019. The Brady–Belichick era, regarded as one of the greatest sports dynasties, would see the Patriots claim nearly every major Super Bowl record. Other NFL records held by the franchise include the most wins in a 10-year period (126 from 2003 to 2012), the longest winning streak of regular season and playoff games (21 from October 2003 to October 2004), the most consecutive winning seasons (19 from 2001 to 2019), the most consecutive conference championship appearances (8 from 2011 to 2018), the most consecutive division titles (11 from 2009 to 2019), the only undefeated 16-game regular season (2007), and the highest postseason winning percentage (.638).

==History==


On November 16, 1959, Boston business executive Billy Sullivan was awarded the eighth and final franchise of the developing American Football League (AFL). The following winter, locals were allowed to submit ideas for the Boston football team&#x27;s official name. The most popular choice – and the one that Sullivan selected – was the &quot;Boston Patriots&quot;, with &quot;Patriots&quot; referring to the colonists of the Thirteen Colonies who rebelled against British control during the American Revolution and in July 1776 declared the United States of America an independent nation, which heavily involved the then-colony of Massachusetts. Immediately thereafter, artist Phil Bissell of &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; developed the &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; logo.

The Patriots never had a regular home stadium in the AFL. Boston University Field, Harvard Stadium, Fenway Park (shared with baseball&#x27;s Boston Red Sox), and Boston College&#x27;s Alumni Stadium all served as home fields during their time in the American Football League. The 1963 season saw the franchise&#x27;s first playoff win over Buffalo to clinch the division. They subsequently lost the AFL championship game to the San Diego Chargers 51–10. They did not appear again in an AFL or NFL post-season game for another 13 years.

When the NFL and AFL merged in 1970, the Patriots were placed in the American Football Conference (AFC) East division, where they still play. The following year, the Patriots moved to a new stadium in Foxborough, Massachusetts, which would serve as their home for the next 30 years. As a result of the move, they announced they would change their name from the Boston Patriots to the Bay State Patriots, after the state of Massachusetts. The name was rejected by the NFL and on March 22, 1971, the team officially announced they would change its geographic name to New England.

During the 1970s, the Patriots had some success under head coach Chuck Fairbanks, earning a berth to the playoffs in 1976 – as a wild card team – and in 1978 – as AFC East champions. They lost in the first round both times. Under his successor, Ron Erhardt, the team finished one game out of the playoffs his first two years. The next coach, Ron Meyer, led the team to the playoffs in the strike-shortened 1982 season, and despite not having a losing record during his career, he was fired in 1984 due to poor relationships with players and management. Hall-of-Fame player Raymond Berry was hired as his replacement, and in 1985, he brought the team to its first AFC Championship and a berth in Super Bowl XX, which they lost to the Chicago Bears 46–10. Following their Super Bowl loss, they returned to the playoffs in 1986 but lost in the first round. Berry left the team following a disappointing 1989 season, and his replacement Rod Rust only lasted one season, 1990, during which the Patriots went 1–15. During the late 1980s and early 1990s they changed ownership several times, being purchased from the Sullivan family first by Victor Kiam in 1988, who sold the team to James Orthwein in 1992. Though Orthwein&#x27;s period as owner was short and controversial, he did oversee major changes to the team, first with the hiring of former New York Giants coach Bill Parcells in 1993. Orthwein and his marketing team then defied Patriots fans&#x27; overwhelming preference and commissioned the NFL to develop a new visual identity and logo, and changed their primary colors from the traditional red, white and blue to blue and silver for the team uniforms. Orthwein intended to move the team to his native St. Louis (where it would have been renamed as the St. Louis Stallions), but instead sold the team in 1994 for $175million to Boston paper magnate Robert Kraft, who had bought the Patriots&#x27; then-home, Foxboro Stadium, out of bankruptcy in 1988.

Continuing on as head coach under Kraft&#x27;s ownership, Parcells would bring the Patriots to two playoff appearances, including Super Bowl XXXI (following the 1996 season), which they lost to the Green Bay Packers by a score of 35–21. Pete Carroll, Parcells&#x27;s successor, would also take the team to the playoffs twice in 1997 and 1998 before being dismissed as head coach after the 1999 season.


In 2000, the Patriots hired head coach Bill Belichick, who had served as defensive coordinator under Parcells including during Super Bowl XXXI. Their new home field, Gillette Stadium, opened in 2002 to replace the aging Foxboro Stadium. Long-time starting quarterback Drew Bledsoe, who was the franchise&#x27;s star throughout the 1990s, went down with a sheared blood vessel in his chest in a week two match-up in 2001 against the rival New York Jets. Backup quarterback Tom Brady, drafted by the Patriots in sixth round of the 2000 NFL draft, became the starting quarterback. Brady&#x27;s successful play led to Bledsoe never getting his job back as a starter, and would serve as the franchise&#x27;s starting quarterback for the next 18 years. Under Belichick and Brady, the Patriots became one of the most consistently dominant teams in the NFL, with many describing the team as a &quot;dynasty&quot;. Within the first few seasons of the 21st century, the team won three Super Bowls in four seasons (2001, 2003, and 2004), over the St. Louis Rams, Carolina Panthers, and Philadelphia Eagles, respectively. In the 2005 season, the Patriots went 10–6 and won the division. The Patriots defeated the Jacksonville Jaguars in the Wild Card Round before falling to the Denver Broncos in the Divisional Round. In the 2006 season, the Patriots went 12–4 and won the division. After defeating the Jets and the Chargers, the Patriots lost in the AFC Championship to the Colts. The Patriots finished the 2007 regular season with a perfect 16–0 record, becoming only the fourth team in league history to go undefeated in the regular season, and the only one since the league expanded its regular season schedule to 16 games. After advancing to Super Bowl XLII, the team&#x27;s fourth Super Bowl in seven years, the Patriots were upset by the Giants to end their bid for a 19–0 season. With the loss, the Patriots ended the year at 18–1, becoming only one of three teams to go 18–1 along with the 1984 San Francisco 49ers and the 1985 Chicago Bears. However, both the Bears and 49ers lost their only game during the regular season, and both would win their respective Super Bowl. In the first game of the 2008 season, Brady suffered a torn ACL against the Chiefs. Matt Cassell stepped in for the rest of the season and the team finished 11–5 but missed the postseason. In the 2009 season, Brady returned from his injury and led the team to a 10–6 record and a division title. The team&#x27;s season in the Wild Card Round with a 33–14 loss to the Baltimore Ravens. The Patriots went 14–2 and won the division in the 2010 season but were one-and-done in the Divisional Round of the playoffs against the New York Jets in a 28–21 loss.

The Patriots returned to the Super Bowl in 2011 but lost again to the Giants, 21–17. In the 2012 season, the Patriots won the AFC East with a 12–4 record. The team defeated the Houston Texans in the Divisional Round before falling to the Baltimore Ravens in the AFC Championship. In the 2013 season, the Patriots went 12–4 and won the division. The Patriots defeated the Indianapolis Colts 43–22 in the Divisional Round before falling to the Denver Broncos 26–16 in the AFC Championship. In 2014, the Patriots won the division with a 12–4 record. The Patriots defeated the Baltimore Ravens in the Divisional Round and the Indianapolis Colts in the AFC Championship. The Patriots reached a record-tying eighth Super Bowl, where they defeated the defending champion Seattle Seahawks by a score of 28–24 to win Super Bowl XLIX for their fourth title. After Seattle had driven the ball to New England&#x27;s 1-yard line with under a minute to go, New England rookie cornerback Malcolm Butler made a critical interception on Seattle&#x27;s final offensive play that helped to seal the victory. In the 2015 season, the Patriots won the division with a 12–4 record. The team defeated the Kansas City Chiefs in the Divisional Round before falling to the Denver Broncos in the AFC Championship. New England became the first team to reach nine Super Bowls in the 2016–17 playoffs and faced the Atlanta Falcons in Super Bowl LI. Trailing 28–3 midway through the third quarter, the Patriots scored 25 unanswered points to tie the game in the final seconds of regulation. In the first overtime in Super Bowl history, the Patriots won the coin toss and scored a touchdown to claim their fifth Super Bowl victory. The Patriots extended their record to ten Super Bowl appearances in the 2017–18 playoffs but lost to the Philadelphia Eagles in Super Bowl LII. The Patriots returned to the championship game for a third consecutive season in Super Bowl LIII, where they defeated the Los Angeles Rams 13–3 to win their sixth Super Bowl, tying them with the Pittsburgh Steelers for most Super Bowl victories in NFL history.

Following a disappointing 2019 season, in which the team lost in the first round of the playoffs to the Tennessee Titans, and in which the long-time Brady–Belichick partnership was strained due to Brady wanting to have more input in organizational decisions, Brady departed the Patriots after 20 seasons for free agency, signing with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. To replace him, the Patriots signed veteran quarterback Cam Newton. In 2020, the team missed the playoffs with their first losing record, 7–9, in two decades. The team drafted Mac Jones in the first round of the 2021 NFL draft, and released Newton after naming Jones the starting quarterback prior to the team&#x27;s first game of the 2021 season. Jones led the team to their first playoff berth without Brady since 1998, but they would lose 47–17 to the division rival Buffalo Bills in the Wild Card round. The Patriots finished with a 8–9 record and missed the postseason in the 2022 season.

After a gloomy 4–13 record in the 2023 season, the Patriots mutually parted ways with Bill Belichick after 24 years on January 11, 2024, notably due to a series of poor decisions in his final years as general manager regarding offensive personnel, which culminated in a sharp decline of offensive production following the 2021 season. One day later, the Patriots promoted the pair of Jerod Mayo, then-current linebackers coach and former player, and Eliot Wolf, director of scouting and son of Pro Football Hall of Fame general manager Ron Wolf, as first-time head coach and first-time &quot;de facto&quot; general manager to each succeed Belichick&#x27;s duties. Mac Jones, after three seasons as the incumbent starter, was traded in the 2024 offseason due to his insufficient play. The post-Belichick era was kickstarted during the 2024 NFL draft, with the franchise selecting Drake Maye third overall, the highest draft pick held by the Patriots in 31 years up to that point. On the day of the final game of the 2024 season, the Patriots fired Jerod Mayo after repeating the prior year&#x27;s 4–13 record in his debut campaign as a head coach, due to multiple factors, including limited experience, which was eventually described by Robert Kraft as being put in an &quot;untenable situation&quot;. Mike Vrabel was named head coach following Mayo&#x27;s dismissal.

==Logos and uniforms==
===Primary logos===

The Patriots original helmet logo was a simple tricorne hat, used only for the 1960 season. From 1961 to 1992, the Patriots used a logo of a Revolutionary War minuteman hiking a football. The Patriots wordmark logo during this time consisted of a western-style font. The minuteman logo became known as the &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; logo, which later became the name of the team&#x27;s mascot.

In 1979, the Patriots worked with NFL Properties to design a new, streamlined logo, to replace the complex Pat Patriot logo. The new logo featured the blue and white profile of a minuteman in a tricorne hat set against a flag showing three red stripes separated by two white stripes. Team owner Billy Sullivan decided to put the new logo up to a vote against Pat Patriot with the fans at the September 23 home game against the San Diego Chargers, using a sound level meter to judge the crowd&#x27;s reaction. The new logo was decidedly rejected by the crowd in favor of Pat, and the concept was shelved.

In 1993, a new logo was unveiled involving the gray face of a minuteman wearing a red, white and royal blue hat that begins as a tricorne and transitions into a flowing banner-like design. It became popularly known as the &quot;Flying Elvis&quot; due to many observing its resemblance to the profile of a young Elvis Presley. A new script logo was introduced as well in tandem with the &quot;Flying Elvis&quot;, utilizing a cursive font.

In 2000, the blue color used on the tricorne of the &quot;Flying Elvis&quot; as well as the outline of the cursive wordmark was switched from royal blue to nautical blue to coincide with the uniform change in the new millennium.

On July 3, 2013, the Patriots unveiled a new wordmark to accompany the &quot;Flying Elvis&quot;, which replaced the script of their previous cursive typeface with modernized block letters (colored in blue or white depending on the background), and modified the &quot;Flying Elvis&quot; to be underneath instead of flowing up-top. While appearing everywhere else, it was not applied on the uniforms until the 2015 season due to NFL uniform policies.
===Uniforms===
====1960–1992====

The Patriots&#x27; primary uniforms remained largely unchanged from the franchises&#x27; inaugural season until 1993. The Patriots originally wore red jerseys with white block numbering at home, and white jerseys with red block numbering on the road. Both uniforms used white pants and white helmets, first with the hat logo over the player&#x27;s number, then with the &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; logo starting in 1961. A blue stripe was added to the two red helmet stripes in 1964. The numbers on both the home and away jerseys gained a blue outline in 1973. In 1979, the Patriots began the first of many sporadic runs of wearing red pants with the white jerseys. The red pants were dropped in 1981, but returned in 1984. After being dropped again in 1988, they were used again from 1990 to 1992.

====1993–1999====

The Patriots underwent a complete identity overhaul before the 1993 season, starting with the introduction of the aforementioned &quot;Flying Elvis&quot; logo. The new uniforms consisted of a royal blue home jersey and a white away jersey. The helmet was silver with the Flying Elvis logo and no additional striping. Both uniforms used silver pants, originally with stripes designed to look like those flowing from the Flying Elvis, but these were changed to simple red and blue stripes after one season. When they debuted, both the home and away jerseys used red block numbers with a blue and white outline, but after one season the home uniforms switched to the now-familiar white with a red outline.

In 1995, the Patriots switched the block numbers to a more modern rounded number font with a dropshadow. The Patriots were one of the first adopters of custom numbers, a trend that would grow drastically over the next 20 years.

====2000–2019====

In 2000, the Patriots then became one of the few teams at the time to drop the rounded numbers and switch back to block numbers. The shade of blue was switched for the first time in the franchises&#x27; history, from royal to nautical blue. The jerseys once again had the number on the shoulders while the logo moved back to the sleeves. &quot;New Century&quot; silver stripes were also added to the home jersey, with nautical blue stripes appearing on the away jersey. The Patriots, unsatisfied with the 1990s white-on-silver road look, also took the opportunity to introduce blue pants to be worn with the white jersey, offering a better contrast. To better match the blue pants, the number on the white jersey was switched from red to blue.

Though the Patriots had generally worn silver pants with the blue jerseys, and navy pants with the white jerseys, they did wear an all-blue set during the 2002 season. On two consecutive home games that season, the Patriots wore blue tops with their road blue pants and white socks; they lost both games (Week 6 vs. the Packers, and Week 8 vs. the Broncos). The team would not wear an all-blue set again until the introduction of the Color Rush uniforms in 2016.

Throughout the 2011 season, the Patriots wore dark patches with white lettering on their uniforms with the initials &#x27;MHK&#x27; in honor of Myra Kraft, the late long-time spouse of owner Robert Kraft.

====2020–present====

In 2020, the Patriots made some changes to their uniform. The all-blue &quot;Color Rush&quot; design became the primary home uniform, complete with a tweaked nameplate font and numbers, and blue/red/white socks. A corresponding white uniform was also unveiled, also paired with the blue pants. Both uniforms featured truncated shoulder striping as a nod to the &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; uniforms. Coincidentally, the arrival of new jerseys occurred with the departure of long-time quarterback, Tom Brady, from the Patriots. Brady was in New England exactly between the last uniform change in 2000, and left before the 2020 uniform change in 2019.

The Patriots brought back the silver pants to pair with the current uniforms in a 2022 Week 7 home game on Monday Night Football against the Chicago Bears. Unlike the previous silver pants the team wore from 2000 to 2019, this design featured thicker red stripes, matching the same width as the middle blue stripe. During a Week 7 2024 road game at Wembley Stadium against the Jacksonville Jaguars, the Patriots paired their silver pants with the road white uniform for the first time since 1999.

====Alternate uniforms====
In 1994, the Patriots wore the &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; helmets and plain white striped pants from two seasons prior as alternates as part of the NFL&#x27;s 75th-anniversary celebration. In 2002, NFL teams were allowed to add a permanent third jersey to be worn in a maximum of two games. The Patriots reintroduced a red jersey as their alternate, complemented with the old-style &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; helmet. In 2003, the Patriots changed their alternate to a silver jersey with blue pants. For this uniform, the &quot;Flying Elvis&quot; helmet was used. The uniform was identical to the white jersey with any areas of white replaced by silver. These uniforms were dropped after 2007. No alternate uniform was used in 2008. In 2009, the red alternate was reintroduced, again accompanied by the &quot;Pat Patriot&quot; helmet. An alternate white road jersey was also worn with the older helmet for one game, using red numbers, in tribute to the 50th anniversary of the AFL. The red alternate gained a blue outline around the numbers in 2010 and this was worn through 2012. The Patriots temporarily retired their alternate red uniforms in 2013, thanks to a new NFL rule outlawing throwback alternate helmets, and restricting teams to one helmet shell only. However, after the NFL reinstated the use of alternate helmets in 2022, the Patriots brought back the throwback red uniforms.

In 2016, the Patriots took part in the NFL&#x27;s Color Rush program, wearing monochrome navy uniforms on September 22 against the Houston Texans. The uniform tops were patterned after the 1980s Pat Patriot-era uniforms, while the pants featured thick white stripes with red accents. They have worn them a total of four times since 2016. In 2017, an all-white Color Rush uniform was introduced and used for the Patriots&#x27; Thursday night road game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.

==Facilities==
===Stadium and headquarters===

Since 2002, the Patriots&#x27; home stadium has been Gillette Stadium, a $350million facility privately financed by Robert Kraft, located in Foxborough, Massachusetts. It houses the team&#x27;s practice facilities, the team&#x27;s administrative offices, as well as its owning entity&#x27;s, The Kraft Group, along with the Kraft-owned Major League Soccer team, the New England Revolution. The field, which was originally natural grass, was replaced with a FieldTurf surface during the 2006 season. The Patriots installed a new video board, the largest in the United States, in 2023. Despite not being around for more than 20 years, Gillette Stadium is home to the second most postseason games ever, Candlestick Park being first with 27 total. The Patriots have a 19–4 playoff record in this stadium as of the conclusion of the 2019 NFL season, the AFC playoffs consistently had the Patriots playing from home in 2001–2019. The area around the stadium was developed, beginning in 2007, into a $375million &quot;lifestyle and entertainment center&quot; called Patriot Place; among its largest structures is a multi-floor restaurant and bar called CBS Scene.

Prior to 2002, the Patriots played in Foxboro Stadium dating back to 1971, the team&#x27;s second year in the NFL after the AFL–NFL merger, and this venue was also privately funded. The final game in this stadium was the 2001 AFC Divisional Playoff game which was a 16–13 overtime win over the visiting Oakland Raiders, known for the raging snowstorm and the &quot;tuck rule&quot; call. During the team&#x27;s days in the American Football League and its first year in the NFL, the Boston Patriots were hosted by a number of fields in or around Boston.

====Stadium history====

===Training camp and practice===

The Patriots hold training camp and practices just outside of Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, with twin practice fields available for team use.

Prior to 2003, the Patriots held training camp and practice at numerous locations. From 1976 to 2002, the team held training camp at Bryant College in Smithfield, Rhode Island. From 1960 to 1961, then from 1969 to 1975, the Patriots held training camp at University of Massachusetts Amherst. Between 1962 and 1968, the Patriots held training camp at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts.

From 1971 until 2001, the Patriots would simply practice at Foxboro Stadium whenever the field was available, otherwise they would use the public football fields that were available in Foxborough.

===Aircraft===

In 2017, the Patriots purchased two Boeing 767-300ERs for use as team planes, with one serving as the backup, which were ready in time for the 2017 NFL season. This made them the first team in league history to own their own planes. At the time it was getting more difficult for professional sports teams to book private charter flights, with eight teams being dropped that season, as major commercial airlines were instead focusing on more profitable scheduled flights. The two jet airliners, N366AA and N39367, were previously operated by American Airlines from 1991 to 2016. The planes are known affectionately as &quot;AirKrafts&quot; after team owner Robert Kraft. Kraft has lent one of the planes to transport students to the March for Our Lives demonstration in Washington, D.C.

In 2020, the New England Patriots signed an agreement with Eastern Airlines to handle the operations of their planes. In July 2023, the Patriots filed a lawsuit against Eastern Airlines over an alleged breach of contract. Since February 2024, both planes now operate with Omni Air International.

==Rivalries==
In terms of number of games played, the Patriots have competed most against other teams in the AFC East division: the Buffalo Bills, Miami Dolphins, and New York Jets, who were all a part of the AFC East division since the AFL–NFL merger, as well as the former AFL Eastern division. The Patriots also share rivalries with several teams outside of their division, including the Indianapolis Colts, who were members of the AFC East from 1970 to 2001, the Baltimore Ravens, the Denver Broncos, the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Las Vegas Raiders. Outside of the AFC, the Patriots also had a memorable rivalry with the New York Giants.

===Divisional rivals===
====New York Jets====
The closest rivalry geographically has been that with the New York Jets. The Patriots and Jets have been in the same division (what is now the AFC East) since both teams&#x27; founding&#x27;s in 1960 and have played each other at least twice a year since then. The rivalry between the Jets and Patriots has escalated since 1996, when Patriots head coach Bill Parcells left the Patriots under controversy to become the head coach of the Jets; he was replaced by former Jets coach Pete Carroll. Four years later, Carroll was fired, and Parcells&#x27;s assistant, Bill Belichick, resigned the day he was named the Jets&#x27; head coach to become the head coach of the Patriots. Six years after that, Eric Mangini, an assistant under Belichick, became the head coach of the Jets.

Bill Belichick achieved his 200th career head coaching win (regular season and playoffs) on November 22, 2012, defeating the Jets 49–19; it was his 163rd such win as Patriots coach. Belichick also passed George Halas for second most career head coaching wins (regular season and playoffs) with his 325th win on October 30, 2022, in a 22–17 victory over the Jets. As of 2023, the Patriots lead the all-time series 75–55–1.

====Buffalo Bills====
The Patriots and the Bills were both charter members of the AFL and even competed with each other in an AFL playoff game. They have remained divisional rivals since the AFL–NFL merger. Prior to the rise of Tom Brady, the two teams shared a mellow, yet occasionally competitive rivalry, featuring highlights from players such as O. J. Simpson, Steve Grogan, Joe Ferguson, Jim Kelly, and Drew Bledsoe. However, Brady dominated the Bills during his tenure as the Patriots&#x27; franchise quarterback, holding a 32–3 regular-season record over them. Though Patriots fans usually felt apathetic towards the Bills during the Brady era, Bills fans came to despise the Patriots more than any other rival. With the departure of Tom Brady after the 2019 season, the Bills swept the Pats in 2020, including a 38–9 &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; win that stands as the worst home loss of the Belichick era. It was their first time doing so since 1999, Belichick&#x27;s first year as head coach and the year before Brady was drafted.
In the 2021–22 NFL playoffs, the Bills defeated the Patriots 47–17 in the rivalry&#x27;s first playoff matchup in nearly 60 years, with the Bills scoring seven consecutive touchdowns and never punting or attempting a field goal against the Pats defense, making for the NFL&#x27;s first &quot;perfect offensive game&quot; in history and the worst playoff loss of Belichick&#x27;s career. As of 2023, the Patriots lead the all-time series 78–50–1.

====Miami Dolphins====
The Patriots first played the Miami Dolphins in 1966 in the AFL, when Miami was one of two expansion teams to debut that year in that league. The Dolphins dominated the Patriots in the 1970s and 1990s, but the two teams remained competitive with each other for years before the rise of Tom Brady. Brady, however, struggled occasionally against the Dolphins in the 2000s before reasserting dominance in the 2010s. The Patriots and Dolphins are the only two teams in the Super Bowl era to post undefeated regular season records, with Miami going 14–0 in 1972 and the Patriots going 16–0 in 2007. Notable moments between the clubs include the Snowplow Game, three playoff matchups, the Dolphins revealing their Wildcat offense against the Patriots, and the Miracle in Miami. As of 2023, the Dolphins lead the all-time series 62–55.

===Conference rivals===
====Indianapolis Colts====
The Patriots rivalry with the Indianapolis Colts ran through the two clubs&#x27; tenure together in the AFC East (1970–2001). The two clubs clashed in several close games, such as on December 19, 1971, as a late Patriots touchdown decided a 21–17 New England win; on September 18, 1978, the Colts rallied to defeat the Patriots 34–27 on &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; on a virtual one-man scoring rampage by running back Joe Washington; on September 4, 1983, the Colts defeated the Patriots in overtime 29–23 in their final season in Baltimore. The Patriots defeated the Colts in back-to-back overtime games, 23–17 on December 8, 1991, and 37–34 on November 15, 1992.
Even though the two clubs were placed in separate divisions in the NFL&#x27;s 2002 divisional realignment, their rivalry did not diminish. At that time, both teams were among the best in the AFC, and both were led by likely Hall of Fame quarterbacks, Peyton Manning (for the Colts) and Tom Brady (for the Patriots). The teams met three times in four years (2003, 2004, 2006) in the playoffs, with the winner going on to win that season&#x27;s Super Bowl each time. The Manning portion of the rivalry began in Manning&#x27;s rookie season, 1998; in 1999 Manning suffered a bitter 31–28 loss in September as the Patriots behind Drew Bledsoe erased a 28–7 Colts lead, then defeated the Patriots 20–15 in Indianapolis on December 12. The Brady–Manning portion of the rivalry began on September 30, 2001, as Brady made his first NFL start in a 44–13 Patriots win at Foxboro; on October 21 the Patriots defeated the Colts at the RCA Dome 38–17.

After the Colts left the AFC East in 2002, they first met on November 30, 2003, in a 38–34 Patriots win decided on a last-second goal line stand by the Patriots. The Colts broke a six-game Patriot winning streak in the rivalry in November 2005, then won twice in 2006; in the AFC Championship Game the Colts erased a 21–6 halftime lead; the game lead tied or changed seven times in the second half before a late touchdown led to a 38–34 Colts win. The November 4, 2007, meeting involved both teams being unbeaten to that point; the 8–0 Patriots and the 7–0 Colts. The Patriots rallied to win 24–20. The Colts won again in 2008 and then erased a large Patriots lead in 2009&#x27;s 4th and 2 game. Manning&#x27;s final meeting with the Patriots as a Colt came in November 2010; a late interception sealed a 31–28 Patriots win.
In 2012, the Patriots faced the Colts, quarterbacked now by Andrew Luck, on November 18; the Patriots defeated the Colts 59–24. The Patriots also beat the Colts on January 12, 2014, 43–22. The Patriots played the Colts in the playoffs again on January 18, 2015, in the AFC title game, winning 45–7. As of the 2023 season, the Patriots lead the all-time series 53–31.

====Baltimore Ravens====

The Ravens first met the New England Patriots in 1996, but the rivalry truly started in 2007 when the Ravens suffered a bitter 27–24 loss in the Patriots&#x27; quest for perfection. The rivalry began to escalate in 2009 when the Ravens lost to the Patriots 27–21 in a game that involved a confrontation between Patriots quarterback Tom Brady and Ravens linebacker Terrell Suggs. Both players would go on to take verbal shots at each other through the media after the game. The Ravens defeated the Patriots in the 2009 AFC Wild Card playoff game, 33–14. This was the first time the Ravens had ever defeated the Patriots.
The Ravens faced the Patriots in week six of the 2010 season. The Patriots ended up winning 23–20 in overtime; the game caused controversy from a hit to the helmet of tight end Todd Heap by Patriots safety Brandon Meriweather.

The Ravens played the Patriots for the third consecutive season in the 2011 AFC Championship Game, which the Ravens lost 23–20. The rivalry reached a new level of friction with this, the second career playoff game between the two clubs. The Ravens clawed to a 20–16 lead in the fourth quarter, but Patriots quarterback Tom Brady dove into the end zone to make the score 23–20 with around 11 minutes remaining; this proved to be the winning touchdown. On the Ravens&#x27; last possession of the game, quarterback Joe Flacco threw a pass to wide receiver Lee Evans in the corner of the end zone which looked to be the game-winning touchdown, before a last-second strip by Sterling Moore forced the ball from the hands of Evans, forcing the game to be decided on a last-minute field goal by Ravens placekicker Billy Cundiff. With 11 seconds remaining on the clock, the kicker missed the 32-yard field goal attempt, allowing the Patriots to kill the clock on their way to Super Bowl XLVI for a rematch with the New York Giants.

The Ravens&#x27; first regular-season win over the Patriots came on September 23, 2012. The game was emotional as receiver Torrey Smith was competing following the death of his brother in a motorcycle accident just the night before. Smith caught two touchdowns in a back and forth game; the Ravens erased a 13–0 lead in the first half and led 14–13, but the Patriots scored at the end of the second quarter for a 20–14 lead. The lead changed twice in the third quarter and the Patriots led 30–21 in the fourth, but the Ravens scored on Smith&#x27;s second touchdown catch. The Ravens were stopped on fourth down but the Patriots had to punt; in the final two minutes a pass interference penalty on Devin McCourty put the ball at the Patriots 7-yard line; new Ravens kicker Justin Tucker booted a 27-yard field goal on the final play; the ball sailed directly over the upright and was ruled good; the quality of officiating by replacement referees caused controversy as Bill Belichick angrily reached for one of the referees as they were leaving the field, leading to a $50,000 fine later that week.

The two teams met again on January 20, 2013, in the AFC Championship, where the Ravens won 28–13. The Patriots led at halftime, 13–7, but the Ravens defense gave up no points in the 2nd half. It was the first time ever that Tom Brady lost a game at home after leading at halftime, and the first time a road team beat the Patriots in the AFC Championship.

The two teams met once again at Gillette Stadium in the playoffs on January 10, 2015. The Patriots trailed by as much as 14 twice, before beating the Ravens 35–31 to advance to the AFC Championship.

The two teams met with Lamar Jackson as the Ravens quarterback for the first time on Sunday Night Football on November 3, 2019. The 8–0 Patriots were favored over the 5–2 Ravens before the game, but the Ravens won in a blowout, 37–20. As of the 2023 season, the Patriots lead the all-time series 11–5.

====Denver Broncos====
The Broncos and Patriots met twice annually during the American Football League (AFL) years from 1960 to 1969, and played in the first-ever AFL game on September 9, 1960. Since , the two teams have met frequently during the regular season, including nine consecutive seasons from 1995 to 2003. As of the end of the season, the two teams have met in the playoffs five times, with the Broncos owning a 4–1 record. The teams&#x27; first playoff match on January 4, 1987, was John Elway&#x27;s first career playoff win, while the teams&#x27; second playoff match on January 14, 2006, game was the Broncos&#x27; first playoff win since Elway&#x27;s retirement after the 1998 season. The game was also notable for Champ Bailey&#x27;s 100-yard interception that resulted in a touchdown-saving tackle by Benjamin Watson at the 1-yard line. On October 11, 2009, the two teams met with former Patriots&#x27; offensive coordinator, Josh McDaniels as the Broncos&#x27; head coach. Both teams wore their AFL 50th anniversary jerseys. The game featured a 98-yard drive in the fourth quarter, with a game-tying touchdown pass from Kyle Orton to Brandon Marshall, followed by an overtime drive led by Orton that resulted in a 41-yard game-winning field goal by Matt Prater. The two teams met in the Divisional round of the 2011 playoffs, with the Patriots blowing out Tim Tebow and the Broncos by a score of 45–10. The Broncos&#x27; rivalry with the Patriots later intensified when longtime Indianapolis Colts&#x27; quarterback Peyton Manning became the Broncos&#x27; starting quarterback from 2012 to 2015. Manning and Patriots&#x27; quarterback Tom Brady maintained a legendary rivalry from until Manning&#x27;s retirement after the season. Though Brady dominated Manning in regular season play, winning nine of twelve meetings, Manning won three of five playoff meetings, including the Broncos&#x27; 26–16 win in the 2013 AFC Championship and the Broncos&#x27; 20–18 win in the 2015 AFC Championship. As of the 2023 season, the Broncos lead the all-time series 31–24.

====Pittsburgh Steelers====

The Pittsburgh Steelers emerged as a prominent rival in league circles when the Patriots upset the Steelers in the 2001 AFC Championship Game at Heinz Field, though the two teams had met in the postseason twice before; the Patriots defeated the Steelers in 1996 28–3 while the Steelers won 7–6 in 1997; both times, the Patriots fielded players with Pittsburgh-area roots in Ty Law and Curtis Martin. Martin&#x27;s final game with the Patriots was in the 1997 playoffs before he departed to the rival New York Jets. Following the 2001 AFC title upset, the Patriots defeated the Steelers 30–14 at the start of the 2002 season. Pittsburgh did not exact revenge for the two losses until ending the Patriots&#x27; record-setting 21-game winning streak in week 6 of the 2004 NFL season. Later that season, the Steelers lost to the eventual Super Bowl champion Patriots in the AFC Championship game after a 15–1 regular season.

The Patriots won six of seven meetings over a ten-year period (–) before the Steelers broke through with a 33–10 victory at Foxborough in , after Matt Cassel turned the ball over five times. The Patriots in 2013 then made history by becoming the first opponent to score 55 points on the Steelers, winning 55–31. The Patriots won again in 2015 (28–21) and 2016&#x27;s regular season (27–16) and then won 36–17 in the 2016 AFC Championship Game. They also won in 2017 when a go-ahead touchdown reception by Steelers&#x27; tight end Jesse James was controversially called back. Though they ultimately missed the playoffs, the Steelers defeated the Patriots by a score of 17–10 on December 16, 2018, in Pittsburgh.

In the postseason, the Patriots have outscored the Steelers 135–75, with the Patriots maintaining a 4–1 record. The only other franchises with winning AFC playoff records against Steelers include the Los Angeles Chargers (2–1), the Jacksonville Jaguars (2–0), and the Denver Broncos (5–3). The Steelers have an all-time regular-season record of 15–13 against the Patriots. In the Bill Belichick era, the main period of the rivalry, the Patriots have a 12–4 record against the Steelers. In their last matchup, the Patriots beat the Steelers 33–3 on Sunday Night Football. As of the 2023 season, the Patriots lead the all-time series 19–16.

====Oakland Raiders====
The rivalry between the Patriots and the Raiders dates to their time in the AFL, but was intensified during a 1978 preseason game, when Patriots wide receiver Darryl Stingley was permanently paralyzed after a vicious hit delivered by Raiders free safety Jack Tatum. Before that, the Patriots also lost a playoff game in 1976 to the Raiders; the game is unofficially known as &quot;The Ben Dreith Game&quot; due to a controversial penalty by head referee Dreith. While based in Los Angeles, the Raiders hosted the Patriots in the divisional round of the playoffs in 1986. The game was won by the Patriots and marred by a chaotic rumble between the teams in the end zone as players were leaving the field after the game. The brawl was especially notable for Raiders linebacker Matt Millen attacking GM Patrick Sullivan, son of owner Billy Sullivan, with his helmet. The two teams met in a divisional round playoff game in 2002, which became known as the &quot;Tuck Rule Game&quot;. Late in the game, an incomplete pass, ruled a fumble, by quarterback Tom Brady was overturned, and the Patriots went on to win in overtime and eventually won the Super Bowl against the heavily favored St. Louis Rams. Since that game, the Patriots have won five of the last six regular-season contests between the two teams. The first contest being the following year during the 2002 season in Oakland, with the Raiders winning 27–20; they met in the 2005 season opener in New England with the Patriots ruining Randy Moss&#x27; debut as a Raider 30–20; the Patriots defeated the Raiders 49–26 in December 2008 in Bill Belichick&#x27;s 100th regular-season win as Patriots coach; a Patriots 31–19 win during the 2011 season; a scrappy 16–9 Patriots win in the third week of the 2014 season, and the Patriots&#x27; 33–8 win in Mexico City in 2017, and following a last-minute lateral play that went awry, a Raider win 30–24. The win also snapped a six-game losing streak against the Patriots. The two teams met again the following season, with the Raiders defeating the Patriots 21–17. The Patriots lead the all-time series 20–17–1.

===Inter-conference rivals===
====New York Giants====
The two teams rarely played each other given they were on opposite conferences, but the rivalry gained notoriety in the late 2000s thanks to some close contests and memorable moments between Tom Brady and Eli Manning. In the 2007 season, the Patriots defeated the Giants 38–35 to clinch a perfect 16–0 regular season but could not finish a perfect 19–0 season in Super Bowl XLII following a 17–14 defeat. That game featured the now iconic Helmet Catch from David Tyree. The Giants also defeated the Patriots in Super Bowl XLVI, a 21–17 victory. As of the 2023 season, the series is tied 7–7.

==Strategy and influence==
Under head coach Bill Belichick, the Patriots employed specific on-field and off-field strategies. On the field, the Patriots typically used an &quot;Erhardt–Perkins&quot; offense and a &quot;Fairbanks–Bullough&quot; 3–4 defense, referred to commonly as a two-gap 3–4 defensive system. Under Erhardt&#x27;s, Perkin&#x27;s and Bullough&#x27;s stints as coordinators and head coaches across the league after developing the scheme in collaboration with head coach Chuck Fairbanks, the systems developed in New England in the 1970s would begin to see historic use. Influence spread, especially under their coaching tree in Bill Parcells&#x27; schemes as head coach of the New York Giants in the mid-to-late 1980s, after serving as a linebacker coach for the Patriots in 1980. Parcells would come back to New England as head coach in 1993 and re-install the system used in the 1970s and 1980s, re-uniting with Ray Perkins as WR coach. Parcells own coaching tree would use the scheme created in New England as well, especially Belichick, once he was named as head coach after years of being an assistant to Parcells with the New York Giants, the Patriots, and the New York Jets.

During Belichick&#x27;s tenure, the philosophy in making personnel decisions and in game planning focused on the &quot;team&quot; concept, stressing preparation, strong work ethic, versatility, and lack of individual ego. This approach, which led to six Super Bowl victories under Belichick, has been analyzed in media such as the 2004 book &quot;Patriot Reign&quot;, as well as the 2021 documentary miniseries Man in the Arena.

The New England Patriots are noted for the following characteristics under coach Belichick&#x27;s tenure, dubbed as the &quot;Patriot Way&quot;:

* Their self-critical, perfectionist, and militaristic approach
* Their emphasis on team, equality among players and lack of individual ego
* Their strong work ethic, intelligence and high level of focus and preparation for each individual game
* Their versatile players, able to play multiple positions
* Their multiple schemes intended to take advantage of their opponent&#x27;s weaknesses

==Championships==

===Super Bowl championships===

The New England Patriots have won six Super Bowls, the league championship of the NFL. The franchise is tied for the most all-time with the Pittsburgh Steelers. The team repeated as champions between the 2003 and 2004 NFL seasons, they are only among eight NFL franchises to accomplish the feat. Between 2001 and 2004, the Patriots became the second team in NFL history to win three Super Bowls in four years (2001, 2003, 2004).

===AFC championships===
The Patriots have won eleven AFC Championships, the record for the most conference championships all-time in the NFL.

===Division championships===
The Patriots have won 22 Division Championships, which is second place for the most all-time behind the Pittsburgh Steelers and Dallas Cowboys, who are tied in first with 24. One of these divisional titles was won in the AFL in the AFL East (1963), the rest were won in the AFC East of the NFL.

==Statistics, records, and awards==
===Season by season results===

This is a partial list of the Patriots&#x27; last five completed seasons.

&quot;Note: The Finish, Wins, Losses, and Ties columns list regular season results and exclude any postseason play.&quot;



===Record vs. opponents===
|-
| Jacksonville Jaguars || 8 || 2 || 0 || || L 32–16 || October 20, 2024 || London, England || 4–1 postseason
| Baltimore Ravens || 9 || 3 || 0 || || L 37–26 || September 25, 2022 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 2–2 postseason
| Chicago Bears || 11 || 4 || 0 || || W 19–3 || November 10, 2024 || Chicago, Illinois || 0–1 postseason
| Tampa Bay Buccaneers || 7 || 3 || 0 || || L 19–17 || October 3, 2021 || Foxborough, Massachusetts ||
| Houston Texans || 9 || 4 || 0 || || L 41–21 || October 13, 2024 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 2–0 postseason
| Cincinnati Bengals || 18 || 10 || 0 || || W 16–10 || September 8, 2024 || Cincinnati, Ohio ||
| Minnesota Vikings || 9 || 5 || 0 || || L 33–26 || November 24, 2022 || Minneapolis, Minnesota ||
| New Orleans Saints || 10 || 6 || 0 || || L 34–0 || October 8, 2023 || Foxborough, Massachusetts ||
| Detroit Lions || 8 || 5 || 0 || || W 29–0 || October 9, 2022 || Foxborough, Massachusetts ||
| Baltimore / Indianapolis Colts || 49 || 31 || 0 || || L 25–24 || December 1, 2024 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 4–1 postseason
| Buffalo Bills || 78 || 50 || 1 || || W 23–16 || January 5, 2025 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 1–1 postseason
| Atlanta Falcons || 9 || 6 || 0 || || W 25–0 || November 18, 2021 || Atlanta, Georgia || 1–0 postseason
| San Diego / Los Angeles Chargers || 24 || 16 || 2 || || L 40–7 || December 28, 2024 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 3–1 postseason
| New York Giants || 7 || 5 || 0 || || L 10–7 || November 26, 2023 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 0–2 postseason
| Houston Oilers / Tennessee Titans || 24 || 17 || 1 || || L 20–17 || November 3, 2024 || Nashville, Tennessee || 2–2 postseason
| New York Jets || 73 || 55 || 1 || || W 25–22 || October 27, 2024 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 2–1 postseason
| Cleveland Browns || 14 || 12 || 0 || || W 38–15 || October 16, 2022 || Cleveland, Ohio || 0–1 postseason
| St. Louis / Phoenix / Arizona Cardinals || 9 || 8 || 0 || || L 30–17 || December 15, 2024 || Glendale, Arizona ||
| Oakland / Los Angeles / Las Vegas Raiders || 18 || 16 || 1 || || L 21–17 || October 15, 2023 || Las Vegas, Nevada || 2–1 postseason
| Green Bay Packers || 6|| 6 || 0 || || L 27–24 || October 2, 2022 || Green Bay, Wisconsin || 0–1 postseason
| St. Louis / Los Angeles Rams || 7 || 7 || 0 || || L 28–22 || November 17, 2024 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 2–0 postseason
| Pittsburgh Steelers || 15 || 15 || 0 || || W 21–18 || December 7, 2023 || Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania || 4–1 postseason
| Denver Broncos || 23 || 27 || 0 || || W 26–23 || December 24, 2023 || Denver, Colorado || 1–4 postseason
| Miami Dolphins || 53 || 63 || 0 || || L 34–15 || November 24, 2024 || Miami Gardens, Florida || 2–1 postseason
| Carolina Panthers || 3 || 4 || 0 || || W 24–6 || November 7, 2021 || Charlotte, North Carolina || 1–0 postseason
| Philadelphia Eagles || 6 || 8 || 0 || || L 25–20 || September 10, 2023 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 1–1 postseason
| Seattle Seahawks || 8 || 11 || 0 || || L 23–20 || September 15, 2024 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 1–0 postseason
| Washington Commanders || 5 || 7 || 0 || || L 20–17 || November 5, 2023 || Foxborough, Massachusetts ||
| Kansas City Chiefs || 14 || 21 || 3 || || L 27–17 || December 17, 2023 || Foxborough, Massachusetts || 2–0 postseason
| Dallas Cowboys || 6 || 9 || 0 || || L 38–3 || October 1, 2023 || Arlington, Texas ||
| San Francisco 49ers || 5 || 10 || 0 || || L 30–13 || September 29, 2024 || Santa Clara, California ||
! Total !! 545 !! 446 !! 9 !! !! colspan=&quot;4&quot;|
! Total including playoffs !! 582 !! 468 !! 9 !! !! colspan=&quot;4&quot;|

===Playoff record===

===All-time leaders===


===Statistics===
====Career leaders====
*Games played: 285 Tom Brady (2000–2019)
*Passing yards: 74,571 Tom Brady (2000–2019) (NFL-record for most passing yards with a single team)
*Pass completions: 6,377 Tom Brady (2000–2019) (NFL-record for most pass completions with a single team)
*Passing touchdowns: 541 Tom Brady (2000–2019) (NFL-record for most passing touchdowns with a single team)
*Rushing yards: 5,453 Sam Cunningham (1973–1982)
*Rushing touchdowns: 45 Jim Nance (1965–1971)
*Receptions: 672 Wes Welker (2007–2012)
*Receiving yards: 10,352 Stanley Morgan (1977–1989)
*Receiving touchdowns: 79 Rob Gronkowski (2010–2018)
*All-purpose yards: 12,340 Kevin Faulk (1999–2011)
*Points scored: 1,775 Stephen Gostkowski (2006–2019)
*Field goals made: 374 Stephen Gostkowski (2006–2018)
*Total punt yardage: 19,922 Rich Camarillo (1981–1987)
*Punting average (min. 250 punts): 45.3 Ryan Allen (2013–2018)
*Kickoff return yards: 4,098 Kevin Faulk (1999–2011)
*Punt Return yards: 2,625 Troy Brown (1993–2007)
*Pass interceptions: 36 Raymond Clayborn (1977–1989)/Ty Law (1995–2004)
*Sacks: 100.0 Andre Tippett (1982–1993)
*Forced fumbles: 17 Tedy Bruschi (1996–2008)

====Single-season leaders====
*Passing yards: 5,235 Tom Brady (2011)
*Passing touchdowns: 50 Tom Brady (2007)
*Rushing yards: 1,635 Corey Dillon (2004)
*Rushing touchdowns: 18 LeGarrette Blount (2016)
*Receptions: 123 Wes Welker (2009)
*Receiving yards: 1,569 Wes Welker (2011)
*Receiving touchdowns: 23 Randy Moss (2007) (NFL-record for most receiving touchdowns in a single-season)
*Points: 158 Stephen Gostkowski (2013)
*Field goals made: 38 Stephen Gostkowski (2013)
*Total punt yardage: 4,227 Shawn McCarthy (1992)
*Punting average: 48.7 Jake Bailey (2020)
*Kickoff return yards: 1,281 Ellis Hobbs (2008)
*Punt return yards: 608 Mike Haynes (1976)
*Pass interceptions: 11 Ron Hall (1964)
*Sacks: 18.5 Andre Tippett (1984)

===Individual awards===
The following Patriots have received these league honorific awards. They are specifically from the Associated Press, except for two cases: The NFL in the case of the Super Bowl MVP and the Pro Football Writers of America in the case of the Executive of the Year award. Seasons in which the AFL counterparts of the awards were won (1960–1969) are labeled.

Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.












==Players of note==
===Current roster===



===Pro Football Hall of Famers===
The Pro Football Hall of Fame has inducted six players who made their primary contribution to professional football while with the Patriots. The Patriots&#x27; total number of Pro Football Hall of Famers is 12 (11 players and 1 coach).

Notes:
* Hall of Famers who made a major part of their primary contribution for the Patriots are listed in bold.
* Hall of Famers who spent only a minor portion of their career with the Patriots are listed in normal font.

===Retired numbers===


The Patriots have officially retired eight uniform numbers, having only retired three numbers since Robert Kraft purchased the team in 1994. Three of the retirees careers spanned the original AFL-era Boston Patriots. The only unofficial retired number is Andre Tippett&#x27;s 56, which has not been reissued since he announced his retirement after the 1993 season.

===Patriots Hall of Fame===
The Patriots Hall of Fame features 31 former players and four contributors as a part of the franchise&#x27;s own hall of fame, founded to independently commemorate significant members of the organization within the club&#x27;s history. It is referred to by the team as &quot;the franchise&#x27;s highest individual honor&quot;. It was established in 1991, with John Hannah being the inaugural member.

The physical Patriots Hall of Fame building opened in 2008 outside of the stadium at Patriot Place, presented by RTX. Featuring a vast collection of game-worn gear, game-used equipment, memorabilia, trophies, in addition to multiple exhibits using audio and video technology, it is periodically renovated and updated yearly. It is described as a &quot;modern, interactive museum&quot;.

A committee of media and staff selected 11 players for enshrinement between 1991 and 2001, before a six-year span of no selections. In 2007, in advance of the grand opening of the physical Patriots Hall of Fame in 2008, the club introduced a new nomination committee to select three candidates, with the winner of an internet fan vote being enshrined in the hall of fame. In order to be eligible, players and head coaches must be retired for at least four years. Beginning in 2011, and meeting every four-to-five years, a senior selection committee has the option of voting a player who has been retired for at least 25 seasons into the hall of fame, alongside the traditional inductee.

Starting in 2009, long-time &quot;contributors&quot;, which can range from roles such as assistant coaches and broadcasters, have been periodically inducted into the Patriots Hall of Fame directly by owner Robert Kraft. Former team owner and founder Billy Sullivan was posthumously inducted in March 2009, before the Patriots&#x27; 50th season, as the first contributor inducted.

Notes:
* * = Inducted as a contributor
* ~ = Inducted as a senior selection
* † = Posthumous induction 
===NFL All-Decade and Anniversary team selections===
The following Patriots were named to the AFL All-Time Team (1960–1969), as well any NFL all-decade team after the AFL–NFL merger in 1970 (and NFL 75th and 100th Anniversary All-Time Teams, selected in 1994 and 2019, respectively). Only those who spent time with New England during the respective decades are listed for all-decade team selections.

Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.









===Patriots Anniversary and All-Decade Teams===
===Pro Bowl selections===
The following Patriots players have been named to the Pro Bowl (or the AFL All-Star game prior to 1970):

Two Patriots has been named Pro Bowl MVP, Vito &quot;Babe&quot; Parilli in 1966 (AFL), and Ty Law as co-MVP in 1998.

In addition to the players, three Patriots coaches have participated in the Pro Bowl as conference coaches. Mike Holovak in 1963 and 1966 (AFL), Chuck Fairbanks in 1978, and Bill Belichick in 2006 and 2010.

*QB Tom Brady (14), Drew Bledsoe, Vito &quot;Babe&quot; Parilli (3) (AFL), Mac Jones, Mike Taliaferro 
*FB Larry Garron (4) (AFL), Jim Nance (2) (AFL), Sam Cunningham, James Develin
*HB Curtis Martin (2), Tony Collins, Corey Dillon, John Stephens, Craig James, Carl Garrett (AFL)
*LT Bruce Armstrong (6), Matt Light, Brian Holloway (3), Leon Gray (2), Don Oakes (AFL)
*LG John Hannah (9), Logan Mankins (6), Charley Long (2) (AFL), Charley Leo (AFL)
*C Jon Morris (7) (AFL), Damien Woody, Dan Koppen
*RG Billy Neighbors (AFL), Len St. Jean (AFL), Brian Waters
*RT Tom Neville (AFL), Dick Klein (AFL)
*TE Rob Gronkowski, Ben Coates (5), Russ Francis (3), Marv Cook (2)
*WR Wes Welker, Gino Cappelletti (5) (AFL), Stanley Morgan (4), Randy Moss, Troy Brown, Terry Glenn, Irving Fryar, Ron Sellers (AFL), Jim Colclough (AFL)
*DE Richard Seymour (5), Bob Dee (4) (AFL), Larry Eisenhauer (4) (AFL), Julius Adams, Andre Carter, Chandler Jones
*DT Houston Antwine (6) (AFL), Vince Wilfork (5), Jim Lee Hunt (4) (AFL)
*LB Andre Tippett, Nick Buoniconti (5) (AFL), Tom Addison (4) (AFL), Steve Nelson (3), Johnny Rembert, Willie McGinest, Jerod Mayo, Dont&#x27;a Hightower, Matthew Judon (2), Chris Slade, Tedy Bruschi, Mike Vrabel, Jamie Collins
*CB Mike Haynes (6), Ty Law (4), Stephon Gilmore (3), Dick Felt (AFL), Chuck Shonta (AFL), Leroy Mitchell (AFL), Asante Samuel, Devin McCourty, Aqib Talib, Darrelle Revis, Malcolm Butler, J. C. Jackson
*SS Lawyer Milloy (4), Fred Bruney (2) (AFL), Ron Hall (AFL), 
*FS Brandon Meriweather (2), Don Webb (AFL), Fred Marion, Devin McCourty
*PK Stephen Gostkowski (4), Adam Vinatieri (2), John Smith, Tony Franklin
*P Rich Camarillo, Jake Bailey
*ST Matthew Slater (10), Raymond Clayborn (3), Larry Izzo (2), Mosi Tatupu, Dave Meggett, Brenden Schooler

===First-team All-Pro selections===
The following Patriots players have been named AP first-team All-Pro (or All-AFL prior to 1970):
 
*QB Tom Brady (3), Vito &quot;Babe&quot; Parilli (AFL)
*FB Jim Nance (AFL) (2)
*LT Leon Gray (3), Matt Light
*LG John Hannah (7), Logan Mankins 
*C Jon Morris (AFL)
*RG Billy Neighbors (AFL)
*TE Rob Gronkowski (4), Ben Coates (2), Marv Cook, Jim Whalen (AFL) 
*WR Wes Welker (2), Randy Moss
*DE Richard Seymour, Larry Eisenhauer (AFL) (3)
*DT Houston Antwine (AFL), Vince Wilfork
*LB Nick Buoniconti (4) (AFL), Andre Tippett (2), Tom Addison (AFL), Mike Vrabel, Jerod Mayo
*CB Ty Law, Stephon Gilmore (2), Asante Samuel, Darrelle Revis
*SS Ron Hall (AFL), Lawyer Milloy, Rodney Harrison
*PK Adam Vinatieri, Stephen Gostkowski (2)
*P Jake Bailey
*ST Matthew Slater (2), Gunner Olszewski, Marcus Jones, Brenden Schooler

===All-time first-round draft picks===
==Administration and personnel==
===Ownership===
The Patriots have had four owners since becoming a franchise, the first being Massachusetts native Billy Sullivan from 1959 to 1988. During Sullivan&#x27;s 28 seasons of owning the club, the Patriots tallied 14 winning records, made six playoff appearances, played in the 1963 AFL Championship Game and represented the AFC in Super Bowl XX. However, he was also notoriously cheap, and would cause friction with some his high-profile players who were seeking to be respected and paid what they were worth, causing someone such as future Pro Football Hall of Famer Mike Haynes to seek an owner who was team first.

Following his bankruptcy, Sullivan sold the team to Remington Products owner Victor Kiam in 1988. The sale did not include Foxboro Stadium, which Sullivan lost in a bankruptcy sale to paper magnate Robert Kraft, and Kiam lost money on the deal. In 1990, Lisa Olson, a &quot;Boston Herald&quot; reporter, sued Kiam and the Patriots when Zeke Mowatt allegedly exposed himself and made lewd comments to her in the team change room. The incident stirred debate over female reporters in the locker room. Kiam became the center of the controversy when he came to the defense of the players&#x27; actions.

In his later career, Kiam&#x27;s business interests moved on from the Patriots, so he sold them in 1992 to St. Louis businessman James Orthwein. During his ownership, Orthwein hired Bill Parcells as head coach and oversaw the drafting of first-overall draft pick quarterback Drew Bledsoe, who helped to return the moribund franchise to respectability. He planned to relocate the Patriots franchise to St. Louis, renaming the team the St. Louis Stallions. However, those plans were derailed when Boston paper magnate Robert Kraft, owner of Foxboro Stadium, refused to accept a buyout of the lease. Kraft used his ownership of the stadium to stage a hostile takeover, offering to pay $175 million for the Patriots franchise knowing that Orthwein no longer wanted the team if he could not move it to St. Louis. Although future St. Louis/Los Angeles Rams owner Stan Kroenke offered to buy the team for $200 million and move it to St. Louis, Orthwein would have been saddled with all moving expenses. He also would have been responsible for any legal expenses as well, and Kraft had already made it clear that he would go to court to enforce the lease. With no other choice, Orthwein accepted Kraft&#x27;s bid on January 21, 1994.

Kraft had been a life-long fan (he was a season ticket holder since 1971) before he purchased the team and intended to support them much more than all of the previous owners did, making multiple moves that have turned New England into an admirable franchise since. The Patriots under Kraft have been the NFL&#x27;s most successful franchise since 1994. Since then, the Patriots have appeared in ten Super Bowls, have won six, and had numerous league records established by the franchise.

===Head coaches===

The Patriots have had 16 head coaches throughout their history as a franchise. On January 12, 2025, the Patriots hired Mike Vrabel as their 16th head coach in franchise history, he is the second coach in the club&#x27;s history to have played for the team (2001–2008).

Bill Belichick had the longest tenure as head coach (23 seasons) with the Patriots, and coached the team from 2000 to 2023. He has been widely considered one of the greatest coaches of all time, and was named a member of the NFL 100th All-Time Anniversary Team, due to his numerous accomplishments with the Patriots. He specifically led the Patriots to 17 AFC East division titles, 13 appearances in the AFC Championship Game, and nine Super Bowl appearances, with a record six wins.

Belichick was the NFL&#x27;s longest-tenured head coach at the time of his departure, as well as the first all-time in playoff coaching wins with 31 and third in regular season coaching wins in the NFL with 297. He is one of only three head coaches who have won six NFL titles. He was named the NFL Coach of the Year for the 2003, 2007, and 2010 seasons. Belichick led the team for more regular season games (336), post-season games (42) and more complete seasons (23) than any other head coach. His 266 wins with the Patriots are far and away the most in franchise history, more than quadruple times those of runner-up Mike Holovak.

Belichick was acquired in a &quot;trade&quot; with the rival New York Jets. Belichick did not want to be under Bill Parcells&#x27; authority there in 2000, with uncertainty of his role once their owner, Leon Hess, died. The initial promise was that Belichick would&#x27;ve been granted extreme authority over all of the Jets executive decisions, but when Hess died Parcells overruled the stipulation with loopholes, so he would remain in control as general manager, leading to Belichick&#x27;s infamous resignation in 2000. Parcells, a two winning Super Bowl champion coach with the New York Giants (also was an assistant with the Patriots in the early 1980s), had joined New England&#x27;s staff for the 1993 season to help resurrect the franchise from its dark early 1990s days but had conflicted interests with owner Robert Kraft. In his last year with the Patriots in 1996, Parcells brought in his assistant head coach from his Giants days, Belichick, after being dismissed from coaching five seasons with the Cleveland Browns. Here, Kraft would plant the seeds of a bond between him and Belichick, as Belichick would often mediate issues between Kraft and Parcells. Although Belichick left in 1997 to once again be Parcells assistant in their Jets regime, cold feet about his long-term role there brought him back after negotiating with Kraft, even though he was still under contract with the Jets. The Patriots had technically &quot;tampered&quot; in communicating with Belichick. For compensation, the Patriots gave the Jets their first round pick in the 2000 NFL draft, where even without their first round pick, the Patriots would coincidentally draft Tom Brady in the sixth round, widely regarded as the greatest quarterback of all time and the NFL&#x27;s greatest draft steal.

While Belichick led the team to nine of their eleven Super Bowl appearances, winning six of them, before him the Patriots saw some championship game appearances. Holovak, Raymond Berry and Parcells all led the Patriots to league championship games, with only one coach failing to reach the Super Bowl. Five Patriots head coaches, Holovak, Chuck Fairbanks, Berry, Parcells, and Belichick, have been named Coach of the Year by at least one major news organization. The first head coach in franchise history was Lou Saban, who coached them to a 7–12–0 record in the 1960 season.

Note:
* * = Interim coach

===Current staff===
===Offensive coordinator history===
Source:
===Defensive coordinator history===
Source:
==Culture==
===Cheerleaders===
The Patriots&#x27; professional cheerleading squad is the New England Patriots Cheerleaders which represents the team in the NFL. Notable alumni of the cheerleading squad include wrestler Carmella and model Camille Kostek. Long-time cheerleading director Tracy Sormanti, who was the cheer director since 1994 and had been involved with the organization since 1983, died after a three-year battle with multiple myeloma in 2020. She was inducted into the Patriots Hall of Fame in 2021 as a contributor.

===Mascots===
The Patriots&#x27; official mascot since 1995 has been Pat Patriot, a revolutionary minuteman wearing a Patriots home jersey based on the original logo of the same name.

The Patriots also employ a corps known as the End Zone Militia, a group of American Revolutionary War reenactors founded in 1996 by Geoff Campbell, a reenactor for the 9th Massachusetts Regiment (26th Continental Regiment). Consisting of about 30 men and women, they dress 20 for each home game and split themselves into two groups of 10 lining the back of either end zone. When the Patriots score – whether it be a touchdown, field goal, point-after-touchdown or safety – the militia behind the opposite end zone fire a volley of blanks from flintlock muskets. Per an interview with the &quot;Loren &amp; Wally Show&quot; on WROR 105.7 FM in and around the time of Super Bowl XLIX, said shots use double the load of black powder than a regular historical reenactor does, specifically 200 grains, in order to be heard throughout the stadium. ESPN writer Josh Pahigian named this one of the top ten celebrations in the league in 2007.

===Fans===
The team draws much of its fanbase from the New England region of the United States, as well as from the Canadian province of Quebec and much of Atlantic Canada.

==Radio and television==


The Patriots&#x27; flagship radio station is WBZ-FM (98.5 FM, otherwise known as &quot;The Sports Hub&quot;), owned by Beasley Broadcast Group. The larger radio network is called the New England Patriots Radio Network, whose 37 affiliate stations span seven states. Gil Santos and Gino Cappelletti were the longtime announcing team until their retirement following the conclusion of the 2012 NFL season. Santos was replaced by Bob Socci. Former Patriots QB Scott Zolak joined the radio team in the 2011 season as a sideline analyst, and in 2013, he replaced Cappelletti as color commentator.

Any preseason games not on national television are shown on CBS&#x27;s O&amp;O WBZ-TV, who also airs the bulk of Patriots regular-season games by virtue of CBS having the rights to most AFC games; CBS also has a presence at the nearby Patriot Place with the &quot;CBS Scene&quot; bar and restaurant. During the regular season whenever the Patriots host an NFC team, the games are aired on Fox affiliate WFXT-TV, and &quot;NBC Sunday Night Football&quot; games are carried by Boston NBC station WBTS-CD. Preseason games were broadcast on ABC affiliate WCVB-TV from 1995 until the change to WBZ in 2009 (WCVB continues to simulcast ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; games featuring the Patriots). Don Criqui was play-by-play announcer for the 1995–2012 seasons, with Randy Cross as a color commentator and Mike Lynch as a sideline reporter. Lynch was replaced by WBZ reporter Steve Burton in 2009.

==Controversies==
===Snowplow Game===

During a December 12, 1982, home game against the Miami Dolphins under icy conditions, the game remained scoreless until the fourth quarter when Patriots head coach Ron Meyer motioned to snowplow operator Mark Henderson to specifically clear a spot on the field for New England kicker John Smith so he could kick what proved to be the game-winning 33-yard field goal to give the Patriots a 3–0 win. At the time, an emergency ground rule was put into play where the officials could call time-out and allow the ground crew to use a snowplow to clear the yard markers, but not plow often enough to keep the field clear. Dolphins head coach Don Shula, believing it to be against the league rules, pointed out that the league&#x27;s unfair act clause allowed the league to overturn it, and met with NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle several days later to formally protest the game result. Although Rozelle agreed with Shula that the use of the plow gave the Patriots an unfair advantage, he said that he had never reversed the result of a game and was not going to start doing so for any reason, including cheating. Henderson, a convict on work release, jokingly remarked, &quot;What are they gonna do, throw me in jail?&quot;

The following year, the NFL banned the use of snowplows on the field during a game. The Patriots organization has commemorated the game with an exhibit at the Hall at Patriot Place within Gillette Stadium, where the plow itself hangs from the ceiling.

===Spygate===

During the 2007 season, the New England Patriots were disciplined by the league for videotaping New York Jets&#x27; defensive coaches&#x27; signals from an unauthorized location during a September 9, 2007, game. Videotaping opposing coaches is not illegal in the NFL &quot;de jure&quot;, but there are designated areas allowed by the league to do such taping. After an investigation, the NFL fined Patriots head coach Bill Belichick $500,000 for his role in the incident, fined the Patriots $250,000, and docked the team their original first-round selection in the 2008 NFL draft, which would have been the 31st pick of the draft.

===Deflategate===

During the 2015 AFC Championship Game against the Indianapolis Colts, allegations arose that the Patriots were using under-inflated footballs. It was even suggested that the Patriots&#x27; staff themselves deliberately deflated the footballs to give their team an unfair advantage during the playoffs. A lengthy investigation and heated debate commenced shortly afterwards, with a full report being published in May 2015. The Wells Report found that balls provided by the Patriots, who were the home team, indeed had less pressure on average than the balls provided by the Colts. Also notable was the findings of some suggestions of communication between Tom Brady and two Patriots locker room attendants, indicating Brady was likely &quot;generally aware&quot; of the situation and that the Patriots staff intentionally deflated the footballs. A later study by the American Enterprise Institute called the evidence and methodology of the Wells report &quot;deeply flawed&quot; and &quot;unreliable&quot;.

In the aftermath of the incident, the NFL suspended Brady without pay for the first four games of the 2015 season, fined the Patriots $1million, and forced them to forfeit their 2016 first round draft pick and 2017 fourth round draft pick. Brady appealed his suspension, which was eventually vacated by the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, only for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit to reinstate it a year later for the 2016 NFL season. Brady eventually agreed to serve the suspension in 2016, but led the Patriots to win Super Bowl LI in spite of it.

====Accusations of falsified data====

However, in February 2022, sportswriter Mike Florio revealed that the NFL falsified data about the Deflategate scandal and hid information that would have cleared the Patriots of wrongdoing. In his book &quot;Playmakers: How the NFL Really Works (And Doesn&#x27;t)&quot;, Florio revealed that NFL executives, specifically vice president Troy Vincent, jumped to conclusions about the air pressure inside the Patriots&#x27; footballs at halftime of the AFC Championship game. He also noted that 11 of the 12 Patriot footballs used in the game were not outside the predicted range of Ideal Gas Law, and the other was only slightly below. 

Florio also revealed that NFL general counsel Jeff Pash ordered that the records of all PSI data gathered from the 2015 season be deleted. Leaked transcripts revealed that the NFL Senior Vice President of Football Operations, Dave Gardi, used false numbers in his letter to the Patriots which stated that the team was to be investigated. It was also revealed that Vincent did not instruct anyone to record the timing of the measurements taken, the temperature in the room during testing, if the footballs tested were wet or dry, and that he did not know which of the two air pressure gauges was used to make the pregame measurements. Vincent also admitted that he and other NFL executives never heard of the Ideal Gas Law and were unaware that PSI in a football can change in certain environments.

==See also==
* Forbes list of the most valuable sports teams
* List of Super Bowl records
* List of National Football League records (team)
* Active NFL playoff appearance streaks
* Sports in Massachusetts
* Sports in Boston

==Notes and references==
Explanatory notes

Citations
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Patriots Hall of Fame 
* NFL.com profile page 
*Franchise Encyclopedia at Pro Football Reference</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="4" end="24" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="44" end="61" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="80" end="94" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="129" end="153" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q276530" start="179" end="207" title="American Football Conference" label="American Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="214" end="218" title="AFC East" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q373355" start="261" end="277" title="Gillette Stadium" label="Gillette Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q830669" start="281" end="306" title="Foxborough, Massachusetts" label="Foxborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="330" end="336" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="364" end="376" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="558" end="573" title="New England Patriots" label="Boston Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="612" end="636" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="686" end="700" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL–NFL merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="788" end="799" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311469" start="838" end="843" title="relocation of professional sports teams" label="moved"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="969" end="984" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="Foxboro Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="1183" end="1193" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="1217" end="1236" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="1286" end="1300" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="1414" end="1428" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="1445" end="1454" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747534" start="1478" end="1497" title="Brady–Belichick era" label="Brady–Belichick era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319161" start="1538" end="1547" title="dynasty (sports)" label="dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931342" start="1597" end="1614" title="List of Super Bowl records" label="Super Bowl record"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025713" start="1735" end="1749" title="winning streak (sports)" label="winning streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2170" end="2176" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q803780" start="2196" end="2210" title="Billy Sullivan (businessman)" label="Billy Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="2272" end="2296" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="2524" end="2532" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="2573" end="2590" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2612" end="2619" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2639" end="2658" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2676" end="2684" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2689" end="2713" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="2847" end="2863" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920525" start="2890" end="2901" title="Pat Patriot" label="Pat Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339834" start="2973" end="2996" title="Nickerson Field" label="Boston University Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587879" start="2998" end="3013" title="Harvard Stadium" label="Harvard Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="3015" end="3026" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="3056" end="3070" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="3077" end="3091" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q598070" start="3099" end="3113" title="Alumni Stadium" label="Alumni Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994166" start="3195" end="3206" title="1963 AFL season" label="1963 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743819" start="3314" end="3335" title="American Football League playoffs" label="AFL championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="3343" end="3361" title="History of the San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015405" start="3362" end="3367" title="1963 American Football League Championship Game" label="51–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548628" start="3412" end="3423" title="NFL playoffs" label="post-season"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="3473" end="3487" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="merged in 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q276530" start="3521" end="3549" title="American Football Conference" label="American Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="3556" end="3560" title="AFC East" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="3638" end="3649" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="new stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q830669" start="3653" end="3678" title="Foxborough, Massachusetts" label="Foxborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3875" end="3888" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4017" end="4028" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089121" start="4096" end="4111" title="Chuck Fairbanks" label="Chuck Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="4160" end="4169" title="wild card (sports)" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363741" start="4276" end="4287" title="Ron Erhardt" label="Ron Erhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364161" start="4373" end="4382" title="Ron Meyer" label="Ron Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q459051" start="4604" end="4617" title="Raymond Berry" label="Raymond Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582428" start="4655" end="4659" title="1985 New England Patriots season" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="4726" end="4739" title="Super Bowl XX" label="Super Bowl XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="4764" end="4777" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356349" start="4964" end="4972" title="Rod Rust" label="Rod Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926063" start="5166" end="5177" title="Victor Kiam" label="Victor Kiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140663" start="5208" end="5222" title="James Orthwein" label="James Orthwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="5374" end="5389" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="5396" end="5409" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5740" end="5749" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589698" start="5791" end="5810" title="St. Louis Stallions" label="St. Louis Stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="5887" end="5899" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="5946" end="5961" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="Foxboro Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q598389" start="6121" end="6136" title="Super Bowl XXXI" label="Super Bowl XXXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591566" start="6152" end="6163" title="1996 New England Patriots season" label="1996 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591419" start="6189" end="6206" title="1996 Green Bay Packers season" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758777" start="6228" end="6240" title="Pete Carroll" label="Pete Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="6434" end="6448" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q373355" start="6561" end="6577" title="Gillette Stadium" label="Gillette Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960114" start="6589" end="6593" title="2002 NFL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="6651" end="6662" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="6663" end="6675" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598957" start="6810" end="6814" title="2001 New England Patriots season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="6833" end="6846" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="6867" end="6876" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714943" start="6924" end="6938" title="2000 NFL draft" label="2000 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747534" start="7286" end="7293" title="Brady–Belichick era" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073479" start="7399" end="7403" title="Super Bowl XXXVI" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="7405" end="7409" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="7415" end="7419" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="7431" end="7445" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="7447" end="7464" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="7470" end="7489" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q254029" start="7892" end="7911" title="2007 NFL season" label="2007 regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661524" start="8075" end="8089" title="regular season (NFL)" label="regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="8131" end="8146" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609006" start="8229" end="8235" title="2007 New York Giants season" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581852" start="8383" end="8407" title="1984 San Francisco 49ers season" label="1984 San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582244" start="8416" end="8434" title="1985 Chicago Bears season" label="1985 Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="9160" end="9167" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621998" start="9190" end="9196" title="2011 New York Giants season" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711360" start="9884" end="9900" title="2014 Seattle Seahawks season" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710023" start="9928" end="9943" title="Super Bowl XLIX" label="Super Bowl XLIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811505" start="10093" end="10107" title="Malcolm Butler" label="Malcolm Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594352" start="10124" end="10136" title="interception" label="interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129090" start="10473" end="10489" title="2016–17 NFL playoffs" label="2016–17 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="10504" end="10519" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642194" start="10523" end="10536" title="Super Bowl LI" label="Super Bowl LI"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="10692" end="10700" title="overtime (American football)" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835189" start="10891" end="10907" title="2017–18 NFL playoffs" label="2017–18 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28373761" start="10924" end="10943" title="2017 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633579" start="10947" end="10961" title="Super Bowl LII" label="Super Bowl LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204362" start="11044" end="11059" title="Super Bowl LIII" label="Super Bowl LIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="11085" end="11101" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="11158" end="11177" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="11187" end="11197" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="11563" end="11583" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q591678" start="11641" end="11651" title="Cam Newton" label="Cam Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009136" start="11761" end="11770" title="Mac Jones" label="Mac Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073066" start="11797" end="11811" title="2021 NFL draft" label="2021 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q920547" start="12564" end="12574" title="Jerod Mayo" label="Jerod Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222131" start="12630" end="12640" title="Eliot Wolf" label="Eliot Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364555" start="12716" end="12724" title="Ron Wolf" label="Ron Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q108443875" start="13014" end="13028" title="2024 NFL draft" label="2024 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q113363657" start="13059" end="13069" title="Drake Maye" label="Drake Maye"/>
<link wikidata="Q763457" start="13639" end="13647" title="tricorne" label="tricorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="13733" end="13760" title="minuteman" label="Revolutionary War minuteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q837816" start="13793" end="13801" title="wordmark" label="wordmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920525" start="13904" end="13915" title="Pat Patriot" label="Pat Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972740" start="14018" end="14032" title="National Football League Properties" label="NFL Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q272220" start="14411" end="14429" title="Los Angeles Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140661" start="14439" end="14456" title="sound level meter" label="sound level meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="14900" end="14913" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702424" start="15666" end="15677" title="2015 New England Patriots season" label="2015 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453958" start="18687" end="18697" title="NFL Color Rush" label="Color Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621981" start="18732" end="18743" title="2011 New England Patriots season" label="2011 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948117" start="18861" end="18871" title="Myra Kraft" label="Myra Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="19437" end="19446" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="19698" end="19719" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q110445387" start="19732" end="19745" title="2022 Chicago Bears season" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="19940" end="19955" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q124167249" start="19968" end="19988" title="2024 Jacksonville Jaguars season" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="21631" end="21645" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="21963" end="21983" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q373355" start="22086" end="22102" title="Gillette Stadium" label="Gillette Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="22149" end="22161" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q830669" start="22174" end="22199" title="Foxborough, Massachusetts" label="Foxborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744946" start="22325" end="22340" title="The Kraft Group" label="The Kraft Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="22369" end="22388" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q309095" start="22399" end="22421" title="New England Revolution" label="New England Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298661" start="22490" end="22499" title="FieldTurf" label="FieldTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="22733" end="22749" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q60526042" start="22861" end="22876" title="2019 NFL season" label="2019 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148024" start="23092" end="23105" title="Patriot Place" label="Patriot Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148024" start="23179" end="23188" title="CBS Scene" label="CBS Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="23229" end="23244" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="Foxboro Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851010" start="23412" end="23444" title="Tuck Rule Game" label="2001 AFC Divisional Playoff game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="23494" end="23509" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="23613" end="23637" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="23736" end="23742" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308853" start="23822" end="23835" title="Training camp (National Football League)" label="training camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012699" start="24082" end="24096" title="Bryant College" label="Bryant College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027898" start="24100" end="24124" title="Smithfield, Rhode Island" label="Smithfield, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="24204" end="24239" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="24299" end="24315" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q370619" start="24319" end="24341" title="Andover, Massachusetts" label="Andover, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="24594" end="24610" title="Boeing 767-300ER" label="Boeing 767-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127991" start="24701" end="24716" title="2017 NFL season" label="2017 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="25099" end="25116" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="25214" end="25226" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q50317608" start="25290" end="25309" title="March for Our Lives" label="March for Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="25327" end="25343" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q17109272" start="25404" end="25420" title="Eastern Airlines, LLC" label="Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q593931" start="25617" end="25639" title="Omni Air International" label="Omni Air International"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="25751" end="25759" title="AFC East" label="AFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="25774" end="25787" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="25789" end="25803" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="25809" end="25822" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="26033" end="26051" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="26109" end="26125" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="26131" end="26145" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="26151" end="26170" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="26179" end="26196" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="26269" end="26284" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="26391" end="26404" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="26687" end="26700" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758777" start="26812" end="26824" title="Pete Carroll" label="Pete Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="26894" end="26908" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731504" start="27030" end="27042" title="Eric Mangini" label="Eric Mangini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954681" start="27240" end="27245" title="Butt Fumble" label="49–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q163908" start="27314" end="27326" title="George Halas" label="George Halas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="27576" end="27581" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="27883" end="27896" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612722" start="27898" end="27910" title="Steve Grogan" label="Steve Grogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209803" start="27912" end="27924" title="Joe Ferguson" label="Joe Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127819" start="27926" end="27935" title="Jim Kelly" label="Jim Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="27941" end="27953" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="28274" end="28283" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="28364" end="28385" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281135" start="28586" end="28606" title="2021–22 NFL playoffs" label="2021–22 NFL playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="29079" end="29093" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13592724" start="29587" end="29605" title="1972 Miami Dolphins season" label="going 14–0 in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q460097" start="29623" end="29641" title="2007 New England Patriots season" label="going 16–0 in 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296089" start="29689" end="29702" title="Snowplow Game" label="Snowplow Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001031" start="29757" end="29772" title="Wildcat formation" label="Wildcat offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028520" start="29803" end="29819" title="Miracle in Miami" label="Miracle in Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="29960" end="29978" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="30034" end="30042" title="AFC East" label="AFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="30273" end="30294" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180213" start="30354" end="30368" title="Joe Washington" label="Joe Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539" start="30852" end="30866" title="Peyton Manning" label="Peyton Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="30887" end="30896" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="31044" end="31054" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594797" start="31149" end="31153" title="1999 Indianapolis Colts season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="31227" end="31239" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092780" start="31524" end="31532" title="RCA Dome" label="RCA Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="31817" end="31838" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149495" start="32221" end="32230" title="4th and 2" label="4th and 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q506098" start="32426" end="32437" title="Andrew Luck" label="Andrew Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="32764" end="32770" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q460097" start="32920" end="32940" title="2007 New England Patriots season" label="quest for perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097677" start="33124" end="33137" title="Terrell Suggs" label="Terrell Suggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q515829" start="33557" end="33566" title="Todd Heap" label="Todd Heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923767" start="33586" end="33605" title="Brandon Meriweather" label="Brandon Meriweather"/>
<link wikidata="Q795406" start="34120" end="34130" title="Joe Flacco" label="Joe Flacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="34576" end="34591" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="34615" end="34630" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248796" start="34756" end="34768" title="Torrey Smith" label="Torrey Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791153" start="35406" end="35419" title="Justin Tucker" label="Justin Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="35602" end="35616" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q24809702" start="36312" end="36325" title="Lamar Jackson" label="Lamar Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="36374" end="36395" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="Sunday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="36670" end="36694" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q432931" start="37087" end="37097" title="John Elway" label="John Elway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593493" start="37280" end="37291" title="1998 Denver Broncos season" label="1998 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061040" start="37323" end="37335" title="Champ Bailey" label="Champ Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q444253" start="37411" end="37426" title="Benjamin Watson" label="Benjamin Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810320" start="37536" end="37550" title="Josh McDaniels" label="Josh McDaniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568795" start="37572" end="37582" title="List of Denver Broncos head coaches" label="head coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="37606" end="37609" title="American Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637233" start="37731" end="37741" title="Kyle Orton" label="Kyle Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q898156" start="37745" end="37761" title="Brandon Marshall" label="Brandon Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q542303" start="37860" end="37871" title="Matt Prater" label="Matt Prater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4623958" start="37922" end="37935" title="2011–12 NFL playoffs" label="2011 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q517467" start="37967" end="37976" title="Tim Tebow" label="Tim Tebow"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="38090" end="38108" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539" start="38127" end="38141" title="Peyton Manning" label="Peyton Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568797" start="38176" end="38187" title="List of Denver Broncos starting quarterbacks" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="38246" end="38255" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q16736162" start="38279" end="38286" title="Tom Brady–Peyton Manning rivalry" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38580" end="38601" title="2015–16 NFL playoffs#Conference Championships" label="2015 AFC Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="38704" end="38723" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="38820" end="38841" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067148" start="38845" end="38856" title="Heinz Field" label="Heinz Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592728" start="38997" end="39001" title="1997 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q206632" start="39074" end="39080" title="Ty Law" label="Ty Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q952539" start="39085" end="39098" title="Curtis Martin" label="Curtis Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593852" start="39200" end="39213" title="1998 New York Jets season" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432035" start="39464" end="39479" title="2004 NFL season" label="2004 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q373355" start="39746" end="39756" title="Gillette Stadium" label="Foxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767336" start="39768" end="39779" title="Matt Cassel" label="Matt Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656170" start="39829" end="39833" title="2013 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="40043" end="40064" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719497" start="40152" end="40163" title="Jesse James (tight end)" label="Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q272220" start="40534" end="40554" title="Los Angeles Chargers" label="Los Angeles Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608689" start="40566" end="40586" title="2007 Jacksonville Jaguars season" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="40714" end="40728" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="40882" end="40903" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="Sunday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="41039" end="41046" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225461" start="41157" end="41172" title="Darryl Stingley" label="Darryl Stingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q687509" start="41252" end="41262" title="Jack Tatum" label="Jack Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885552" start="41383" end="41393" title="Ben Dreith" label="Ben Dreith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789070" start="41773" end="41784" title="Matt Millen" label="Matt Millen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147693" start="41798" end="41814" title="Patrick Sullivan (American football executive)" label="Patrick Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599538" start="41885" end="41901" title="2001–02 NFL playoffs" label="divisional round"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851010" start="41956" end="41970" title="Tuck Rule Game" label="Tuck Rule Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599122" start="42179" end="42193" title="2001 St. Louis Rams season" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q462925" start="42488" end="42498" title="Randy Moss" label="Randy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="42590" end="42604" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q622681" start="42688" end="42699" title="2011 NFL season" label="2011 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630246" start="42754" end="42765" title="2014 NFL season" label="2014 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127991" start="42817" end="42821" title="2017 NFL season" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q115902144" start="42851" end="42878" title="Lunatic Lateral" label="lateral play that went awry"/>
<link wikidata="Q316187" start="43368" end="43379" title="Eli Manning" label="Eli Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608996" start="43405" end="43433" title="2007 New England Patriots–New York Giants game" label="Patriots defeated the Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="43526" end="43541" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360289" start="43602" end="43614" title="Helmet Catch" label="Helmet Catch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018916" start="43620" end="43631" title="David Tyree" label="David Tyree"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="43674" end="43689" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363741" start="43933" end="43940" title="Ron Erhardt" label="Erhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297939" start="43941" end="43948" title="Ray Perkins (wide receiver)" label="Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089121" start="43975" end="43984" title="Chuck Fairbanks" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648293" start="43985" end="43993" title="Hank Bullough" label="Bullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043062" start="44000" end="44011" title="3–4 defense" label="3–4 defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="44402" end="44415" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="44451" end="44466" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="44941" end="44954" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148027" start="45304" end="45317" title="Patriot Reign" label="Patriot Reign"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45368" end="45384" title="Man in the Arena: Tom Brady" label="Man in the Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q526301" start="45813" end="45836" title="utility player" label="play multiple positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q909800" start="46015" end="46026" title="List of Super Bowl champions" label="Super Bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865607" start="46032" end="46051" title="History of the National Football League championship" label="league championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="46059" end="46062" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="46117" end="46136" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960118" start="46181" end="46185" title="2003 NFL season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432035" start="46190" end="46194" title="2004 NFL season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960112" start="46281" end="46285" title="2001 NFL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432035" start="46290" end="46294" title="2004 NFL season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960118" start="46393" end="46397" title="2003 NFL season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="46460" end="46477" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="46683" end="46702" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="46707" end="46721" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="46800" end="46803" title="American Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="46811" end="46819" title="AFL East" label="AFL East"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="46853" end="46861" title="AFC East" label="AFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="46869" end="46872" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="47175" end="47195" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="47248" end="47263" title="Wembley Stadium" label="London, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="47284" end="47300" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="47401" end="47414" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132413" start="47468" end="47485" title="Soldier Field" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="47506" end="47526" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="47609" end="47623" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="47722" end="47740" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632294" start="47796" end="47812" title="Paycor Stadium" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="47818" end="47835" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929512" start="47889" end="47911" title="U.S. Bank Stadium" label="Minneapolis, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="47917" end="47935" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="48018" end="48031" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984507" start="48113" end="48122" title="Baltimore Colts" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="48125" end="48143" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="48244" end="48257" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="48357" end="48372" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007552" start="48425" end="48441" title="Mercedes-Benz Stadium" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="48462" end="48471" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q272220" start="48474" end="48494" title="Los Angeles Chargers" label="Los Angeles Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="48595" end="48610" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="48709" end="48723" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="48726" end="48742" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142992" start="48797" end="48817" title="Nissan Stadium" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="48838" end="48851" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="48952" end="48968" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100756" start="49023" end="49038" title="FirstEnergy Stadium" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938063" start="49059" end="49068" title="St. Louis Cardinals (NFL)" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="49071" end="49098" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Phoenix / Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="49152" end="49169" title="State Farm Stadium" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="49175" end="49182" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417643" start="49185" end="49196" title="Los Angeles Raiders" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="49199" end="49216" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q27768421" start="49271" end="49288" title="Allegiant Stadium" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="49309" end="49326" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q860790" start="49377" end="49397" title="Lambeau Field" label="Green Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="49418" end="49427" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="49430" end="49446" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="49546" end="49565" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067148" start="49620" end="49644" title="Acrisure Stadium" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="49665" end="49679" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046135" start="49735" end="49751" title="Empower Field at Mile High" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="49772" end="49786" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="49842" end="49864" title="Hard Rock Stadium" label="Miami Gardens, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="49885" end="49902" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q806673" start="49954" end="49979" title="Bank of America Stadium" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="50000" end="50019" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="50120" end="50136" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="50238" end="50259" title="Washington Commanders" label="Washington Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="50343" end="50361" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="50463" end="50477" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q838284" start="50528" end="50544" title="AT&amp;amp;T Stadium" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="50550" end="50569" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="50625" end="50648" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Santa Clara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="50890" end="50899" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="50935" end="50944" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="51037" end="51046" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="51142" end="51151" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407375" start="51246" end="51260" title="Sam Cunningham" label="Sam Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197114" start="51297" end="51306" title="Jim Nance" label="Jim Nance"/>
<link wikidata="Q526874" start="51336" end="51346" title="Wes Welker" label="Wes Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599806" start="51384" end="51398" title="Stanley Morgan" label="Stanley Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334384" start="51437" end="51451" title="Rob Gronkowski" label="Rob Gronkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q617175" start="51491" end="51502" title="Kevin Faulk" label="Kevin Faulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q364812" start="51537" end="51555" title="Stephen Gostkowski" label="Stephen Gostkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q364812" start="51591" end="51609" title="Stephen Gostkowski" label="Stephen Gostkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323207" start="51650" end="51664" title="Rich Camarillo" label="Rich Camarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383827" start="51717" end="51727" title="Ryan Allen (American football)" label="Ryan Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q617175" start="51769" end="51780" title="Kevin Faulk" label="Kevin Faulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q332169" start="51819" end="51829" title="Troy Brown" label="Troy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298673" start="51866" end="51882" title="Raymond Clayborn" label="Raymond Clayborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q206632" start="51895" end="51901" title="Ty Law" label="Ty Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q493244" start="51928" end="51941" title="Andre Tippett" label="Andre Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q512013" start="51974" end="51986" title="Tedy Bruschi" label="Tedy Bruschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="52052" end="52061" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="52093" end="52102" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738" start="52132" end="52144" title="Corey Dillon" label="Corey Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q963007" start="52176" end="52193" title="LeGarrette Blount" label="LeGarrette Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q526874" start="52218" end="52228" title="Wes Welker" label="Wes Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q526874" start="52260" end="52270" title="Wes Welker" label="Wes Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q462925" start="52304" end="52314" title="Randy Moss" label="Randy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q364812" start="52397" end="52415" title="Stephen Gostkowski" label="Stephen Gostkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q364812" start="52445" end="52463" title="Stephen Gostkowski" label="Stephen Gostkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631725" start="52498" end="52512" title="Shawn McCarthy" label="Shawn McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63351200" start="52543" end="52554" title="Jake Bailey (American football)" label="Jake Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051522" start="52591" end="52602" title="Ellis Hobbs" label="Ellis Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q967730" start="52634" end="52645" title="Mike Haynes (cornerback)" label="Mike Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363869" start="52677" end="52685" title="Ron Hall (defensive back)" label="Ron Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q493244" start="52706" end="52719" title="Andre Tippett" label="Andre Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="52851" end="52867" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="52895" end="52898" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079382" start="52918" end="52932" title="Super Bowl MVP" label="Super Bowl MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246731" start="52941" end="52972" title="Pro Football Writers of America" label="Pro Football Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="53042" end="53045" title="American Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="53265" end="53290" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="53845" end="53857" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="53937" end="53939" title="American Football League" label="AF"/>
<link wikidata="Q493244" start="54000" end="54013" title="Andre Tippett" label="Andre Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377462" start="54500" end="54511" title="John Hannah (American football)" label="John Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148024" start="54626" end="54639" title="Patriot Place" label="Patriot Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q89368734" start="54654" end="54657" title="RTX Corporation" label="RTX"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="55822" end="55834" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q803780" start="55866" end="55880" title="Billy Sullivan (American football)" label="Billy Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205543" start="56195" end="56212" title="American Football League All-Time Team" label="AFL All-Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191856" start="56238" end="56257" title="National Football League All-Decade Teams" label="NFL all-decade team"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="56268" end="56282" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL–NFL merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507319" start="56296" end="56304" title="National Football League 75th Anniversary All-Time Team" label="NFL 75th"/>
<link wikidata="Q76429308" start="56309" end="56326" title="National Football League 100th Anniversary All-Time Team" label="100th Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="56702" end="56710" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743813" start="56719" end="56731" title="American Football League All-Star game" label="AFL All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837661" start="56796" end="56825" title="Babe Parilli" label="Vito &amp;quot;Babe&amp;quot; Parilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q206632" start="56845" end="56851" title="Ty Law" label="Ty Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595032" start="56865" end="56869" title="1999 Pro Bowl" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847295" start="56980" end="56992" title="Mike Holovak" label="Mike Holovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089121" start="57017" end="57032" title="Chuck Fairbanks" label="Chuck Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578830" start="57036" end="57040" title="1979 Pro Bowl" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="57046" end="57060" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609159" start="57064" end="57068" title="2007 Pro Bowl" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406157" start="57073" end="57077" title="2011 Pro Bowl" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="57084" end="57093" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="57100" end="57112" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837661" start="57114" end="57143" title="Babe Parilli" label="Vito &amp;quot;Babe&amp;quot; Parilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009136" start="57155" end="57164" title="Mac Jones" label="Mac Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849009" start="57166" end="57181" title="Mike Taliaferro" label="Mike Taliaferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490360" start="57187" end="57199" title="Larry Garron" label="Larry Garron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197114" start="57211" end="57220" title="Jim Nance" label="Jim Nance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407375" start="57232" end="57246" title="Sam Cunningham" label="Sam Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950133" start="57248" end="57261" title="James Develin" label="James Develin"/>
<link wikidata="Q952539" start="57266" end="57279" title="Curtis Martin" label="Curtis Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822088" start="57285" end="57297" title="Tony Collins (American football)" label="Tony Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738" start="57299" end="57311" title="Corey Dillon" label="Corey Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259028" start="57313" end="57326" title="John Stephens (American football)" label="John Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181090" start="57328" end="57339" title="Craig James (running back)" label="Craig James"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040204" start="57341" end="57353" title="Carl Garrett" label="Carl Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926387" start="57364" end="57379" title="Bruce Armstrong" label="Bruce Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q920055" start="57385" end="57395" title="Matt Light" label="Matt Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964072" start="57397" end="57411" title="Brian Holloway" label="Brian Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524658" start="57417" end="57426" title="Leon Gray" label="Leon Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293241" start="57432" end="57441" title="Don Oakes (American football)" label="Don Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377462" start="57452" end="57463" title="John Hannah (American football)" label="John Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q364829" start="57469" end="57482" title="Logan Mankins" label="Logan Mankins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085153" start="57488" end="57500" title="Charlie Long" label="Charley Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115585" start="57512" end="57523" title="Chuck Leo" label="Charley Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271264" start="57533" end="57543" title="Jon Morris" label="Jon Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212536" start="57555" end="57567" title="Damien Woody" label="Damien Woody"/>
<link wikidata="Q364613" start="57569" end="57579" title="Dan Koppen" label="Dan Koppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913090" start="57584" end="57599" title="Billy Neighbors" label="Billy Neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521967" start="57607" end="57619" title="Len St. Jean" label="Len St. Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965585" start="57627" end="57639" title="Brian Waters" label="Brian Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817026" start="57644" end="57655" title="Tom Neville (offensive tackle)" label="Tom Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273095" start="57663" end="57673" title="Dick Klein (American football)" label="Dick Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334384" start="57684" end="57698" title="Rob Gronkowski" label="Rob Gronkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301837" start="57700" end="57710" title="Ben Coates" label="Ben Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453408" start="57716" end="57728" title="Russ Francis" label="Russ Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778071" start="57734" end="57743" title="Marv Cook" label="Marv Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q526874" start="57752" end="57762" title="Wes Welker" label="Wes Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106796" start="57764" end="57780" title="Gino Cappelletti" label="Gino Cappelletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599806" start="57792" end="57806" title="Stanley Morgan" label="Stanley Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q462925" start="57812" end="57822" title="Randy Moss" label="Randy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q332169" start="57824" end="57834" title="Troy Brown" label="Troy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571489" start="57836" end="57847" title="Terry Glenn" label="Terry Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802156" start="57849" end="57861" title="Irving Fryar" label="Irving Fryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364370" start="57863" end="57874" title="Ron Sellers" label="Ron Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950812" start="57882" end="57895" title="Jim Colclough" label="Jim Colclough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606618" start="57906" end="57921" title="Richard Seymour" label="Richard Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932253" start="57927" end="57934" title="Bob Dee" label="Bob Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490251" start="57946" end="57962" title="Larry Eisenhauer" label="Larry Eisenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119989" start="57974" end="57986" title="Julius Adams" label="Julius Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615432" start="57988" end="58000" title="Andre Carter" label="Andre Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q941408" start="58002" end="58016" title="Chandler Jones" label="Chandler Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141387" start="58021" end="58036" title="Houston Antwine" label="Houston Antwine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340769" start="58048" end="58061" title="Vince Wilfork" label="Vince Wilfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196354" start="58067" end="58079" title="Jim Lee Hunt" label="Jim Lee Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q493244" start="58094" end="58107" title="Andre Tippett" label="Andre Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q132135" start="58109" end="58124" title="Nick Buoniconti" label="Nick Buoniconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q619421" start="58136" end="58147" title="Tom Addison" label="Tom Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613458" start="58159" end="58171" title="Steve Nelson (American football)" label="Steve Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267564" start="58177" end="58191" title="Johnny Rembert" label="Johnny Rembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571625" start="58193" end="58208" title="Willie McGinest" label="Willie McGinest"/>
<link wikidata="Q920547" start="58210" end="58220" title="Jerod Mayo" label="Jerod Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036863" start="58222" end="58243" title="Dont&amp;#x27;a Hightower" label="Dont&amp;#x27;a Hightower"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060921" start="58245" end="58258" title="Matthew Judon" label="Matthew Judon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108083" start="58264" end="58275" title="Chris Slade (American football)" label="Chris Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q512013" start="58277" end="58289" title="Tedy Bruschi" label="Tedy Bruschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382305" start="58291" end="58302" title="Mike Vrabel" label="Mike Vrabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146747" start="58304" end="58317" title="Jamie Collins (American football)" label="Jamie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q967730" start="58322" end="58333" title="Mike Haynes (cornerback)" label="Mike Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206632" start="58339" end="58345" title="Ty Law" label="Ty Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973224" start="58351" end="58366" title="Stephon Gilmore" label="Stephon Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272904" start="58372" end="58381" title="Richard Felt" label="Dick Felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115707" start="58389" end="58401" title="Chuck Shonta" label="Chuck Shonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529007" start="58409" end="58423" title="Leroy Mitchell" label="Leroy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q641569" start="58431" end="58444" title="Asante Samuel" label="Asante Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025478" start="58446" end="58460" title="Devin McCourty" label="Devin McCourty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859108" start="58462" end="58472" title="Aqib Talib" label="Aqib Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166605" start="58474" end="58488" title="Darrelle Revis" label="Darrelle Revis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811505" start="58490" end="58504" title="Malcolm Butler" label="Malcolm Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q50283035" start="58506" end="58519" title="J. C. Jackson" label="J. C. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066408" start="58524" end="58537" title="Lawyer Milloy" label="Lawyer Milloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091734" start="58543" end="58554" title="Fred Bruney" label="Fred Bruney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363869" start="58566" end="58574" title="Ron Hall (defensive back)" label="Ron Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923767" start="58587" end="58606" title="Brandon Meriweather" label="Brandon Meriweather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293686" start="58612" end="58620" title="Don Webb (American football)" label="Don Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495864" start="58628" end="58639" title="Fred Marion" label="Fred Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025478" start="58641" end="58655" title="Devin McCourty" label="Devin McCourty"/>
<link wikidata="Q364812" start="58660" end="58678" title="Stephen Gostkowski" label="Stephen Gostkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q351092" start="58684" end="58698" title="Adam Vinatieri" label="Adam Vinatieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258251" start="58704" end="58714" title="John Smith (placekicker)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822379" start="58716" end="58729" title="Tony Franklin (kicker)" label="Tony Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323207" start="58733" end="58747" title="Rich Camarillo" label="Rich Camarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63351200" start="58749" end="58760" title="Jake Bailey (American football)" label="Jake Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791235" start="58765" end="58779" title="Matthew Slater" label="Matthew Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298673" start="58786" end="58802" title="Raymond Clayborn" label="Raymond Clayborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570527" start="58808" end="58818" title="Larry Izzo" label="Larry Izzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916268" start="58824" end="58835" title="Mosi Tatupu" label="Mosi Tatupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229372" start="58837" end="58849" title="Dave Meggett" label="Dave Meggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q113659082" start="58851" end="58867" title="Brenden Schooler" label="Brenden Schooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="58952" end="58954" title="Associated Press" label="AP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706900" start="58966" end="58973" title="All-Pro" label="All-Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743812" start="58978" end="58985" title="American Football League All-League Team" label="All-AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="59008" end="59017" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837661" start="59023" end="59052" title="Babe Parilli" label="Vito &amp;quot;Babe&amp;quot; Parilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197114" start="59063" end="59072" title="Jim Nance" label="Jim Nance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524658" start="59087" end="59096" title="Leon Gray" label="Leon Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q920055" start="59102" end="59112" title="Matt Light" label="Matt Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377462" start="59117" end="59128" title="John Hannah (American football)" label="John Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q364829" start="59134" end="59147" title="Logan Mankins" label="Logan Mankins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271264" start="59152" end="59162" title="Jon Morris" label="Jon Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913090" start="59173" end="59188" title="Billy Neighbors" label="Billy Neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334384" start="59199" end="59213" title="Rob Gronkowski" label="Rob Gronkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301837" start="59219" end="59229" title="Ben Coates" label="Ben Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778071" start="59235" end="59244" title="Marv Cook" label="Marv Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198882" start="59246" end="59256" title="Jim Whalen" label="Jim Whalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q526874" start="59268" end="59278" title="Wes Welker" label="Wes Welker"/>
<link wikidata="Q462925" start="59284" end="59294" title="Randy Moss" label="Randy Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606618" start="59299" end="59314" title="Richard Seymour" label="Richard Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490251" start="59316" end="59332" title="Larry Eisenhauer" label="Larry Eisenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141387" start="59347" end="59362" title="Houston Antwine" label="Houston Antwine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340769" start="59370" end="59383" title="Vince Wilfork" label="Vince Wilfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q132135" start="59388" end="59403" title="Nick Buoniconti" label="Nick Buoniconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q493244" start="59415" end="59428" title="Andre Tippett" label="Andre Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q619421" start="59434" end="59445" title="Tom Addison" label="Tom Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382305" start="59453" end="59464" title="Mike Vrabel" label="Mike Vrabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q920547" start="59466" end="59476" title="Jerod Mayo" label="Jerod Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206632" start="59481" end="59487" title="Ty Law" label="Ty Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973224" start="59489" end="59504" title="Stephon Gilmore" label="Stephon Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q641569" start="59510" end="59523" title="Asante Samuel" label="Asante Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166605" start="59525" end="59539" title="Darrelle Revis" label="Darrelle Revis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363869" start="59544" end="59552" title="Ron Hall (defensive back)" label="Ron Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066408" start="59560" end="59573" title="Lawyer Milloy" label="Lawyer Milloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850309" start="59575" end="59590" title="Rodney Harrison" label="Rodney Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q351092" start="59595" end="59609" title="Adam Vinatieri" label="Adam Vinatieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q364812" start="59611" end="59629" title="Stephen Gostkowski" label="Stephen Gostkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q63351200" start="59637" end="59648" title="Jake Bailey (American football)" label="Jake Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791235" start="59653" end="59667" title="Matthew Slater" label="Matthew Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q64743851" start="59673" end="59689" title="Gunner Olszewski" label="Gunner Olszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q109581270" start="59691" end="59703" title="Marcus Jones (cornerback)" label="Marcus Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q113659082" start="59705" end="59721" title="Brenden Schooler" label="Brenden Schooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q803780" start="59910" end="59924" title="Billy Sullivan (businessman)" label="Billy Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217442" start="59967" end="59977" title="List of New England Patriots seasons" label="28 seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="60137" end="60150" title="Super Bowl XX" label="Super Bowl XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q967730" start="60374" end="60385" title="Mike Haynes (cornerback)" label="Mike Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q825258" start="60476" end="60494" title="Remington (personal care brand)" label="Remington Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926063" start="60501" end="60512" title="Victor Kiam" label="Victor Kiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="60547" end="60562" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="Foxboro Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="60622" end="60634" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558316" start="60678" end="60688" title="Lisa Olson" label="Lisa Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570593" start="60760" end="60771" title="Zeke Mowatt" label="Zeke Mowatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="61131" end="61140" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140663" start="61153" end="61167" title="James Orthwein" label="James Orthwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="61206" end="61219" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="61299" end="61311" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589698" start="61458" end="61477" title="St. Louis Stallions" label="St. Louis Stallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q706686" start="61540" end="61552" title="Robert Kraft" label="Robert Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q339850" start="61563" end="61578" title="Foxboro Stadium" label="Foxboro Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="61672" end="61688" title="hostile takeover" label="hostile takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="61848" end="61874" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="St. Louis/Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q945207" start="61881" end="61893" title="Stan Kroenke" label="Stan Kroenke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382305" start="62879" end="62890" title="Mike Vrabel" label="Mike Vrabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="63030" end="63044" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597694" start="63140" end="63144" title="2000 New England Patriots season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158598" start="63148" end="63152" title="2023 New England Patriots season" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q76429308" start="63255" end="63290" title="National Football League 100th Anniversary All-Time Team" label="NFL 100th All-Time Anniversary Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="63386" end="63394" title="AFC East" label="AFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="63434" end="63455" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192268" start="63634" end="63655" title="List of National Football League head coaches by playoff record" label="playoff coaching wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149382" start="63677" end="63716" title="List of National Football League head coaches with 50 wins" label="regular season coaching wins in the NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594152" start="63810" end="63831" title="AP NFL Coach of the Year award" label="NFL Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960118" start="63840" end="63844" title="2003 NFL season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q254029" start="63846" end="63850" title="2007 NFL season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q622675" start="63856" end="63868" title="2010 NFL season" label="2010 seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847295" start="64135" end="64147" title="Mike Holovak" label="Mike Holovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="64211" end="64224" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="64261" end="64274" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524689" start="64353" end="64362" title="Leon Hess" label="Leon Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="64733" end="64748" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="65164" end="65180" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714943" start="65712" end="65726" title="2000 NFL draft" label="2000 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="65811" end="65820" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="65992" end="66002" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q459051" start="66110" end="66123" title="Raymond Berry" label="Raymond Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089121" start="66278" end="66293" title="Chuck Fairbanks" label="Chuck Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594152" start="66343" end="66360" title="AP NFL Coach of the Year award" label="Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685739" start="66448" end="66457" title="Lou Saban" label="Lou Saban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878896" start="66502" end="66513" title="1960 Boston Patriots season" label="1960 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007338" start="66740" end="66773" title="New England Patriots Cheerleaders" label="New England Patriots Cheerleaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967244" start="66807" end="66810" title="National Football League Cheerleading" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205822" start="66870" end="66878" title="Carmella (wrestler)" label="Carmella"/>
<link wikidata="Q61965500" start="66889" end="66903" title="Camille Kostek" label="Camille Kostek"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="67083" end="67099" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="67226" end="67232" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920525" start="67253" end="67264" title="Pat Patriot" label="Pat Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="67268" end="67281" title="American Revolution" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="67282" end="67291" title="minuteman" label="minuteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632420" start="67537" end="67591" title="26th Continental Regiment" label="9th Massachusetts Regiment (26th Continental Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q650807" start="67785" end="67794" title="touchdown" label="touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q24923" start="67796" end="67806" title="field goal (football)" label="field goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603777" start="67808" end="67829" title="Extra point" label="point-after-touchdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906" start="67833" end="67839" title="Safety (gridiron football score)" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424040" start="67900" end="67906" title="Blank (cartridge)" label="blanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="67912" end="67929" title="flintlock" label="flintlock muskets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67957" end="68008" title="WROR-FM#Loren and Wally" label="&amp;quot;Loren &amp;amp; Wally Show&amp;quot; on WROR 105.7 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710023" start="68035" end="68050" title="Super Bowl XLIX" label="Super Bowl XLIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="68086" end="68098" title="black powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289233" start="68223" end="68236" title="Josh Pahigian" label="Josh Pahigian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="68359" end="68370" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="68441" end="68447" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="68460" end="68475" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947556" start="68550" end="68556" title="WBZ-FM" label="WBZ-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876829" start="68624" end="68647" title="Beasley Broadcast Group" label="Beasley Broadcast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213228" start="68688" end="68722" title="New England Patriots Radio Network" label="New England Patriots Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523848" start="68771" end="68781" title="Gil Santos" label="Gil Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106796" start="68786" end="68802" title="Gino Cappelletti" label="Gino Cappelletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201331" start="68932" end="68941" title="Bob Socci" label="Bob Socci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437559" start="68962" end="68973" title="Scott Zolak" label="Scott Zolak"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="69158" end="69161" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114923" start="69169" end="69176" title="Owned-and-operated television stations in the United States" label="O&amp;amp;O"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947559" start="69177" end="69183" title="WBZ-TV" label="WBZ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148024" start="69333" end="69346" title="Patriot Place" label="Patriot Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="69487" end="69490" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949607" start="69501" end="69508" title="WFXT-TV" label="WFXT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="69520" end="69545" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="NBC Sunday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="69580" end="69583" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957979" start="69592" end="69599" title="WBTS-CD" label="WBTS-CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="69635" end="69638" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948158" start="69649" end="69656" title="WCVB-TV" label="WCVB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="69746" end="69767" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292468" start="69805" end="69815" title="Don Criqui" label="Don Criqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="69820" end="69832" title="play-by-play" label="play-by-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292152" start="69875" end="69886" title="Randy Cross" label="Randy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="69892" end="69909" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="69930" end="69947" title="sideline reporter" label="sideline reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612114" start="69984" end="69996" title="Steve Burton (sports journalist)" label="Steve Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364161" start="70211" end="70220" title="Ron Meyer" label="Ron Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258251" start="70331" end="70341" title="John Smith (placekicker)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239512" start="70683" end="70692" title="Don Shula" label="Don Shula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128686" start="70774" end="70784" title="unfair act" label="unfair act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745380" start="70857" end="70869" title="Pete Rozelle" label="Pete Rozelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q254029" start="71544" end="71555" title="2007 NFL season" label="2007 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="71629" end="71642" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="71806" end="71813" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="71951" end="71965" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q434766" start="72098" end="72112" title="2008 NFL draft" label="2008 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="" start="72195" end="72221" title="2014–15 NFL playoffs#AFC: New England Patriots 45, Indianapolis Colts 7" label="2015 AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="72234" end="72252" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="72839" end="72848" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="73050" end="73079" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q18698858" start="73293" end="73304" title="2015 NFL season" label="2015 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q49669" start="73498" end="73564" title="United States District Court for the Southern District of New York" label="United States District Court for the Southern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="73579" end="73632" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21993818" start="73670" end="73685" title="2016 NFL season" label="2016 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642194" start="73772" end="73785" title="Super Bowl LI" label="Super Bowl LI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485262" start="73882" end="73893" title="Mike Florio" label="Mike Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="73912" end="73915" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847024" start="74179" end="74191" title="Troy Vincent" label="Troy Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191785" start="74423" end="74436" title="Ideal gas law" label="Ideal Gas Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191785" start="75187" end="75200" title="Ideal gas law" label="Ideal Gas Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962018" start="75293" end="75338" title="Forbes list of the most valuable sports teams" label="Forbes list of the most valuable sports teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931342" start="75341" end="75367" title="List of Super Bowl records" label="List of Super Bowl records"/>
<link wikidata="Q928290" start="75370" end="75417" title="List of National Football League records (team)" label="List of National Football League records (team)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548628" start="75420" end="75457" title="Active NFL playoff appearance streaks" label="Active NFL playoff appearance streaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579881" start="75460" end="75483" title="Sports in Massachusetts" label="Sports in Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493976" start="75486" end="75502" title="Sports in Boston" label="Sports in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246590" start="75689" end="75711" title="Pro Football Reference" label="Pro Football Reference"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21720" wikidata="Q172435" url="?curid=21720" title="New Orleans Saints">
<text>The New Orleans Saints are a professional American football team based in New Orleans. The Saints compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the National Football Conference (NFC) South division. Since 1975, the team plays its home games at Caesars Superdome after using Tulane Stadium during its first eight seasons. Founded by John W. Mecom Jr., David Dixon, and the city of New Orleans on November 1, 1966, the Saints joined the NFL as an expansion team in 1967.

The Saints were among the NFL&#x27;s least successful franchises in their first several decades, where they went 20 consecutive seasons without a winning record or qualifying for the playoffs. They earned their first winning record and postseason berth in 1987, while their first playoff win would not occur until 2000, the team&#x27;s 34th season. The team&#x27;s fortunes improved in the 21st century, especially during the late 2000s and 2010s, which saw them become more consistent postseason contenders. Their greatest success to date came in the 2009 season, when they won Super Bowl XLIV over the favored Indianapolis Colts, the team&#x27;s first and only Super Bowl appearance so far. The Saints, along with the New York Jets, are one of two NFL franchises to win their sole Super Bowl appearance.

==History==
===Early history===
Local sports entrepreneur Dave Dixon and a local civic group had been seeking an NFL franchise for over five years and had hosted record crowds for NFL exhibition games. To seal the NFL–AFL merger, NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle arrived in New Orleans within a week, and announced on November 1, 1966, that the NFL officially had awarded the city of New Orleans an expansion franchise. The team was named for &quot;When the Saints Go Marching In&quot;, the classic jazz standard associated with New Orleans. When the deal was reached a week earlier, Dixon strongly suggested to Rozelle that the announcement be delayed until November 1, to coincide with All Saints&#x27; Day. Dixon cleared the name with New Orleans&#x27; Archbishop Philip M. Hannan, who &quot;thought it would be a good idea,&quot; according to Dixon. &quot;He had an idea the team was going to need all the help it could get.&quot;

=== John Mecom Jr. era (1967–1984) ===
U.S. House Majority Whip from Louisiana Hale Boggs attached the merger to a bill approving an exemption from antitrust sanctions allowing for the merger and the team. John W. Mecom Jr., a young oilman from Houston, became the team&#x27;s first majority stockholder. The team&#x27;s colors, black and gold, symbolized both Mecom&#x27;s and New Orleans&#x27; strong ties to the oil industry. Trumpeter Al Hirt was part owner of the team.
Tom Fears was named as the team&#x27;s first head coach. The inaugural game on September 17, 1967, started with Saints receiver John Gilliam returning the opening kickoff 94-yards for a touchdown, in a losing effort, 27–13, to the Los Angeles Rams at Tulane Stadium, with over 80,000 in attendance. It was one of the few highlights of a 3–11 season, which set an NFL record for most wins by an expansion team.

For most of their first 20 years, the Saints finished third or fourth in their division until 1979. Until 1987, the 1979 and 1983 teams were the only ones to finish at .500.

One of the franchise&#x27;s early bright moments came on November 8, 1970, when Tom Dempsey kicked an NFL record-breaking 63-yard field goal at Tulane Stadium to defeat the Detroit Lions 19–17 in the final seconds of the game; the previous record was seven yards less, set in . Dempsey&#x27;s record was not broken until by Matt Prater of the Denver Broncos, who kicked one yard farther.

In 1980, the Saints lost their first 14 games, prompting local sportscaster Bernard &quot;Buddy D&quot; Diliberto to advise Saints supporters to wear paper bags over their heads at the team&#x27;s home games; many bags rendered the club&#x27;s name as the &quot;&#x27;Aints&quot; rather than the &quot;Saints.&quot;

=== Benson era (1985–present) ===

==== Jim E. Mora years (1986–1996) ====
Tom Benson, a successful automobile dealership owner and banker, acquired the franchise in 1985, and hired Jim Finks as general manager and Jim Mora as head coach. That combination provided the Saints with their first-ever winning record and playoff appearance, going 12–3 in 1987, which had one fewer game than normal due to a players&#x27; strike. Another playoff berth would follow during the 1990 season, and the club&#x27;s first division title came in 1991. During Mora&#x27;s tenure, the Saints made the playoffs four times, with teams marked by strong defenses led by the &quot;Dome Patrol&quot; linebacking corps, but they were never able to win a playoff game. Mora coached the Saints until the middle of the 1996 season, when he stepped down halfway through the 3–13 season. His 93 wins were three more than the Saints won in their entire history prior to his arrival, and would remain the most for any Saints coach until 2016.

==== Mike Ditka years (1997–1999) ====
After the end of the 1996 season, ironically as Diliberto had suggested before Mora&#x27;s resignation, former Chicago Bears coach Mike Ditka was hired to replace Mora. Although this initially generated a lot of excitement among Saints fans, Ditka&#x27;s tenure ended up being a failure. The Saints went 6–10 in their first two seasons under Ditka (1997 and 1998). During the 1999 NFL draft, Ditka traded all of his picks for that season, as well as the first-round and third-round picks for the following season, to the Washington Redskins in order to draft University of Texas Heisman Trophy running back Ricky Williams in the first round. Ditka and Williams had a mock wedding picture taken to commemorate the occasion. However, Ditka, most of his coaching staff, and general manager Bill Kuharich were fired at the end of the 1999 season due to the club&#x27;s 3–13 record.

==== Jim Haslett years (2000–2005) ====
Jim Haslett held the post from 2000 to 2005. In his first year, he took the team to the 2000 playoffs with a 10–6 mark and defeated the defending Super Bowl champion St. Louis Rams for the team&#x27;s first-ever playoff win. The team lost the following week to the Minnesota Vikings. After winning the 2000 NFL Executive of the Year Award, General Manager Randy Mueller was fired between the 2001 and 2002 seasons without explanation by Benson. The Saints failed to make the playoffs in 2001 and 2002, although in the latter year they had the distinction of beating the eventual Super Bowl XXXVII champion Tampa Bay Buccaneers in both of their regular-season meetings, only the second team to do so in NFL history.

In 2003, the Saints again missed the playoffs after finishing 8–8. The 2004 season started poorly for the Saints, as they went 2–4 through their first six games and 4–8 through their first twelve games. At that point Haslett&#x27;s job appeared to be in jeopardy; however, he managed to win the three straight games leading up to the season finale, leaving the Saints in playoff contention in the final week of the season. In week 17, the Saints defeated division rivals Carolina; however, the Saints needed other results to break their way and when the St. Louis Rams beat the New York Jets the Saints were eliminated despite having beaten the Rams, who finished with the same record. The Rams, Saints, and Vikings all were 8–8, with the Rams having a 7–5 conference record, Saints 6–6, and the Vikings 5–7. The Rams received the number 1 wild-card due to having the best conference record out of the three, followed by the Vikings due to the 38–31 loss handed to the Saints in Week 6. Haslett was fired after the 2005 season, in which the Saints finished 3–13 and did not play any regular-season games in New Orleans due to Hurricane Katrina.

===== Effect of Hurricane Katrina =====
Due to the damage Hurricane Katrina caused to the Superdome and the New Orleans area, the Saints&#x27; scheduled 2005 home opener against the New York Giants was moved to Giants Stadium. The remainder of their 2005 home games were split between the Alamodome in San Antonio, Texas, and LSU&#x27;s Tiger Stadium in Baton Rouge.

==== Sean Payton years (2006–2021) ====
On January 17, 2006, the Saints hired Sean Payton as their new head coach and, on March 14, signed former San Diego Chargers quarterback Drew Brees to a six-year, $60 million deal.

On March 23, the Saints announced that the team&#x27;s two 2006 preseason games were to be played at Shreveport, Louisiana, and Jackson, Mississippi. After a $185 million renovation of the historic stadium, on April 6 the Saints released their 2006 schedule, with all home games scheduled to be played at the Superdome. On September 19, Saints owner Tom Benson announced that the team had sold out the Louisiana Superdome for the entire season with season tickets alone (68,354 seats), a first in franchise history.

The September 25, home opener, the first home game in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, was won by the Saints 23–3 against the Atlanta Falcons, who were undefeated in the 2006 season at that time. The attendance for the game was a sellout crowd of 70,003. Meanwhile, the broadcast of the game was ESPN&#x27;s highest-ever rated program to date, with an 11.8 rating, and viewership by 10.85 million homes. It was the most-watched program for the night, broadcast or cable, and was the second-highest rated cable program of all time at the time. Green Day and U2 performed &quot;Wake Me Up When September Ends&quot; and &quot;The Saints Are Coming&quot;, respectively, before the game. The game received a 2007 ESPY award for &quot;Best Moment in Sports.&quot; The game is remembered by Saints fans for Steve Gleason&#x27;s blocked punt on the opening series that resulted in a touchdown for New Orleans.

On December 17, the Saints clinched their third division title and their first NFC South title in franchise history. For the first time in Saints&#x27; history, they clinched their NFC South title on their home field. Sean Payton became the second consecutive Saints coach to win a division title in his first season. After the Philadelphia Eagles beat the Dallas Cowboys 23–7 on Christmas Day 2006, the Saints clinched a first-round playoff bye for the first time in franchise history, finishing the regular season with a record of 10–6.

After the first-round bye, the Saints beat the Philadelphia Eagles 27–24 in the Superdome in the 2006 Divisional Playoffs. No team had ever had such a poor record in the prior year (3–13) and then gone on to a league or conference championship game since the 1999 St. Louis Rams who advanced to win their first Super Bowl after being 4–12 the season before. Since the Saints&#x27; only previous playoff win was in the wild card round, this was the farthest the Saints had ever advanced at the time. The victory was only the second playoff win in team history. The season ended on January 21, 2007, when the Saints lost a 39–14 blowout to the Chicago Bears in the NFC Championship game.

The Saints announced that for the second year in a row, the Louisiana Superdome had sold out every ticket for the season.

The first game of the season was against the defending Super Bowl XLI champion Indianapolis Colts. The Saints lost this game, 41–10, and lost their next three games. In one of these three games, against the Tennessee Titans, the Saints lost running back Deuce McAllister for the season with his second career (second time in three seasons) ACL tear. After winning their first game, against the Seattle Seahawks, two weeks later, the team went on a four-game winning streak to bring their record to an even 4–4. After reaching 7–7, the Saints lost their final two games to finish 7–9.

Following a disappointing 7–9 record in the 2007 season, the Saints ended the 2008 season 8–8. Failing to qualify for the post-season for the second straight year, the Saints found themselves struggling on defense. However, the Saints would match the explosive offense they had in the 2006 season. Drew Brees ended the 2008 season just 16 yards short of beating Dan Marino&#x27;s single-season record of 5084 total passing yards, and receiver Lance Moore came 72 yards short of his first 1,000-yard season.

===== Super Bowl XLIV champions (2009) =====
The 2009 season was the team&#x27;s most successful season, which culminated in the franchise&#x27;s first league championship win against the Indianapolis Colts in Super Bowl XLIV. After achieving a record of 13–0 with their win over the Atlanta Falcons, it marked the Saints&#x27; best start to a season in its franchise history. The result clinched an NFC playoff berth and a bye in the first round of the playoffs. By winning their first 13 games, the Saints also set the record for the longest undefeated season opening (13–0) by an NFC team since the AFL–NFL merger, surpassing the previous record (12–0) held by the 1985 Chicago Bears. However, they would fall victim to the Dallas Cowboys in week 14, going on to end the season with a three-game losing streak. The Saints became the first team to win a Super Bowl after losing its last three regular-season games.

Although its opponents would include winners of 9 of the last 15 NFL MVP awards, the team advanced to the 2009 NFC Championship game where they defeated the Minnesota Vikings, led by Brett Favre, 31–28 in overtime, advancing to their first Super Bowl appearance in franchise history. Television ratings for Super Bowl XLIV (44) were the second highest for any TV program, sports or otherwise, in history, as their successful bid to win the Super Bowl was seen by many to represent the city&#x27;s resurgence after the devastating Hurricane Katrina.

The Saints&#x27; 2010 season began in the Superdome as the defending Super Bowl champions defeated the Minnesota Vikings 14–9, in a rematch of the 2009 NFC Championship Game. It was played on Thursday, September 9, 2010, and televised on NBC, making it the first time the Saints have opened the NFL&#x27;s season at home. On Sunday, August 8, 2010, NBC announced the televised opening festivities of the evening would begin with Taylor Swift and Dave Matthews Band. On December 27, 2010, with a 17–14 win against the Atlanta Falcons in Atlanta, the Saints clinched a playoff appearance (wild card). This marked the first time a team in the NFC South had made back-to-back playoff appearances since the division was formed in 2002. The Saints would face the Seattle Seahawks for the wild-card opener at Qwest Field. The Seahawks were the first NFL team to capture their division with a sub-.500 regular-season record (7–9). Drew Brees completed a postseason-record 39 passes for 404 yards and two touchdowns. Despite throwing 60 passes and hindered by a lack of depth at running back, last year&#x27;s Super Bowl MVP was not intercepted and rallied the Saints within 34–30 in the fourth quarter. In the end, his efforts were negated by a defense that could not get enough stops and a late touchdown run by Marshawn Lynch breaking over a half-dozen tackles with 3:22 left which helped the Seahawks defeat the Saints 41–36.

The Saints began their season with a loss against the Green Bay Packers, but the team rebounded for the next four weeks to bring their record to 4–1. A loss to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers brought the record to 4–2, but the team bounced back with a 62–7 blowout win against the struggling Indianapolis Colts. A surprise loss to the St. Louis Rams resulted in the record dropping to 5–3. In the next seven weeks the Saints beat talented teams such as the eventual Super Bowl XLVI champion New York Giants, Detroit Lions, and Atlanta Falcons, bringing their season record to 12–3. To cap off the season, quarterback Drew Brees broke the single-season passing record held for over 25 years, on the way to a Saints division-winning game. The Saints won the NFC South title on December 26 and ended the 2011 season as the third seed in the NFC. They finished with a 13–3 record, beating Carolina 45–17 and also giving running back Darren Sproles the record for most all-purpose yards in a single season. The team broke numerous records that year including most yards in a season, completion percentage, yards passing, completions and more. The New Orleans Saints beat the Detroit Lions in the 2011 NFC wild-card playoff game 45–28. New Orleans also tied the NFL&#x27;s postseason mark for team first downs in a game (34), and broke the record for total yards with 626, eclipsing the yardage record set 49 years ago. The Saints lost in the Divisional round in the playoffs against the San Francisco 49ers in Candlestick Park that featured the Saints losing two leads in the last four minutes of regulation.

After an off-season dominated by the bounty scandal and the year-long suspension of head coach Sean Payton, the Saints sought to refocus on football and produce yet another winning year. Instead, the team, led by offensive line coach Aaron Kromer for its first six games, started the season with four straight losses and a last-place spot in the NFC South. The team finally broke through with a win in Week 5, against the San Diego Chargers, a game that also saw quarterback Drew Brees break Johnny Unitas&#x27;s longstanding record for consecutive games with a touchdown pass. After their bye week, the Saints went on to win 4 of their next 5 games, to bring their record to an even 5–5. Joe Vitt returned after his six-game suspension to serve as interim head coach for the rest of the season. The team failed to hold its momentum however, and lost the next three games, including a loss at Atlanta that also marked the end of Brees&#x27; record touchdown streak after 54 games, and a 52–27 blowout loss to the Giants that dropped the Saints to 5–8. Despite winning 2 of their last 3 games, and Brees again leading the league with 5,177 passing yards (his third time to surpass 5,000 yards, as he remained the only quarterback to break that barrier more than once), the team finished third in the NFC South, at 7–9. The Saints defense allowed 7,042 yards, setting an NFL record.

The Saints finished their 2013 preseason 3–1, and won their first five regular-season games against the Atlanta Falcons, Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Arizona Cardinals, Miami Dolphins and Chicago Bears. The Saints under Sean Peyton had been winless in Chicago&#x27;s Soldier Field and had not won in the Windy City since 2000. The Saints fared well against Chicago, Arizona and Miami, winning 26–18, 31–7 and 38–17 respectively, but needed a 4th down shutdown and a last-minute field goal to escape Atlanta and Tampa Bay. The Saints went on a 5–0 win streak, but were stopped short by the New England Patriots in Week 6, losing 30–27, with a touchdown pass by Tom Brady in the last 5 seconds of the game. New Orleans would go undefeated at home for the second straight season with Sean Payton as the head coach, but finish just 3–5 on the road. Key losses included a 7–34 blowout against the Seattle Seahawks on Monday Night Football in Seattle which cost them homefield advantage throughout the playoffs, a 16–27 upset against the St. Louis Rams in St. Louis which led to the Saints needing to win their next game against Carolina to control their own playoff destiny, and a heartbreaking 13–17 defeat to their division rival the Carolina Panthers in Charlotte who went on to win the NFC South. The Saints finished the season with an 11–5 record and earned a wild card berth as the sixth seed in the NFC. On January 4, 2014, the Saints recorded their first road playoff win in franchise history over the Philadelphia Eagles 26–24. On January 11, the Saints lost to the first seed, the Seattle Seahawks, once again in Seattle 15–23. The weather conditions were very poor, which gave the offense much difficulty. Despite the conditions, the defense of the Saints played well, holding Seattle to just 23 over the 34 points allowed against Seattle during the regular season.

The Saints finished the season 7–9, second in their division behind the 7–8–1 Carolina Panthers. They missed out on the playoffs after being defeated 14–30 by their divisional rival, the Atlanta Falcons, in the second-to-last week of the season. This season was notorious in Saints history for having the 31st worst-ranked defense in the league, which is one of the main reasons for the Saints&#x27; poor 2014 campaign. The only two great performances by the defense out of the entire season came from a 44–23 home win against the Green Bay Packers and a 31–15 victory against the Chicago Bears in Chicago.

The Saints finished with a 7–9 record for the second consecutive season. They were third in the NFC South after the 15–1 NFC champions Carolina Panthers and the 8–8 Atlanta Falcons. Their defense was historically bad. They allowed the most passing touchdowns in a season in NFL history as they allowed 45, effectively making them the worst passing defense in NFL history. They also set the NFL record in opposing passer rating (116.2), while finishing last in points allowed (29.8) and yards allowed per play (6.6). Atrocious play by defensive captain Brandon Browner, who set the NFL record for most penalties with 23, did not help the struggling Saints defense. Defensive coordinator Rob Ryan was fired near the half-way point in the season and was replaced by senior defensive assistant Dennis Allen. The Saints had strong play from their 2015 draft class. The Saints&#x27; first pick Andrus Peat started at right tackle and left guard at certain points in the season, and other first-round pick Stephone Anthony finished his rookie season with 112 tackles, one sack, one interception, and two forced fumbles. He had two scores, both coming against the Carolina Panthers and led all rookies in tackles. Second-round pick Hau&#x27;oli Kikaha had 4 sacks. Canadian football star Delvin Breaux, who was signed in the off-season, led the Saints struggling secondary with 3 interceptions and 19 pass deflections. Drew Brees also tied the NFL record for touchdown passes in a game with 7, coming against the New York Giants.

The Saints finished with a 7–9 record for the third consecutive season, their offense finished first in the NFL in yards per game (426.0), second in points per game (29.3), and third in yards per play (6.2). Brees led the NFL in passing yards with 5,208. However the defense yet again struggled mightily, as they were allowed the 2nd most points per game (28.4) and 6th most yards per game (375.4) while being tied for 2nd worst in yards per play allowed (6.0).

Despite an 0–2 start to the season, the Saints proceeded to win their next 8 games en route to an 11–5 finish, winning their first NFC South title since 2011. The Saints&#x27; turnaround was largely attributable to their draft, where they drafted cornerback Marshon Lattimore, offensive tackle Ryan Ramczyk, safety Marcus Williams, and running back Alvin Kamara. It is widely considered one of the best draft classes in NFL history. The defense drastically improved, as they allowed just 20.4 points per game while finishing third in the league with 20 interceptions. The offense continued to be excellent, finishing second in yards per game (391.2) and fourth in points per game (28.0).

In the wild card round, the Saints defeated the Carolina Panthers in the wild-card round, 31–26. However, in the divisional round, the Saints lost 29–24 to the Minnesota Vikings after the Vikings completed the Minneapolis Miracle. The Minneapolis Miracle was a stunning finish in which Vikings quarterback Case Keenum completed a pass towards the sideline to Stefon Diggs, then Marcus Williams missed a tackle and Diggs was able to run to the end zone for a 61-yard touchdown with no time left on the clock.

On March 15, 2018, the Saints&#x27; owner Tom Benson died from flu at the age of 90 after he was hospitalized on February 16, 2018. Benson&#x27;s wife Gayle Benson succeeded him as the owner of the Saints and the NBA&#x27;s New Orleans Pelicans.

In the 2018 season, the Saints finished with a 13–3 record and won the NFC South. The Saints defeated the Philadelphia Eagles 20–14 in the Divisional Round. The Saints fell to the Los Angeles Rams 26–23 in overtime in the NFC Championship in a game that had a controversial ending to regulation.

In the 2019 season, the Saints finished with a 13–3 record and won the NFC South. The Saints lost 26–20 in overtime to the Minnesota Vikings in the Wild Card Round.

In the 2020 season, the Saints won the NFC South with a 12–4 record. In the Wild Card Round, they defeated the Chicago Bears 21–9. In the Divisional Round, they fell to their NFC South rivals, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, 30–20. The loss was Drew Brees&#x27;s final game.

Following Drew Brees&#x27;s retirement, the Saints had a revolving door at quarterback in the 2021 season with Trevor Siemian, Jameis Winston, Taysom Hill, and Ian Book starting over the course of the year. In the 2021 season, the Saints finished 9–8 and missed the postseason.

On January 25, 2022, Sean Payton announced to the team that he was stepping away as head coach after 15 seasons with the team. During his tenure as head coach, the Saints went 152–89 in the regular season and 9–8 in the postseason.

==== Dennis Allen years (2022–2024) ====
The team promoted defensive coordinator, Dennis Allen to head coach on February 8, 2022.

On November 14, 2022, after a 3–7 start, disappointed Saints fans started a petition on change.org, asking to relieve Dennis Allen of his duties. The Saints finished the 2022 season with a 7–10 mark and missed the postseason. Allen would maintain his head coaching position into the start of the 2023 season.

During the 2023 season, The Saints brought in a new quarterback in Derek Carr hoping that he would solidify the position. Dennis Allen and the Saints had one of the easiest schedules in the league, but finished with a 9–8 record missing the playoffs after a 3rd straight season.

Dennis Allen was fired on November 4, 2024, following a 23–22 loss to division rivals Carolina Panthers and a 2–7 start.

==Logos and uniforms==
Black, along with old gold and white, has always been one of the team colors, but it was not the first choice of original majority owner John W. Mecom Jr. His preference was for Mecom blue, a medium shade which was used by all of his other investments. The NFL office, however, informed him that his proposed combination too closely resembled that worn by the San Diego Chargers. Although the Chargers were members of the AFL, the older league did not want to offend its soon-to-be partner so soon after the merger. Mecom settled on black as the primary color as a nod to his financial involvement in the petroleum industry. &quot;Black gold&quot; is a term synonymous with oil. Although the Pittsburgh Steelers—who played a few home games in New Orleans during their early years to avoid conflict with the Pittsburgh Panthers football team—have long used black and gold as their colors, their shade of gold more closely resembles yellow, making the Saints black and gold compatible with the rest of the NFL.

Except for minor modifications, the Saints&#x27; logo and uniforms have basically remained the same since the club debuted in 1967. The team&#x27;s logo is a fleur-de-lis (a symbol of the City of New Orleans and of France&#x27;s Royal Family, which included the House of Bourbon), while its uniform design consists of gold helmets, gold pants, and either black or white jerseys. Minor changes to the uniform stripes and trim have been made throughout the years. The team wore black helmets during the 1969 preseason, but NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle barred the Saints from using the helmets during the regular season, since Mecom did not notify the league office of the change. Black helmets were not introduced until 2022, after the NFL repealed its &quot;one-helmet rule&quot; previously enforced in 2013.

The Saints predominantly wore white at home when the club played at Tulane Stadium from 1967 through 1974 (except in 1969 and 1970), forcing opponents to suffer in their darker jerseys in the subtropical climate of New Orleans. When the surface at Tulane Stadium switched from natural grass to PolyTurf in 1971, field temperatures became hotter still. In Archie Manning&#x27;s first game, in the 1971 season opener against the Los Angeles Rams, temperatures on the field reached as high as . The heavily favored Rams wilted in the stifling heat, and the Saints claimed their first-ever victory over their NFC West rivals, 24–20, on Manning&#x27;s one-yard quarterback sneak on the last play of the game.

The Saints switched to white pants in 1975, coinciding with the team&#x27;s move from Tulane Stadium to the Superdome, and have worn white at home numerous times since then. One year later, they started to wear black pants with their white jerseys, a move influenced by coach Hank Stram, who introduced red pants to the Kansas City Chiefs&#x27; uniforms in 1968. In an October 3, 1976, home game against the Houston Oilers, Hank Stram used the Saints&#x27; road uniforms, the white jerseys and black pants. The Saints lost that game 31–26. During the 1981–82 seasons (Bum Phillips&#x27; first two seasons as coach), the team wore white jerseys with black pants at home, but reverted to the black jerseys and white pants for 1983. They reverted to wearing gold pants with both their black and white jerseys in 1986 under new coach Jim E. Mora. From 1986 through 1995, the sleeves of the jerseys and sides of the pants featured a logo with a fleur-de-lis inside an outline of the state of Louisiana (with the location of New Orleans marked with a star in the state outline). The logo replaced the striping pattern that had been on the uniforms since the team&#x27;s inception; save for color variations, the striping pattern was similar to that used by the Washington Redskins (until 1979), Green Bay Packers (until 1997), and Cleveland Browns (until 2014), which is likely why the change was made. That logo was removed in 1996 and replaced with a fleur-de-lis on both the sleeves and sides of the pants.

From 1996 through 1998, the Saints returned to gold numbers on both the white and black jerseys, but complaints about the numbers on the white jerseys being too difficult to read forced the numbers on the white jerseys to be changed to black in 1999. The Saints wore black pants with a wide gold stripe with their white jerseys in 1999, but following a 3–13 season and the dismissal of coach Mike Ditka, the black pants were mothballed by new coach Jim Haslett.

===2000s===
In 2000, the Saints won their first playoff game as they hosted the St. Louis Rams, and after having a better road record than home record, they wore their white jerseys, and won 31–28 over the defending champion Rams. The defining play of the game came with the Saints clinging to a three-point lead with minutes to play. The Saints punted to the Rams&#x27; Az-Zahir Hakim (who would play one season for the Saints in 2005), who fumbled the punt deep in Rams&#x27; territory. Brian Milne recovered for the Saints, who then ran out the clock to preserve the victory.

In 2001, they wore their white jerseys in the first six home games. During that same year, they primarily wore black pants with both their white and black jerseys. They became the first NFL team to wear all-black uniforms in a Week 5 road game against the Carolina Panthers, and again in weeks 16 and 17 in home games against the Washington Redskins and San Francisco 49ers; the Saints were outscored 78–10 in the final two contests to end a 7–9 campaign.

In 2002, the Saints wore black pants with their white jerseys (except for the final road game, a 20–13 loss in Cincinnati when they went back to the gold pants), and gold pants with their black jerseys, a gold alternate jersey, and a 1967-style throwback uniform, complete with an accurate 1967-era helmet which featured a larger fleur-de-lis, a darker shade of gold and grey facemasks. But one season later, they stopped using the alternates and again reverted to wearing gold pants with both their black and white jerseys.

The team introduced a gold alternate jersey (worn with the black pants) during a December 15, 2002, game versus the Minnesota Vikings, a 32–31 loss, but have never worn them since then. Because of the metallic gold&#x27;s bright color, the gold jerseys were considered the &quot;light&quot; jersey in the game, so the Vikings wore their purple home jerseys as the &quot;dark&quot; colored team. One team must wear &quot;dark&quot; and one team must wear &quot;light&quot;, this was done because of black &amp; white t.v. broadcasts so viewers could tell the teams apart. The only exception being if both teams are wearing throwback uniforms, such as Thanksgiving Classic games. From 2003 through 2007, the New England Patriots had a &quot;light&quot; jersey (their alternate, a bright metallic silver) that is not white in which the other team would wear their colored, or &quot;dark&quot; jerseys against them since the third jersey rule was implemented in the NFL in 2002.

The Saints also introduced a 1967-style throwback uniform in a 23–20 win on December 1, 2002, against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. This uniform was not worn again until a 40–33 win against the Houston Texans on September 25, 2011, and also on November 6, 2011, against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in a 27–16 Saints win. However, the 2011 throwbacks use the current helmet, meaning the shades of gold on the helmet and jersey do not match. This uniform was brought back on December 4, 2016, a 28–13 loss to the Detroit Lions, in commemoration of the franchise&#x27;s 50th season. It was then shelved for five seasons before returning on November 21, 2022, against the Los Angeles Rams.

In 2006, to honor their return to Louisiana, the Saints wore a patch on their uniforms with an outline of the State of Louisiana with a fleur-de-lis superimposed, similar to the logo from the 1980s.

The Saints originally planned to wear white jerseys at home for the 2006 season, but during the season, the players voted to wear the black jerseys at home after the second game. Since the team had informed the NFL office that they planned to wear white jerseys at home, each of the Saints&#x27; remaining home opponents would have to agree to New Orleans&#x27; request. The Atlanta Falcons, Tampa Bay Buccaneers and Cincinnati Bengals did not agree to the switch, forcing the Saints to wear white jerseys for those games.

Starting in week 13 of the 2006 season, the Saints wore black pants with the black jerseys against the San Francisco 49ers (restoring them after a four-season absence), and in a Week 16 game in The Meadowlands against the New York Giants (a 30–7 Saints win), the Saints wore the black pants with their road white jerseys. The Saints later stuck with the black pants in their 2006 playoff run.

Since 2008, the Saints have worn white jerseys at home for preseason games and early regular-season home games.

In 2009, the Saints wore the black pants only once, beating St. Louis 28–23. They wore the white jerseys/gold pants combination during the Super Bowl XLIV victory over the Indianapolis Colts. In 2012 and 2014, the Saints wore black pants 12 times and wore gold pants 4 times. In 2013, gold pants were used only 7 times (including playoffs). After 2015, a season in which the gold pants were donned 10 times, the Saints only wore them sporadically in the regular season, though they were still used regularly in the preseason.

Prior to the 2016 season, the NFL introduced the Color Rush program, and the Saints&#x27; version is a mixture of different uniform designs from earlier eras. White jersey tops featured old gold numbers with black trim along with gold and black sleeve stripes (a nod to the team&#x27;s late 1960s uniforms). Complementing the uniforms were white pants (inspired from the 1975–85 look) and all-white socks. The Saints first wore the uniform during Week 11 of that season against the Carolina Panthers on the road, and was worn on the road two more times thereafter. Its first home appearance came in Week 11 of the 2018 season against the Philadelphia Eagles; the Saints were forced to wear the white uniforms at home after head coach Sean Payton lost a bet with Eagles coach Doug Pederson during a charity golf event in the offseason.

In 2019, a variation of the all-white Color Rush look was unveiled during the Week 6 game against the Jacksonville Jaguars. The Saints wore their current white uniforms, but paired them with white pants minus any striping (an inverse of their black pants). During the regular season, New Orleans went undefeated (8–0) while wearing either all-white uniform. As a result, they opted to wear the new all-white look at home during the Wild Card Round against the Minnesota Vikings. However, the Saints&#x27; luck finally ran out, losing in overtime 26–20. On December 24, 2022, the Saints wore another variation of the all-white uniform, this time wearing black socks at the Cleveland Browns. The plain white pants were then paired with the black uniform on January 8, 2023, against the Carolina Panthers, a look last seen in the 1985 season.

In 2022, the Saints unveiled an alternate black helmet, featuring a gold fleur-de-lis on each side and a triangle pattern of tiny gold fleur-de-lis logos. The helmets are worn with the Color Rush uniforms. The black helmets made its official regular season debut in an NFL London Game at Tottenham Hotspur Stadium against the Minnesota Vikings on October 2, 2022.

==Stadium==

Caesars Superdome is the Saints&#x27; home stadium. It has a listed seating capacity of 76,468 (expanded) or 73,208 (not expanded). The Saints own a perfect record there against the Houston Texans (2–0), but a winless one against the Baltimore Ravens (0–2).

==Rivalries==
===Divisional===
====Atlanta Falcons====

The Saints&#x27; oldest rival are the Atlanta Falcons, both teams were the original two NFL franchises along the southern coast of the United States in the late 1960s. Originally both teams were created as part of the NFC West until the league&#x27;s realignment in 2002. The frequent divisional matchups and constant tensions between the two teams has fueled a long-standing rivalry between both cities. As of the 2024 season, both teams are tied at 56–56, but the Saints lead the regular season record, 56–55. The two clubs joined the NFL within a year of each other as expansion teams and have played each other twice a season since the Saints joined the league in 1967.

====Tampa Bay Buccaneers====

Ever since the early 2000s, the Saints have had a developing rivalry with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who have been part of the NFC South with the Saints since 2002, and the Saints lead the overall series, 40–25.

The teams actually played each other quite often as non-division rivals. Between 1977 and 2001, there were only five years in which the teams did not play. This includes 12 years in a row from 1981 to 1992 – all as a result of the scheduling formulas in place prior to 2002 (this remains a record for most consecutive years in which two teams not from the same division met each other).

The Saints won 13 of 20 games as non-division opponents. Since becoming division rivals, the Saints have the edge in the series, winning 16 games to the Bucs&#x27; 10.

One notable pre-division game is a 1977 matchup that resulted in Tampa Bay&#x27;s first win in franchise history coming against New Orleans after previously starting out 0–26 overall.

On January 17, 2021, the two teams faced off in the playoffs for the first time in their rivalry history with Tampa Bay winning 30–20, despite New Orleans beating Tampa Bay in both regular season meetings.

====Carolina Panthers====

The Saints and the Carolina Panthers have been division rivals since Carolina joined the league as an expansion franchise in 1995, first in the NFC West and then in the NFC South since 2002.

Carolina defeated New Orleans on the road every year from 2002 to 2008, a streak of seven seasons. Notable games include Carolina&#x27;s 19–7 home victory in 1996 that sparked Saints head coach Jim Mora&#x27;s infamous &quot;Diddley Poo&quot; rant and resignation from the team, Carolina&#x27;s 10–6 win in the 2002 season finale at the Superdome to knock the Saints out of the playoffs, and the emotional 2005 season opener at Carolina where the Saints won 23–20 in the face of Hurricane Katrina and an eventual 3–13 season.

In their last game in the 2014 NFL season, a fight between players broke out in the end zone and spilled out into the tunnel entrance after a Cam Newton touchdown, with Panther&#x27;s tight end Brandon Williams getting ejected and both teams receiving offsetting penalties. The Panthers won the contest 41–10, with early turnovers by the Saints being a factor in the blowout.

On January 7, 2018, the two teams met in the NFL playoffs for the first time in the wild-card round. It was the first playoff game between NFC South teams since the division&#x27;s formation in 2002. The Saints beat the Panthers 31–26, thus eliminating Carolina. As of the 2023 season, the Saints lead the all-time series 31–28.

===Conference===
====Minnesota Vikings====

The Saints have developed a strong postseason rivalry with the Minnesota Vikings as they have met in many consequential regular-season and playoff games, including the historic Minneapolis Miracle. As of the 2024 season, the Vikings lead the overall series 25–13 with a 4–1 record in the playoffs.

====Los Angeles Rams====

The Saints and the Los Angeles Rams once shared a fierce divisional rivalry as the Saints played in the NFC West until the league&#x27;s realignment in 2002. Animosity resurged between the two teams during the 2010s after the Rams had lured Saints&#x27; controversial defensive coordinator Gregg Williams in 2012, shortly before Williams and Saints&#x27; head coach Sean Payton would be implicated in the infamous Bountygate Scandal. Both teams had thrown insults towards one another in the media, most notably during the controversial 2018 NFC Championship Game, in which a critical pass to Saints&#x27; receiver Tommylee Lewis was illegally broken up by Rams&#x27; cornerback Nickell Robey-Coleman, though no flag was thrown, enraging the Saints for the blown call. Saints&#x27; receiver Michael Thomas expressed his anger towards the Rams and in regards to the no-call to the media following the game. As of the 2024 season, the teams are tied 1–1 in the postseason, but the Rams lead the all-time series 45–35.

==Statistics==
===Season-by-season records===
===Record vs. opponents===
|-
| Jacksonville Jaguars || 5 || 3 || 0 || || L 24–31 || October 19, 2023 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Seattle Seahawks || 10 || 8 || 0 || || W 39–32 || October 9, 2022 || Seattle, Washington || 0–2 postseason
| Buffalo Bills || 7 || 5 || 0 || || L 31–6 || November 25, 2021 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Baltimore / Indianapolis Colts || 10 || 5 || 0 || || W 38–27 || October 29, 2023 || Indianapolis, Indiana || 1–0 postseason
| Tampa Bay Buccaneers || 40 || 27 || 0 || || L 19–27 || January 5, 2025 || Tampa, Florida || 0–1 postseason
| Houston Texans || 3 || 3 || 0 || || L 13–20 || October 15, 2023 || Houston, Texas ||
| Chicago Bears || 19 || 15 || 0 || || W 24–17 || November 5, 2023 || New Orleans, Louisiana || 1–2 postseason
| Pittsburgh Steelers || 9 || 8 || 0 || || L 10–20 || November 13, 2022 || Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania ||
| Detroit Lions || 14 || 13 || 1 || || L 28–33 || December 3, 2023 || New Orleans, Lousisiana || 1–0 postseason
| New York Jets || 8 || 6 || 0 || || W 30–9 || December 12, 2021 || East Rutherford, New Jersey ||
| Carolina Panthers || 32 || 29 || 0 || || L 22–23 || November 3, 2024 || Charlotte, North Carolina || 1–0 postseason
| St. Louis / Phoenix / Arizona Cardinals || 16 || 16 || 0 || || L 34–42 || October 20, 2022 || Glendale, Arizona || 1–0 postseason
| Atlanta Falcons || 56 || 56 || 0 || || W 20–17 || November 10, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana || 0–1 postseason
| Oakland / Los Angeles / Las Vegas Raiders || 7 || 8 || 1 || || L 10–25 || December 29, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Cincinnati Bengals || 7 || 8 || 0 || || L 26–30 || October 16, 2022 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Miami Dolphins || 6 || 7 || 0 || || L 3–20 || December 27, 2021 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| San Diego / Los Angeles Chargers || 6 || 8 || 0 || || L 8–26 || October 28, 2024 || Los Angeles, California ||
| New York Giants || 16 || 17 || 0 || || W 14–11 || December 8, 2024 || East Rutherford, New Jersey ||
| St. Louis / Los Angeles Rams || 35 || 45 || 0 || || L 14–21 || December 1, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana || 1–1 postseason
| Houston Oilers / Tennessee Titans || 9 || 7 || 1 || || W 16–15 || September 10, 2023 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Dallas Cowboys || 14 || 18 || 0 || || W 44–19 || September 15, 2024 || Arlington, Texas ||
| Kansas City Chiefs || 5 || 8 || 0 || || L 13–26 || October 7, 2024 || Kansas City, Missouri ||
| Philadelphia Eagles || 16 || 20 || 0 || || L 12–15 || September 22, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana || 3–1 postseason
| Washington Redskins / Commanders || 11 || 18 || 0 || || L 19–20 || December 15, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Green Bay Packers || 10 || 19 || 0 || || L 0–34 || December 23, 2024 || Green Bay, Wisconsin ||
| San Francisco 49ers || 27 || 50 || 2 || || L 0–13 || November 27, 2022 || Santa Clara, California || 0–1 postseason
| Minnesota Vikings || 12 || 25 || 0 || || L 19–27 || November 12, 2023 || Minneapolis, Minnesota || 1–4 postseason
| New England Patriots || 6 || 10 || 0 || || W 34–0 || October 8, 2023 || Foxborough, Massachusetts ||
| Cleveland Browns || 7 || 13 || 0 || || W 35–14 || November 17, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Baltimore Ravens || 2 || 6 || 0 || || L 27–13 || November 7, 2022 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
| Denver Broncos || 3 || 10 || 0 || || L 10–33 || October 17, 2024 || New Orleans, Louisiana ||
! Total !! 417 !! 480 !! 5 !! !! colspan=&quot;4&quot;|
! Total including playoffs !! 427 !! 493 !! 5 !! !! colspan=&quot;4&quot;|
===Single-game records===
* Passing yards: 510 Drew Brees (November 19, 2006, vs Cincinnati Bengals)
* Passing yards per attempt: 16.1 Drew Brees (November 30, 2009, vs New England Patriots)
* Passing touchdowns: 7 Drew Brees (November 1, 2015, vs New York Giants) T – NFL record
* Passer rating: 158.3 Drew Brees (November 30, 2009, vs New England Patriots) T – NFL record
* Consecutive pass completions: 23 Drew Brees (December 16/22, 2019, vs. Indianapolis Colts and Tennessee Titans)
* Rushing yards: 206 George Rogers (September 4, 1983, vs St. Louis Cardinals)
* Rushing touchdowns: 6 Alvin Kamara (December 25, 2020, vs Minnesota Vikings) T – NFL record
* Receptions: 16 Michael Thomas (September 9, 2018, vs Tampa Bay Buccaneers)
* Receptions, postseason game: 15 Darren Sproles (January 14, 2012, at San Francisco 49ers)
* Receiving yards: 211 Michael Thomas (November 4, 2018, vs Los Angeles Rams)
* Receiving touchdowns: 4 Joe Horn (December 14, 2003, vs New York Giants)
* Punt return yards: 176 Reggie Bush (October 6, 2008, vs Minnesota Vikings)
* Kickoff return yards: 304 Tyrone Hughes (October 23, 1994, vs Los Angeles Rams) NFL record
* Kickoff return &amp; punt return yards: 347 Tyrone Hughes (October 23, 1994, vs Los Angeles Rams) NFL record
* Passes intercepted: 3 Sammy Knight (September 9, 2001, at Buffalo Bills)
* Longest interception return: 99 yards Darren Sharper (October 4, 2009, vs New York Jets)
* Yards from scrimmage: 237 Deuce McAllister (November 16, 2003, vs Atlanta Falcons)
* All-purpose yards: 356 Michael Lewis (October 13, 2002, vs Washington Redskins)
* Longest field goal: 63 yards Tom Dempsey (November 8, 1970, vs Detroit Lions)
* Field goals: 6 Tom Dempsey (November 16, 1969, at New York Giants)
* Total touchdowns: 6 Alvin Kamara (December 25, 2020, vs Minnesota Vikings) T – NFL record
* Points scored: 36 Alvin Kamara (December 25, 2020, vs Minnesota Vikings)
* Points scored, team: 62 (October 23, 2011, vs Indianapolis Colts)
* Sacks: 4.0 many times, most recently Cameron Jordan, (November 28, 2019, vs Atlanta Falcons)
* Margin of victory: 62–7 (October 23, 2011, vs Indianapolis Colts)
* First downs: 40 (November 10, 2013, vs Dallas Cowboys) NFL record

===Super Bowl appearance(s)===
===Single-season records===
* Passing attempts: 673 Drew Brees (2016)
* Passing completions: 471 Drew Brees (2016)
* Passing completion percentage: 74.4 Drew Brees (2018) – NFL record
* Passing yards: 5,476 Drew Brees (2011)
* Passing touchdowns: 46 Drew Brees (2011)
* Passing interceptions: 22 Aaron Brooks (2001), Drew Brees (2010)
* Passer rating: 116.3 Drew Brees (2019)
* Rushing attempts: 378 George Rogers (1981)
* Rushing yards: 1,674 George Rogers (1981)
* Rushing touchdowns: 16 Alvin Kamara (2020)
* Receptions: 149 Michael Thomas (2019) – NFL record
* Receiving yards: 1,725 Michael Thomas (2019)
* Receiving touchdowns: 16 Jimmy Graham (2013)
* Quarterback sacks: 17 Pat Swilling (1991) and La&#x27;Roi Glover (2000)
* Passes intercepted: 10 Dave Whitsell (1967)
* Pass interception return yards: 376 Darren Sharper (2009) – NFL record
* Pass interceptions returned for touchdowns: 3 Darren Sharper (2009)
* Field goals attempts: 41 Tom Dempsey (1969)
* Field goals made: 32 Wil Lutz (2019)
* Points: 147 John Kasay (2011)
* Total touchdowns: 21 Alvin Kamara (2020) 
* Punt return yards: 625 Michael Lewis (2002)
* All-purpose yards: 2,696 Darren Sproles (2011) – NFL record
* Yards from scrimmage: 2,157 Deuce McAllister (2003)
* Points scored (team): 547 (2011)

===Career records===
* Passing attempts: 8,742 Drew Brees (2006–2020)
* Passing completions: 6,017 Drew Brees (2006–2020)
* Passing yards: 68,010 Drew Brees (2006–2020)
* Passing touchdowns: 491 Drew Brees (2006–2020)
* Passer rating: 101.5 Drew Brees (2006–2020)
* Passing interceptions: 190 Drew Brees (2006–2020)
* Rushing attempts: 1,543 Alvin Kamara (2017–2024)
* Rushing yards: 6,779 Alvin Kamara (2017–2024)
* Rushing touchdowns: 60 Alvin Kamara (2017–2024)
* Receptions: 711 Marques Colston (2006–2015)
* Receiving yards: 9,759 Marques Colston (2006–2015)
* Receiving touchdowns: 72 Marques Colston (2006–2015) 
* Quarterback sacks: 123 Rickey Jackson (1981–1993)
* Passes intercepted: 37 Dave Waymer (1980–1989)
* Field goal attempts: 389 Morten Andersen (1982–1994)
* Field goals made: 302 Morten Andersen (1982–1994)
* Extra points made: 412 Morten Andersen (1982–1994)
* Points: 1,318 Morten Andersen (1982–1994)
* Total touchdowns: 86 Alvin Kamara (2017–2024)
* Pass interception return yards: 621 Tom Myers (1972–1981)
* Pass interceptions returned for touchdowns: 4 Sammy Knight (1997–2002)
* Punt return yards: 1,482 Michael Lewis (2001–2006)
* Punt return touchdowns: 4 Reggie Bush (2006–2010)
* Kickoff return yards: 5,903 Michael Lewis (2001–2006)
* Longest punt: 81 Tom McNeill (1967–1969)
* Games: 228 Drew Brees (2006–2020)

==Notable players==
===Pro Football Hall of Famers===
Until the selection of Rickey Jackson in 2010, there had been no players in the Hall of Fame who earned their credentials primarily as Saints; the others were chosen for their work with previous teams. Jim Finks’ tenure as Saints general manager was a significant factor in his selection.
When offensive tackle Willie Roaf was selected in 2012, he became the second Saint to earn his Hall of Fame credentials mostly while in New Orleans. Roaf was a member of the NFL&#x27;s All-Decade team of the &#x27;90s. Morten Andersen was selected in 2017, becoming the third former player inducted primarily for their accomplishments in New Orleans. Andersen was only the second full-time placekicker inducted into the Hall of Fame (the other was Jan Stenerud in 1991). Sam Mills in 2022 became the 4th former player inducted primarily for his accomplishments in New Orleans.

===Louisiana Sports Hall of Fame===
===Pro Bowl players===
The following Saints players have been named to at least one Pro Bowl:
* QB Drew Brees, Archie Manning
* FB Tony Baker
* RB Deuce McAllister, Dalton Hilliard, Rueben Mayes, George Rogers, Chuck Muncie, Andy Livingston, Mark Ingram II, Alvin Kamara
* LT Jammal Brown, William Roaf, Jermon Bushrod, Terron Armstead
* LG Brad Edelman, Jake Kupp, Carl Nicks, Ben Grubbs, Andrus Peat
* C LeCharles Bentley, Joel Hilgenberg, Jonathan Goodwin, Max Unger, Erik McCoy
* RG Jahri Evans, Larry Warford
* RT Jon Stinchcomb
* TE Hoby Brenner, Henry Childs, Jimmy Graham, Jared Cook
* WR Joe Horn, Eric Martin, Wes Chandler, Michael Thomas
* DE Will Smith, Joe Johnson, Wayne Martin, Renaldo Turnbull, Bruce Clark, Cameron Jordan
* DT Dave Rowe, La&#x27;Roi Glover
* LB Jonathan Vilma, Mark Fields, Keith Mitchell, Sam Mills, Vaughan Johnson, Pat Swilling, Rickey Jackson, Renaldo Turnbull, Demario Davis
* CB Tyrone Hughes, Eric Allen, Bennie Thompson, Dave Waymer, Dave Whitsell, Marshon Lattimore
* SS Roman Harper, Sammy Knight, Tom Myers, J. T. Gray
* FS Darren Sharper
* K Morten Andersen, Tom Dempsey, Wil Lutz
* P Mitch Berger, Brian Hansen, Thomas Morstead
* RS Michael Lewis, Deonte Harty, Rashid Shaheed
* ST Fred McAfee

Two Saints head coaches have participated in the Pro Bowl, Tom Fears in 1970 (1969 season) and Sean Payton in 2007 (2006 season) and 2018 (2017 season).

===Super Bowl MVPs===
===Ring of Honor===
On October 9, 2013, the Saints announced the creation of a Ring of Honor to commemorate former players, administrators and individuals with significant contributions to the franchise. Their names are displayed along the Caesars Superdome&#x27;s Terrace Level fascia. The first three honorees were Archie Manning, Rickey Jackson and Willie Roaf and were officially inducted during halftime of the Saints&#x27; game against the Dallas Cowboys on November 10, 2013.


===45th Anniversary Team===
To commemorate the club&#x27;s 45th anniversary, the New Orleans Saints Hall of Fame selected its All-45th Anniversary Team. The Hall of Fame updates its all-time team every five years, and this latest squad of head coach and players features four standouts from the club&#x27;s roster at the time of selection: QB Drew Brees, G Jahri Evans, and DE Will Smith as well as head coach Sean Payton. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

The players are chosen in a vote by the Hall of Fame media selection committee, which includes local and regional media members who cover the Saints now or did so in the past. The All-45th Anniversary Team is as follows, with an asterisk (*) designating those players who have already been inducted into the Hall of Fame:

Offense
* WR – Eric Martin* (1985–1993)
* WR – Joe Horn* (2000–2006)
* C – John Hill* (1975–1984)
* G – Jim Dombrowski* (1986–1996)
* G – Jahri Evans* (2006–2016)
* OT – Willie Roaf* (1993–2001)
* OT – Stan Brock* (1980–1992)
* TE – Hoby Brenner* (1981–1993)
* QB – Drew Brees* (2006–2020)
* RB – Dalton Hilliard* (1986–1993)
* RB – Deuce McAllister (2001–2009)

Specialists
* K – Morten Andersen* (1982–1994)
* P – Tommy Barnhardt (1987, 1989–1994, 1999)
* ST – Fred McAfee* (1991–1993, 2000–2006)
* KR/PR – Michael Lewis* (2001–2006)

Defense
* DE – Wayne Martin (1989–1999)
* DE – Jim Wilks (1981–1993)
* DE – Joe Johnson* (1994–1998, 2000–2001)
* DE – Will Smith (2004–2012)
* LB – Sam Mills* (1986–1994)
* LB – Vaughan Johnson* (1986–1993)
* LB – Rickey Jackson* (1981–1993)
* LB – Pat Swilling* (1986–1992)
* CB – Dave Waymer* (1980–1989)
* CB – Mike McKenzie (2004–2009)
* S – Tommy Myers (1972–1981)
* S – Sammy Knight (1997–2002)

Coach
* Sean Payton (2006–2021)

 Unanimous selection

===New Orleans Saints Hall of Fame===
1 2005 induction ceremonies postponed to October 27, 2006, due to Hurricane Katrina

==Staff==
===Coaches===
===Current staff===
==Joe Gemelli Fleur-De-Lis Award==
The &quot;Joe Gemelli Fleur-De-Lis Award&quot; is given yearly to a person who has contributed to the betterment of the New Orleans Saints organization. The award is named for Joe Gemelli, a New Orleans clothing store owner and an active supporter of sports in the city, who was known as the team&#x27;s biggest fan.

* 1989: Al Hirt
* 1990: Joe Gemelli
* 1991: Dave Dixon
* 1992: Charlie Kertz
* 1993: Wayne Mack
* 1994: Erby Aucoin
* 1995: Aaron Broussard
* 1996: Marie Knutson
* 1997: Angela Hill
* 1998: Joe Impastato
* 1999: Frank Wilson
* 2000: Bob Remy
* 2001: Peter &quot;Champ&quot; Clark
* 2002: Dean Kleinschmidt
* 2003: Jim Fast
* 2004: Bob Roesler
* 2005–06: Bernard &quot;Buddy&quot; Diliberto (2005 induction ceremonies postponed to October 27, 2006, due to Hurricane Katrina)
* 2007: New Orleans Saints fans
* 2008: Barra Birrcher
* 2009: Jerry Romig
* 2010: Dan &quot;Chief&quot; Simmons and Glennon &quot;Silky&quot; Powell
* 2011: Bruce Miller
* 2012: Jim Henderson
* 2013: Peter Finney
* 2014: Al Nastasi and Tony Piazza
* 2015: Doug Thornton
* 2016: Hokie Gajan
* 2017: Jay Romig
* 2018: Michael C. Hebert
* 2019: Gov. Kathleen Blanco
* 2020: Marco Garcia
*2023: Steve Paretti and Bob Parkinson


==Current roster==
==Cheerleaders==
The Saints Cheer Krewe (formerly Saintsations) are the cheerleading squad for the Saints. A cheerleading squad has existed since the franchise&#x27;s founding. The squad was formerly known as the Saintsations from 1987 to 2021. The current name was adopted in 2021.

==Radio and television==
The Saints&#x27; flagship station is WWL (870 AM/105.3 FM), one of the oldest radio stations in the city of New Orleans and one of the nation&#x27;s most powerful as a clear-channel station with 50,000 watts of power. Longtime WWL-TV reporter and anchor Mike Hoss is the play-by-play announcer, with former Saints running back Deuce McAllister as color commentator. Hoss succeeded former Saints guard Zach Strief when Strief was named to the Saints&#x27; coaching staff in the spring of 2021.

Strief succeeded longtime play-by-play announcer Jim Henderson in 2018, and McAllister succeeded another former Saints running back, Hokie Gajan, in the role after Gajan&#x27;s death on April 11, 2016, from liposarcoma. Henderson was the play-by-play announcer for Saints radio broadcasts continuously from 1993 to 2017, and previously held the position from 1986 to 1989 after serving as a color commentator from 1981 to 1985, and again in 1992, when Dave Garrett was play-by-play announcer. Previous color commentators include former Saints players Jim Taylor (RB, 1967), Steve Stonebreaker (LB, 1967–68), Danny Abramowicz (WR, 1967–73), Archie Manning (QB, 1971–82) and Stan Brock (OT, 1980–91).

Most preseason games are televised by WVUE (Channel 8), a station which until its outright 2017 sale to Raycom Media (and subsequent sale in 2019 to Gray Television) was owned by a consortium led by Saints owner Tom Benson since mid-2008 (that consortium, now led by Gayle Benson, continues to hold a minority stake in the station). As the Fox affiliate for New Orleans, it carries the majority of Saints games; WVUE also carries a heavy complement of coach and player shows. Tim Brando and Jon Stinchcomb call the preseason games for the Saints.

Saints preseason games were previously produced by Cox Sports Television. Beginning in the 2015 season, owing to Raycom&#x27;s management of the station on behalf of Tom Benson&#x27;s ownership group, production of preseason telecasts were taken over by Raycom Sports under a new multi-year deal, and syndicated to Raycom stations and others around the team&#x27;s footprint. Regular season games are also aired on WWL-TV, the local CBS station whenever they host an AFC opponent (and games vs. NFC opponents cross-flexed from Fox to CBS) and NBC affiliate WDSU via &quot;Sunday Night Football&quot;, with the latter also syndicating &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; games for local airing from sister operation ESPN.

==See also==
* Religious symbolism in U.S. sports team names and mascots

==References==
==External links==
* New Orleans Saints at the National Football League official website
* Franchise Encyclopedia at Pro Football Reference</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="4" end="22" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="42" end="59" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="74" end="85" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="113" end="137" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="163" end="191" title="National Football Conference" label="National Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q934745" start="198" end="203" title="NFC South" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="259" end="276" title="Caesars Superdome" label="Caesars Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536237" start="289" end="303" title="Tulane Stadium" label="Tulane Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q50316573" start="347" end="364" title="John W. Mecom Jr." label="John W. Mecom Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5232990" start="366" end="377" title="David Dixon (businessman)" label="David Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="460" end="474" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583809" start="741" end="745" title="1987 New Orleans Saints season" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597695" start="799" end="803" title="2000 New Orleans Saints season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614450" start="1037" end="1048" title="2009 New Orleans Saints season" label="2009 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="1064" end="1079" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="1097" end="1115" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="1148" end="1158" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="1205" end="1218" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232990" start="1350" end="1360" title="David Dixon (businessman)" label="Dave Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745380" start="1539" end="1551" title="Pete Rozelle" label="Pete Rozelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1673" end="1684" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753926" start="1738" end="1768" title="When the Saints Go Marching In" label="When the Saints Go Marching In"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1788" end="1792" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="1977" end="1997" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q724895" start="2056" end="2072" title="Philip Hannan" label="Philip M. Hannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508632" start="2269" end="2288" title="House Majority Whip" label="House Majority Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567156" start="2304" end="2314" title="Hale Boggs" label="Hale Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q50316573" start="2431" end="2448" title="John W. Mecom Jr." label="John W. Mecom Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="2640" end="2643" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q658636" start="2664" end="2671" title="Al Hirt" label="Al Hirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514023" start="2793" end="2797" title="1967 New Orleans Saints season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235367" start="2828" end="2840" title="John Gilliam" label="John Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514397" start="2931" end="2947" title="1967 Los Angeles Rams season" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578783" start="3205" end="3209" title="1979 New Orleans Saints season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581130" start="3236" end="3240" title="1983 New Orleans Saints season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439627" start="3366" end="3377" title="Tom Dempsey" label="Tom Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573986" start="3459" end="3472" title="1970 Detroit Lions season" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q542303" start="3610" end="3621" title="Matt Prater" label="Matt Prater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656619" start="3629" end="3643" title="2013 Denver Broncos season" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579333" start="3678" end="3682" title="1980 New Orleans Saints season" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697206" start="3943" end="3947" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t" label="Aint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814941" start="4067" end="4077" title="Tom Benson" label="Tom Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194975" start="4174" end="4183" title="Jim Finks" label="Jim Finks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194796" start="4207" end="4215" title="Jim E. Mora" label="Jim Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583809" start="4335" end="4339" title="1987 New Orleans Saints season" label="12–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406048" start="4343" end="4347" title="1987 NFL season" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336879" start="4395" end="4415" title="1987 NFL strike" label="players&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610137" start="4463" end="4474" title="1990 NFL season" label="1990 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q690475" start="4525" end="4529" title="1991 NFL season" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290009" start="4653" end="4664" title="Dome Patrol" label="Dome Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q979803" start="4786" end="4797" title="1996 NFL season" label="1996 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591569" start="4840" end="4851" title="1996 New Orleans Saints season" label="3–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="5157" end="5170" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355840" start="5177" end="5187" title="Mike Ditka" label="Mike Ditka"/>
<link wikidata="Q385181" start="5395" end="5399" title="1997 NFL season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q507929" start="5404" end="5408" title="1998 NFL season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714942" start="5422" end="5436" title="1999 NFL draft" label="1999 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="5567" end="5586" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707821" start="5605" end="5624" title="Texas Longhorns football" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="5625" end="5639" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349267" start="5653" end="5667" title="Ricky Williams" label="Ricky Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909791" start="5833" end="5846" title="Bill Kuharich" label="Bill Kuharich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423491" start="5876" end="5887" title="1999 NFL season" label="1999 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594958" start="5911" end="5922" title="1999 New Orleans Saints season" label="3–13 record"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569529" start="5965" end="5976" title="Jim Haslett" label="Jim Haslett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595566" start="6058" end="6066" title="1999–2000 NFL playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597865" start="6131" end="6145" title="2000 St. Louis Rams season" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597625" start="6230" end="6247" title="2000 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292342" start="6321" end="6334" title="Randy Mueller" label="Randy Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q939802" start="6544" end="6561" title="Super Bowl XXXVII" label="Super Bowl XXXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600530" start="6571" end="6591" title="2002 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960118" start="6684" end="6688" title="2003 NFL season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602306" start="6718" end="6726" title="2003–04 NFL playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432035" start="6752" end="6763" title="2004 NFL season" label="2004 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603137" start="6787" end="6793" title="2004 New Orleans Saints season" label="Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602607" start="7152" end="7160" title="2004 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603318" start="7235" end="7249" title="2004 St. Louis Rams season" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603140" start="7259" end="7272" title="2004 New York Jets season" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603055" start="7389" end="7396" title="2004 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325351" start="7696" end="7707" title="2005 NFL season" label="2005 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604664" start="7722" end="7728" title="2005 New Orleans Saints season" label="Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="7807" end="7824" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="7885" end="7902" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325351" start="7980" end="7984" title="2005 NFL season" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604666" start="8009" end="8024" title="2005 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q375365" start="8038" end="8052" title="Giants Stadium" label="Giants Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618347" start="8116" end="8125" title="Alamodome" label="Alamodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="8129" end="8147" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460028" start="8153" end="8156" title="LSU Tigers football" label="LSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594708" start="8164" end="8177" title="Tiger Stadium (LSU)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="8181" end="8192" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414784" start="8273" end="8284" title="Sean Payton" label="Sean Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="8341" end="8359" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="8372" end="8382" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="8518" end="8539" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="8545" end="8565" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814941" start="8767" end="8777" title="Tom Benson" label="Tom Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="8819" end="8838" title="Louisiana Superdome" label="Louisiana Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="8988" end="8999" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="9006" end="9023" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605794" start="9064" end="9079" title="2006 Atlanta Falcons season" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="9234" end="9238" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="9481" end="9490" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="9495" end="9497" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751842" start="9514" end="9544" title="Wake Me Up When September Ends" label="Wake Me Up When September Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q584286" start="9561" end="9582" title="The Saints Are Coming" label="The Saints Are Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046190" start="9646" end="9650" title="ESPY" label="ESPY"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896742" start="9667" end="9688" title="Best Moment ESPY Award" label="Best Moment in Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612664" start="9738" end="9751" title="Steve Gleason" label="Steve Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q934745" start="9920" end="9929" title="NFC South" label="NFC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q934745" start="10022" end="10031" title="NFC South" label="NFC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414784" start="10059" end="10070" title="Sean Payton" label="Sean Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606802" start="10169" end="10188" title="2006 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606030" start="10198" end="10212" title="2006 Dallas Cowboys season" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606802" start="10428" end="10447" title="2006 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595121" start="10640" end="10659" title="1999 St. Louis Rams season" label="1999 St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q176843" start="10692" end="10702" title="Super Bowl XXXIV" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605960" start="11023" end="11036" title="2006 Chicago Bears season" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784597" start="11044" end="11065" title="NFC Championship Game" label="NFC Championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="11128" end="11147" title="Louisiana Superdome" label="Louisiana Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q597607" start="11246" end="11260" title="Super Bowl XLI" label="Super Bowl XLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608657" start="11270" end="11288" title="2007 Indianapolis Colts season" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609390" start="11398" end="11414" title="2007 Tennessee Titans season" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201637" start="11445" end="11461" title="Deuce McAllister" label="Deuce McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q611127" start="11531" end="11534" title="Anterior cruciate ligament" label="ACL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609247" start="11585" end="11601" title="2007 Seattle Seahawks season" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q195367" start="12138" end="12148" title="Dan Marino" label="Dan Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q542422" start="12219" end="12230" title="Lance Moore" label="Lance Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614025" start="12472" end="12490" title="2009 Indianapolis Colts season" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="12494" end="12509" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613281" start="12568" end="12583" title="2009 Atlanta Falcons season" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615990" start="12688" end="12695" title="2009–10 NFL playoffs" label="playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="12886" end="12900" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL–NFL merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582244" start="12952" end="12970" title="1985 Chicago Bears season" label="1985 Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="13011" end="13025" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q267088" start="13385" end="13396" title="Brett Favre" label="Brett Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="13442" end="13452" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="13855" end="13872" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="14181" end="14193" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="14198" end="14216" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902825" start="15057" end="15071" title="Marshawn Lynch" label="Marshawn Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="15228" end="15245" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="15338" end="15358" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="15459" end="15477" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="15502" end="15516" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="15633" end="15648" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="15658" end="15673" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="15675" end="15688" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="15694" end="15709" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="15784" end="15794" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q934745" start="15923" end="15932" title="NFC South" label="NFC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="16672" end="16688" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951527" start="16809" end="16823" title="New Orleans Saints bounty scandal" label="bounty scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414784" start="16867" end="16878" title="Sean Payton" label="Sean Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662166" start="17006" end="17018" title="Aaron Kromer" label="Aaron Kromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212821" start="17461" end="17469" title="Joe Vitt" label="Joe Vitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="18297" end="18314" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="19039" end="19055" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="19059" end="19080" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="19179" end="19193" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="19378" end="19395" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="19652" end="19671" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="20551" end="20568" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="20601" end="20614" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q934745" start="20724" end="20733" title="NFC South" label="NFC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701993" start="20763" end="20780" title="2015 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701921" start="20793" end="20808" title="2015 Atlanta Falcons season" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="20902" end="20905" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340518" start="21314" end="21322" title="Rob Ryan" label="Rob Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112571" start="21418" end="21430" title="Dennis Allen (American football)" label="Dennis Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987467" start="21470" end="21486" title="2015 NFL draft" label="2015 draft class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759561" start="21516" end="21527" title="Andrus Peat" label="Andrus Peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950871" start="21627" end="21643" title="Stephone Anthony" label="Stephone Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667205" start="21852" end="21871" title="Hau&amp;#x27;oli Kikaha" label="Hau&amp;#x27;oli Kikaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619574" start="21908" end="21921" title="Delvin Breaux" label="Delvin Breaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="22039" end="22049" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="22133" end="22148" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q25050788" start="22835" end="22840" title="2017 NFL draft" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916464" start="22872" end="22889" title="Marshon Lattimore" label="Marshon Lattimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q27899324" start="22908" end="22920" title="Ryan Ramczyk" label="Ryan Ramczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180644" start="22929" end="22944" title="Marcus Williams (safety)" label="Marcus Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="22963" end="22975" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448613" start="23351" end="23368" title="2017 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412160" start="23450" end="23455" title="Minneapolis Miracle" label="29–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448626" start="23463" end="23480" title="2017 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412160" start="23513" end="23532" title="Minneapolis Miracle" label="Minneapolis Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412160" start="23538" end="23557" title="Minneapolis Miracle" label="Minneapolis Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048309" start="23609" end="23620" title="Case Keenum" label="Case Keenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606645" start="23662" end="23674" title="Stefon Diggs" label="Stefon Diggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172339" start="24036" end="24056" title="New Orleans Pelicans" label="New Orleans Pelicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112571" start="25553" end="25565" title="Dennis Allen (American football)" label="Dennis Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886119" start="26188" end="26196" title="old gold" label="old gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="26530" end="26548" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="26775" end="26793" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="26828" end="26835" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="26844" end="26847" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="26862" end="26881" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199341" start="26977" end="27005" title="Pittsburgh Panthers football" label="Pittsburgh Panthers football"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="27338" end="27350" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="27409" end="27421" title="List of French monarchs" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="27442" end="27458" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745380" start="27718" end="27730" title="Pete Rozelle" label="Pete Rozelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536237" start="28058" end="28072" title="Tulane Stadium" label="Tulane Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="28182" end="28201" title="subtropical climate" label="subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911887" start="28284" end="28292" title="Poly-Turf" label="PolyTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q611891" start="28345" end="28359" title="Archie Manning" label="Archie Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574546" start="28417" end="28433" title="1971 Los Angeles Rams season" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="29015" end="29033" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577166" start="29103" end="29117" title="1976 Houston Oilers season" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997222" start="29263" end="29275" title="Bum Phillips" label="Bum Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194796" start="29525" end="29536" title="Jim E. Mora" label="Jim E. Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="29682" end="29691" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="29950" end="29969" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="29984" end="30001" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="30020" end="30036" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355840" start="30592" end="30602" title="Mike Ditka" label="Mike Ditka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569529" start="30649" end="30660" title="Jim Haslett" label="Jim Haslett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960108" start="30678" end="30682" title="2000 NFL season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597865" start="30743" end="30757" title="2000 St. Louis Rams season" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q208884" start="31034" end="31048" title="Az-Zahir Hakim" label="Az-Zahir Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964778" start="31152" end="31163" title="Brian Milne" label="Brian Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960112" start="31246" end="31250" title="2001 NFL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598556" start="31499" end="31516" title="2001 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599227" start="31573" end="31592" title="2001 Washington Redskins season" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599055" start="31597" end="31616" title="2001 San Francisco 49ers season" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960114" start="31703" end="31707" title="2002 NFL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632294" start="31811" end="31821" title="Paul Brown Stadium" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600271" start="32342" end="32359" title="2002 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="32932" end="32952" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785065" start="33147" end="33159" title="third jersey" label="third jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798535" start="33242" end="33259" title="throwback uniform" label="throwback uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600530" start="33308" end="33328" title="2002 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621328" start="33392" end="33406" title="2011 Houston Texans season" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622561" start="33472" end="33492" title="2011 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022393" start="33706" end="33719" title="2016 Detroit Lions season" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q110445412" start="33863" end="33879" title="2022 Los Angeles Rams season" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q385964" start="33885" end="33889" title="2006 NFL season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605794" start="34457" end="34472" title="2006 Atlanta Falcons season" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606998" start="34474" end="34494" title="2006 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605971" start="34499" end="34517" title="2006 Cincinnati Bengals season" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q375365" start="34800" end="34815" title="Giants Stadium" label="The Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606705" start="34828" end="34843" title="2006 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="35252" end="35267" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614025" start="35285" end="35303" title="2009 Indianapolis Colts season" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453958" start="35689" end="35699" title="NFL Color Rush" label="Color Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22021965" start="36122" end="36139" title="2016 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47989656" start="36278" end="36297" title="2018 Philadelphia Eagles season" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300814" start="36415" end="36428" title="Doug Pederson" label="Doug Pederson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60525856" start="36578" end="36598" title="2019 Jacksonville Jaguars season" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36908" end="36923" title="2019–20 NFL playoffs#NFC: Minnesota Vikings 26, New Orleans Saints 20 (OT)" label="Wild Card Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q60525878" start="36936" end="36953" title="2019 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q110445358" start="37148" end="37164" title="2022 Cleveland Browns season" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q110445399" start="37260" end="37277" title="2022 Carolina Panthers season" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582430" start="37303" end="37314" title="1985 New Orleans Saints season" label="1985 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530067" start="37586" end="37601" title="NFL International Series" label="NFL London Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074091" start="37605" end="37630" title="Tottenham Hotspur Stadium" label="Tottenham Hotspur Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q110445395" start="37643" end="37660" title="2022 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="37695" end="37712" title="Caesars Superdome" label="Caesars Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="37763" end="37779" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="37877" end="37891" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="37929" end="37945" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="38048" end="38063" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="38793" end="38813" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="39922" end="39939" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194796" start="40289" end="40297" title="Jim E. Mora" label="Jim Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="40432" end="40441" title="Mercedes-Benz Superdome" label="Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="40574" end="40591" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630246" start="40648" end="40663" title="2014 NFL season" label="2014 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232032" start="40816" end="40832" title="Brandon Williams (tight end)" label="Brandon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412160" start="41550" end="41569" title="Minneapolis Miracle" label="Minneapolis Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="41717" end="41733" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606609" start="41988" end="42002" title="Gregg Williams" label="Gregg Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414784" start="42064" end="42075" title="Sean Payton" label="Sean Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951527" start="42112" end="42130" title="New Orleans Saints bounty scandal" label="Bountygate Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080853" start="42234" end="42260" title="2018 NFC Championship Game" label="2018 NFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837174" start="42312" end="42326" title="Tommylee Lewis" label="Tommylee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028310" start="42376" end="42397" title="Nickell Robey-Coleman" label="Nickell Robey-Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666691" start="42488" end="42502" title="Michael Thomas (wide receiver, born 1993)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="42792" end="42812" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="42893" end="42909" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q612736" start="42962" end="42981" title="Lumen Field" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="43002" end="43015" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984507" start="43096" end="43105" title="Baltimore Colts" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="43108" end="43126" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q867160" start="43180" end="43201" title="Lucas Oil Stadium" label="Indianapolis, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="43222" end="43242" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141343" start="43296" end="43310" title="Raymond James Stadium" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="43331" end="43345" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058864" start="43398" end="43412" title="NRG Stadium" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="43418" end="43431" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="43529" end="43548" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067148" start="43602" end="43626" title="Acrisure Stadium" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="43632" end="43645" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="43744" end="43757" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="43810" end="43837" title="MetLife Stadium" label="East Rutherford, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="43843" end="43860" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q806673" start="43915" end="43940" title="Bank of America Stadium" label="Charlotte, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938063" start="43961" end="43970" title="St. Louis Cardinals (NFL)" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="43973" end="44000" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Phoenix / Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="44055" end="44072" title="State Farm Stadium" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="44093" end="44108" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="44207" end="44214" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417643" start="44217" end="44228" title="Los Angeles Raiders" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="44231" end="44248" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Las Vegas Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="44330" end="44348" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="44429" end="44443" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="44524" end="44533" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q272220" start="44536" end="44556" title="Los Angeles Chargers" label="Los Angeles Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520501" start="44608" end="44631" title="SoFi Stadium" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="44637" end="44652" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="44707" end="44734" title="MetLife Stadium" label="East Rutherford, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="44740" end="44749" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="44752" end="44768" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="44866" end="44880" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="44883" end="44899" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="44982" end="44996" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q838284" start="45053" end="45069" title="AT&amp;amp;T Stadium" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="45075" end="45093" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q544553" start="45145" end="45166" title="Arrowhead Stadium" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="45172" end="45191" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="45291" end="45323" title="Washington Redskins / Commanders" label="Washington Redskins / Commanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="45407" end="45424" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q860790" start="45479" end="45499" title="Lambeau Field" label="Green Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="45505" end="45524" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419343" start="45579" end="45602" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s Stadium" label="Santa Clara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="45623" end="45640" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929512" start="45696" end="45718" title="US Bank Stadium" label="Minneapolis, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="45739" end="45759" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q373355" start="45811" end="45836" title="Gillette Stadium" label="Foxborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="45842" end="45858" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="45941" end="45957" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="46038" end="46052" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="46310" end="46320" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="46344" end="46362" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="46398" end="46408" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="46432" end="46452" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="46478" end="46488" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="46511" end="46526" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032686" start="46560" end="46565" title="List of NFL quarterbacks who have posted a perfect passer rating" label="158.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="46566" end="46576" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="46600" end="46620" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="46672" end="46682" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="46710" end="46728" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="46733" end="46749" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101881" start="46772" end="46785" title="George Rogers (American football)" label="George Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="46854" end="46866" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="46890" end="46907" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666691" start="46941" end="46955" title="Michael Thomas (wide receiver, born 1993)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="46979" end="46999" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459456" start="47035" end="47049" title="Darren Sproles" label="Darren Sproles"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="47072" end="47091" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666691" start="47116" end="47130" title="Michael Thomas (wide receiver, born 1993)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="47153" end="47169" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180088" start="47197" end="47205" title="Joe Horn" label="Joe Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="47229" end="47244" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q555271" start="47271" end="47282" title="Reggie Bush" label="Reggie Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="47304" end="47321" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861613" start="47351" end="47364" title="Tyrone Hughes" label="Tyrone Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="47387" end="47403" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861613" start="47462" end="47475" title="Tyrone Hughes" label="Tyrone Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="47498" end="47514" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409784" start="47551" end="47563" title="Sammy Knight" label="Sammy Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="47587" end="47600" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109820" start="47642" end="47656" title="Darren Sharper" label="Darren Sharper"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="47678" end="47691" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201637" start="47721" end="47737" title="Deuce McAllister" label="Deuce McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="47761" end="47776" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832238" start="47803" end="47816" title="Michael Lewis (wide receiver)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="47839" end="47858" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439627" start="47891" end="47902" title="Tom Dempsey" label="Tom Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="47925" end="47938" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439627" start="47957" end="47968" title="Tom Dempsey" label="Tom Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="47992" end="48007" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="48031" end="48043" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="48067" end="48084" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="48121" end="48133" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="48157" end="48174" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="48224" end="48242" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651349" start="48283" end="48297" title="Cameron Jordan" label="Cameron Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="48322" end="48337" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="48387" end="48405" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="48448" end="48462" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48559" end="48569" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48604" end="48614" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48660" end="48670" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48714" end="48724" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48757" end="48767" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820027" start="48803" end="48815" title="Aaron Brooks (American football)" label="Aaron Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48824" end="48834" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="48865" end="48875" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101881" start="48907" end="48920" title="George Rogers (American football)" label="George Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101881" start="48951" end="48964" title="George Rogers (American football)" label="George Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="48997" end="49009" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666691" start="49035" end="49049" title="Michael Thomas (wide receiver, born 1993)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666691" start="49095" end="49109" title="Michael Thomas (wide receiver, born 1993)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808423" start="49144" end="49156" title="Jimmy Graham" label="Jimmy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368600" start="49188" end="49200" title="Pat Swilling" label="Pat Swilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460625" start="49212" end="49230" title="La&amp;#x27;Roi Glover" label="La&amp;#x27;Roi Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230095" start="49263" end="49276" title="Dave Whitsell" label="Dave Whitsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109820" start="49322" end="49336" title="Darren Sharper" label="Darren Sharper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109820" start="49405" end="49419" title="Darren Sharper" label="Darren Sharper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439627" start="49454" end="49465" title="Tom Dempsey" label="Tom Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248320" start="49496" end="49504" title="Wil Lutz" label="Wil Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809386" start="49526" end="49536" title="John Kasay" label="John Kasay"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="49567" end="49579" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832238" start="49613" end="49626" title="Michael Lewis (wide receiver)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459456" start="49661" end="49675" title="Darren Sproles" label="Darren Sproles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201637" start="49726" end="49742" title="Deuce McAllister" label="Deuce McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="49833" end="49843" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="49885" end="49895" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="49932" end="49942" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="49981" end="49991" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="50027" end="50037" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="50079" end="50089" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="50128" end="50140" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="50176" end="50188" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="50226" end="50238" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389622" start="50269" end="50284" title="Marques Colston" label="Marques Colston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389622" start="50322" end="50337" title="Marques Colston" label="Marques Colston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389622" start="50377" end="50392" title="Marques Colston" label="Marques Colston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645323" start="50431" end="50445" title="Rickey Jackson" label="Rickey Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230083" start="50483" end="50494" title="Dave Waymer" label="Dave Waymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q718303" start="50534" end="50549" title="Morten Andersen" label="Morten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q718303" start="50586" end="50601" title="Morten Andersen" label="Morten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q718303" start="50639" end="50654" title="Morten Andersen" label="Morten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q718303" start="50683" end="50698" title="Morten Andersen" label="Morten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="50734" end="50746" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409784" start="50867" end="50879" title="Sammy Knight" label="Sammy Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832238" start="50919" end="50932" title="Michael Lewis (wide receiver)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q555271" start="50973" end="50984" title="Reggie Bush" label="Reggie Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832238" start="51027" end="51040" title="Michael Lewis (wide receiver)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816854" start="51072" end="51083" title="Tom McNeill" label="Tom McNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="51109" end="51119" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q80404" start="51924" end="51936" title="Jan Stenerud" label="Jan Stenerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="52174" end="52182" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="52189" end="52199" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q611891" start="52201" end="52215" title="Archie Manning" label="Archie Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821813" start="52221" end="52231" title="Tony Baker (running back, born 1945)" label="Tony Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201637" start="52237" end="52253" title="Deuce McAllister" label="Deuce McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211694" start="52255" end="52270" title="Dalton Hilliard" label="Dalton Hilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377791" start="52272" end="52284" title="Rueben Mayes" label="Rueben Mayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101881" start="52286" end="52299" title="George Rogers (American football)" label="George Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967603" start="52301" end="52313" title="Chuck Muncie" label="Chuck Muncie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760953" start="52315" end="52330" title="Andy Livingston" label="Andy Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q452154" start="52332" end="52346" title="Mark Ingram II" label="Mark Ingram II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443318" start="52348" end="52360" title="Alvin Kamara" label="Alvin Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993376" start="52366" end="52378" title="Jammal Brown" label="Jammal Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q970588" start="52380" end="52392" title="William Roaf" label="William Roaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182401" start="52394" end="52408" title="Jermon Bushrod" label="Jermon Bushrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703823" start="52410" end="52425" title="Terron Armstead" label="Terron Armstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953906" start="52431" end="52443" title="Brad Edelman" label="Brad Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14951399" start="52445" end="52454" title="Jake Kupp" label="Jake Kupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658791" start="52456" end="52466" title="Carl Nicks (American football)" label="Carl Nicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885752" start="52468" end="52478" title="Ben Grubbs" label="Ben Grubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759561" start="52480" end="52491" title="Andrus Peat" label="Andrus Peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506331" start="52496" end="52513" title="LeCharles Bentley" label="LeCharles Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213563" start="52515" end="52530" title="Joel Hilgenberg" label="Joel Hilgenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809923" start="52532" end="52548" title="Jonathan Goodwin (American football)" label="Jonathan Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853084" start="52550" end="52559" title="Max Unger" label="Max Unger"/>
<link wikidata="Q61993531" start="52561" end="52571" title="Erik McCoy" label="Erik McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806153" start="52577" end="52588" title="Jahri Evans" label="Jahri Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491259" start="52590" end="52603" title="Larry Warford" label="Larry Warford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271638" start="52609" end="52623" title="Jon Stinchcomb" label="Jon Stinchcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875274" start="52629" end="52641" title="Hoby Brenner" label="Hoby Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950809" start="52643" end="52655" title="Henry Childs" label="Henry Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808423" start="52657" end="52669" title="Jimmy Graham" label="Jimmy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159936" start="52671" end="52681" title="Jared Cook" label="Jared Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180088" start="52687" end="52695" title="Joe Horn" label="Joe Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387048" start="52697" end="52708" title="Eric Martin (wide receiver)" label="Eric Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983655" start="52710" end="52722" title="Wes Chandler" label="Wes Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666691" start="52724" end="52738" title="Michael Thomas (wide receiver, born 1993)" label="Michael Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568301" start="52744" end="52754" title="Will Smith (defensive end)" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210546" start="52756" end="52767" title="Joe Johnson (defensive end)" label="Joe Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196150" start="52769" end="52781" title="Wayne Martin (American football)" label="Wayne Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312514" start="52783" end="52799" title="Renaldo Turnbull" label="Renaldo Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926408" start="52801" end="52812" title="Bruce Clark (American football)" label="Bruce Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651349" start="52814" end="52828" title="Cameron Jordan" label="Cameron Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229731" start="52834" end="52843" title="Dave Rowe (American football)" label="Dave Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460625" start="52845" end="52863" title="La&amp;#x27;Roi Glover" label="La&amp;#x27;Roi Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555548" start="52869" end="52883" title="Jonathan Vilma" label="Jonathan Vilma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767601" start="52885" end="52896" title="Mark Fields (linebacker)" label="Mark Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384780" start="52898" end="52912" title="Keith Mitchell (American football)" label="Keith Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470521" start="52914" end="52923" title="Sam Mills" label="Sam Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917292" start="52925" end="52940" title="Vaughan Johnson" label="Vaughan Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368600" start="52942" end="52954" title="Pat Swilling" label="Pat Swilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645323" start="52956" end="52970" title="Rickey Jackson" label="Rickey Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312514" start="52972" end="52988" title="Renaldo Turnbull" label="Renaldo Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705263" start="52990" end="53003" title="Demario Davis" label="Demario Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861613" start="53009" end="53022" title="Tyrone Hughes" label="Tyrone Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386007" start="53024" end="53034" title="Eric Allen" label="Eric Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889832" start="53036" end="53051" title="Bennie Thompson (American football)" label="Bennie Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230083" start="53053" end="53064" title="Dave Waymer" label="Dave Waymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230095" start="53066" end="53079" title="Dave Whitsell" label="Dave Whitsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916464" start="53081" end="53098" title="Marshon Lattimore" label="Marshon Lattimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940516" start="53104" end="53116" title="Roman Harper" label="Roman Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409784" start="53118" end="53130" title="Sammy Knight" label="Sammy Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816996" start="53132" end="53141" title="Tom Myers (safety)" label="Tom Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56434221" start="53143" end="53153" title="J. T. Gray" label="J. T. Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109820" start="53159" end="53173" title="Darren Sharper" label="Darren Sharper"/>
<link wikidata="Q718303" start="53178" end="53193" title="Morten Andersen" label="Morten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439627" start="53195" end="53206" title="Tom Dempsey" label="Tom Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248320" start="53208" end="53216" title="Wil Lutz" label="Wil Lutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939457" start="53221" end="53233" title="Mitch Berger" label="Mitch Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963941" start="53235" end="53247" title="Brian Hansen (American football)" label="Brian Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301762" start="53249" end="53264" title="Thomas Morstead" label="Thomas Morstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832238" start="53270" end="53283" title="Michael Lewis (wide receiver)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q66823443" start="53285" end="53297" title="Deonte Harty" label="Deonte Harty"/>
<link wikidata="Q114709187" start="53299" end="53313" title="Rashid Shaheed" label="Rashid Shaheed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495892" start="53319" end="53330" title="Fred McAfee" label="Fred McAfee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409449" start="53391" end="53400" title="Tom Fears" label="Tom Fears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414784" start="53427" end="53438" title="Sean Payton" label="Sean Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q611891" start="53825" end="53839" title="Archie Manning" label="Archie Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645323" start="53841" end="53855" title="Rickey Jackson" label="Rickey Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q970588" start="53860" end="53871" title="Willie Roaf" label="Willie Roaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656854" start="53954" end="53968" title="2013 Dallas Cowboys season" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387048" start="54818" end="54829" title="Eric Martin (wide receiver)" label="Eric Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180088" start="54850" end="54858" title="Joe Horn" label="Joe Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950004" start="54878" end="54887" title="John Hill (American football)" label="John Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194661" start="54907" end="54921" title="Jim Dombrowski" label="Jim Dombrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806153" start="54941" end="54952" title="Jahri Evans" label="Jahri Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q970588" start="54973" end="54984" title="Willie Roaf" label="Willie Roaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496475" start="55005" end="55015" title="Stan Brock (American football)" label="Stan Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875274" start="55036" end="55048" title="Hoby Brenner" label="Hoby Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q38952" start="55069" end="55079" title="Drew Brees" label="Drew Brees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211694" start="55100" end="55115" title="Dalton Hilliard" label="Dalton Hilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201637" start="55136" end="55152" title="Deuce McAllister" label="Deuce McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q718303" start="55184" end="55199" title="Morten Andersen" label="Morten Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819205" start="55219" end="55234" title="Tommy Barnhardt" label="Tommy Barnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495892" start="55266" end="55277" title="Fred McAfee" label="Fred McAfee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832238" start="55312" end="55325" title="Michael Lewis (wide receiver)" label="Michael Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196150" start="55355" end="55367" title="Wayne Martin (American football)" label="Wayne Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950511" start="55387" end="55396" title="Jim Wilks" label="Jim Wilks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210546" start="55416" end="55427" title="Joe Johnson (defensive end)" label="Joe Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568301" start="55459" end="55469" title="Will Smith (defensive end)" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470521" start="55489" end="55498" title="Sam Mills" label="Sam Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917292" start="55519" end="55534" title="Vaughan Johnson" label="Vaughan Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645323" start="55555" end="55569" title="Rickey Jackson" label="Rickey Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368600" start="55590" end="55602" title="Pat Swilling" label="Pat Swilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230083" start="55623" end="55634" title="Dave Waymer" label="Dave Waymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933332" start="55655" end="55668" title="Mike McKenzie (cornerback)" label="Mike McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816996" start="55687" end="55698" title="Tom Myers (safety)" label="Tommy Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409784" start="55717" end="55729" title="Sammy Knight" label="Sammy Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414784" start="55751" end="55762" title="Sean Payton" label="Sean Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q658636" start="56326" end="56333" title="Al Hirt" label="Al Hirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232990" start="56362" end="56372" title="David Dixon (businessman)" label="Dave Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976436" start="56403" end="56413" title="Wayne Mack" label="Wayne Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661874" start="56442" end="56457" title="Aaron Broussard" label="Aaron Broussard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14957126" start="56488" end="56499" title="Angela Hill (journalist)" label="Angela Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892870" start="56672" end="56707" title="Bernard &amp;quot;Buddy&amp;quot; Diliberto" label="Bernard &amp;quot;Buddy&amp;quot; Diliberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195531" start="56971" end="56984" title="Jim Henderson (sportscaster)" label="Jim Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950295" start="57071" end="57082" title="Hokie Gajan" label="Hokie Gajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237786" start="57140" end="57155" title="Kathleen Blanco" label="Kathleen Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402462" start="57258" end="57276" title="Saints Cheer Krewe" label="Saints Cheer Krewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967244" start="57309" end="57321" title="NFL Cheerleading" label="cheerleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="57563" end="57571" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957367" start="57583" end="57586" title="WWL (AM)" label="WWL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957346" start="57595" end="57603" title="WWL-FM" label="105.3 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="57714" end="57735" title="clear-channel station" label="clear-channel station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957347" start="57773" end="57779" title="WWL-TV" label="WWL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201637" start="57873" end="57889" title="Deuce McAllister" label="Deuce McAllister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063848" start="57947" end="57958" title="Zach Strief" label="Zach Strief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195531" start="58089" end="58102" title="Jim Henderson (Sportscaster)" label="Jim Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950295" start="58173" end="58184" title="Hokie Gajan" label="Hokie Gajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827425" start="58247" end="58258" title="liposarcoma" label="liposarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q363440" start="58591" end="58601" title="Jim Taylor (fullback)" label="Jim Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614053" start="58614" end="58632" title="Steve Stonebreaker" label="Steve Stonebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220084" start="58648" end="58664" title="Danny Abramowicz" label="Danny Abramowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q611891" start="58680" end="58694" title="Archie Manning" label="Archie Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496475" start="58713" end="58723" title="Stan Brock (American football)" label="Stan Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564823" start="58778" end="58782" title="WVUE-DT" label="WVUE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134015" start="58844" end="58856" title="Raycom Media" label="Raycom Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598232" start="58889" end="58904" title="Gray Television" label="Gray Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="58921" end="58931" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803214" start="59216" end="59226" title="Tim Brando" label="Tim Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271638" start="59231" end="59245" title="Jon Stinchcomb" label="Jon Stinchcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179913" start="59339" end="59360" title="Cox Sports Television" label="Cox Sports Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298423" start="59542" end="59555" title="Raycom Sports" label="Raycom Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957347" start="59703" end="59709" title="WWL-TV" label="WWL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948586" start="59845" end="59849" title="WDSU-TV" label="WDSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="59928" end="59949" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="60001" end="60005" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311397" start="60023" end="60080" title="Religious symbolism in U.S. sports team names and mascots" label="Religious symbolism in U.S. sports team names and mascots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="60144" end="60168" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246590" start="60214" end="60236" title="Pro Football Reference" label="Pro Football Reference"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21721" wikidata="Q219602" url="?curid=21721" title="New York Jets">
<text>The New York Jets are a professional American football team based in the New York metropolitan area. The Jets compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) East division. The team plays its home games at MetLife Stadium (which it shares with the New York Giants) at the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford, New Jersey, west of New York City. The team is headquartered in Florham Park, New Jersey. The franchise is legally organized as a limited liability company under the name New York Jets, LLC.

The team was founded in 1959 as the Titans of New York, a charter member of the American Football League (AFL); the franchise joined the NFL in the AFL–NFL merger in . The team began play in 1960 at the Polo Grounds in upper Manhattan, the former home of the football and baseball Giants. Under new ownership, the current name was adopted in 1963 and the franchise moved to Shea Stadium in Queens in 1964, then to the Meadowlands Sports Complex in New Jersey in 1984. The team&#x27;s training facility was located at Hofstra University on Long Island until 2008, when the Atlantic Health Jets Training Center opened in Florham Park.

The Jets advanced to the AFL playoffs for the first time in 1968 and went on to compete in Super Bowl III where they defeated the Baltimore Colts, becoming the first AFL team to defeat an NFL club in an AFL–NFL World Championship Game. However, the Jets have never returned to the Super Bowl, making them one of two NFL teams to win their lone Super Bowl appearance along with the New Orleans Saints, and one of five teams never to win a conference championship since the AFL–NFL merger in 1970, along with the Cleveland Browns, Detroit Lions, and two expansion franchises, the Jacksonville Jaguars (who began play in 1995) and Houston Texans (2002). Since 1970 the Jets have won the AFC East only twice, in 1998 and 2002, the fewest division titles among NFL teams in the post-merger era. They have qualified for the postseason 12 times, and reached the AFC Championship Game four times, most recently losing to the Pittsburgh Steelers in 2010. The Jets have not qualified for the playoffs since then, and currently hold the longest active playoff drought in the NFL and are tied with the Buffalo Sabres for the longest drought in the &quot;Big 4&quot; North American sports leagues. The Jets also have the longest championship drought among New York&#x27;s major professional sports franchises, having eclipsed the New York Rangers&#x27; 54-year drought (from 1940 to 1994) in 2023.

The Jets&#x27; team colors are green and white, although they have at times used black as a third/trim color and have had a black alternate uniform since 2019. For most of their history the Jets had white helmets with green stripes and oval or football-shaped logos, and opposite-colored jersey sleeves; the current primary uniforms are based on the design used from 1978-89 with simpler striping, green helmets, and a wordmark logo in stylized italic lettering with a jet-plane silhouette above the letters.

==History==

The first organizational meeting of the American Football League took place on August 14, 1959. Harry Wismer, representing the city of New York at the meeting, proclaimed the state was ready for another professional football team and that he was more than capable of running the daily operations.

Wismer was granted the charter franchise later dubbed the Titans of New York as Wismer explained, &quot;Titans are bigger and stronger than Giants.&quot; He secured the Titans&#x27; home field at the decrepit Polo Grounds, a place where the team struggled financially and on the field during its first three years. In their first two seasons of existence, coached by Sammy Baugh, the Titans went 7–7 in both 1960 and 1961. By 1962, the debt continued to mount for Wismer, forcing the AFL to assume the costs of the team until season&#x27;s end.
A five-man syndicate, headed by Sonny Werblin, saved the team from certain bankruptcy, purchasing the lowly Titans for $1 million in 1963. Werblin renamed the team the New York Jets since the team would play near LaGuardia Airport and because it rhymed with the New York Mets as they would be playing in Shea Stadium. The new name was intended to reflect the modern approach of his team. The Jets&#x27; owners hired Weeb Ewbank as the general manager and head coach. Ewbank and quarterback Joe Namath led the Jets to prominence in 1969, when New York defeated the heavily favored Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III and solidified the AFL&#x27;s position in the world of professional football.

When the AFL and NFL merged, the team fell into a state of mediocrity along with their star quarterback, Namath, who only had three successful post-merger seasons after injuries hampered much of his career. The Jets continued to spiral downward before enjoying a string of successes in the 1980s, which included an appearance in the 1982 AFC Championship Game, and the emergence of the popular New York Sack Exchange. Walt Michaels and Joe Walton coached the team throughout the decade.

The early 1990s saw the team struggling. After firing coach Bruce Coslet, owner Leon Hess hired Pete Carroll who struggled to a 6–10 record and was promptly fired at the end of the season. Thereafter, Rich Kotite was selected to lead the team to victory; instead he led the Jets to a 4–28 record over the next two years. Kotite stepped down at the end of his second season, forcing the Jets to search for a new head coach.

Hess lured then-disgruntled New England Patriots head coach Bill Parcells to New York in 1997. Parcells led the team back to relevance and coached them to the AFC Championship Game in 1998. Hess died in 1999 while the team, plagued by injuries, produced an eight win record, falling short of a playoff berth. At the end of the season, Parcells stepped down as head coach deferring control to his assistant, Bill Belichick; Belichick resigned the very next day (leaving a napkin at the stage for his introduction, on which he had written &quot;I resign as HC of the NYJ&quot;) and went on to accept the head coaching position with the Patriots.

The franchise obtained a new owner in Woody Johnson in 2000. Additionally, through the 2000s the Jets visited the playoffs five times, a franchise record, under the direction of three coaches: Herm Edwards, Eric Mangini, and Rex Ryan. Rex Ryan was hired in January 2009. In the draft that year the Jets would take USC quarterback Mark Sanchez with the fifth overall pick with the intent of making him the franchise centerpiece. Ryan and Sanchez led the team to back-to-back AFC Championship Game appearances during their first two years, but the team never made the playoffs again during their tenure. The Jets had a 6–10 season in 2012 and a 8–8 season in 2013. After a 4–12 season in 2014, Sanchez was released, while Ryan and general manager John Idzik were fired. 

Prior to the 2015 season, Todd Bowles was hired to replace Ryan as head coach. In his first season, he led the Jets to a 10–6 record that finished second in the AFC East but failed to qualify for the postseason. However, the Jets followed up the 2015 season with three consecutive last place finishes in the AFC East from 2016 to 2018, winning no more than five games each season. Bowles was fired following the third consecutive losing season. The Jets used their first round pick, third overall, on quarterback Sam Darnold from USC. Adam Gase was hired to replace Bowles prior to the 2019 season. Gase&#x27;s tenure saw the Jets go 7–9 in 2019 and 2–14 in 2020, missing the postseason both years. Gase was fired following the 2020 season. Prior to the 2021 season, the Jets hired former 49ers defensive coordinator Robert Saleh as head coach. The Jets used their first round pick, second overall, on BYU quarterback Zach Wilson. The 2021 season saw the Jets go 4–13 to finish last in the AFC East. The 2022 season saw improvement for the Jets with a 7–10 record with another last place finish in the division. In the 2023 season, the Jets once again finished 7–10 in a season that started hopeful with the signing of Aaron Rodgers, who later suffered a season-ending Achilles tear on the first offensive series of the regular season. The 2024 season saw the Jets fire Saleh after a 2–3 start. Jeff Ulbrich finished the season with a 3–9 mark to end with a 5–12 record. Detroit Lions defensive coordinator Aaron Glenn was named as head coach following the season.

==Championships==

===AFL championships===
===Super Bowl championships===
===Division championships===
==Ownership==

===Harry Wismer===
Harry Wismer, a businessman, had been interested in sports for much of his life when he was granted a charter franchise in the American Football League. Wismer was a three-sport letterman in high school, and went on to play football for the University of Florida and Michigan State University before a knee injury ended his playing career. Undeterred, Wismer began his career as a broadcaster with Michigan State and became a pioneer of the industry. Later, as the Titans owner, Wismer formulated a league-wide policy which allowed broadcasting rights to be shared equally among the teams.

Wismer, who had previously had a 25% stake in the Washington Redskins, was interested in the American Football League and was given a franchise to develop in New York. Wismer, whose philosophy was who you knew mattered most, tried to make the team and the league a success. His efforts began to accrue debt as the Titans&#x27; first two seasons were mediocre with attendance dropping in the team&#x27;s second year. The franchise was sold for $1 million to a five-man syndicate headed by Sonny Werblin of the Gotham Football Club, Inc., in February 1963.

===Sonny Werblin syndicate===
Sonny Werblin graduated from Rutgers University and was employed by the Music Corporation of America, eventually becoming president of the company&#x27;s television division. With a vast knowledge of media, Werblin was determined to put the spotlight on the team. His first order of business, after changing the team&#x27;s name and jerseys, was to sign Joe Namath to an unprecedented contract. Werblin&#x27;s gamble would later pay off as Namath, who became a public star, led the Jets on to victory in Super Bowl III, though by then Werblin had sold his stake in the team.

Werblin&#x27;s partners, Townsend B. Martin, Leon Hess, Donald C. Lillis, and Philip H. Iselin, had a falling out with Werblin over the way the team was run—though the franchise had begun to make a profit, Werblin was making all the policies and decisions himself with little or no input from his partners, much to their dismay. Though Werblin initially resisted their ultimatum to dissolve the partnership, Werblin agreed to be bought out in 1968. Werblin remained involved in the sports community and became the first chairman and CEO of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority where he helped to create the Meadowlands Sports Complex, including Giants Stadium.

===Leon Hess===
Leon Hess became well known for his Hess Corporation gas stations; however, he also played an instrumental part in the development of the Jets during his tenure as co-owner and eventual sole owner. Hess had often fought for improvements while the team was a tenant at Shea Stadium but generally stayed away from football operations, allowing his coaches and general manager to make football-related decisions.

Becoming the team&#x27;s majority stockholder in 1973, Hess bought Philip H. Iselin&#x27;s share upon his death in 1976 after which only two of Hess&#x27; partners remained, Townsend Martin and Helen Dillon, who had inherited the stake from her father Donald Lillis, upon his death. Hess began to buy out the remaining partners in 1981 when he bought Martin&#x27;s 25% stake for $5 million. Hess bought Dillon&#x27;s stake three years later for another $5 million, acquiring sole control of the team.

Hess had a passion for his team and took losses hard. In 1995, following a mediocre 6–10 season under Pete Carroll, despite generally shying away from football operations, Hess announced &quot;I&#x27;m 80 years old, I want results now&quot; during a conference in which Rich Kotite was introduced as the team&#x27;s new coach. After two unsuccessful years with Kotite, Hess heavily involved himself in hiring Bill Parcells in hopes to see his team again reach the Super Bowl. He did not live to see his dream realized, dying on May 7, 1999.
===Woody Johnson===
With the team for sale, two potential buyers were found in Cablevision and billionaire heir Woody Johnson, whose grandfather Robert Wood Johnson II founded Johnson &amp; Johnson. Johnson was unknown among the other NFL owners at the time of his $635 million purchase of the franchise. However, Johnson had a passion for sports according to former Knicks general manager Ernie Grunfeld and desired to own his own team. Johnson has been considered to be an enabler who wants the best from his employees.

Much like Hess, Johnson left many of the football related decisions up to his management team and tended to avoid the spotlight. However, upon hiring head coach Rex Ryan, Johnson had an increased presence as he molded the Jets into his team.

===Christopher Johnson===
In 2017, Woody Johnson was appointed by President Donald Trump as the United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom. Once his post was confirmed, his brother Christopher Johnson became a co-owner and took over the day-to-day operations for the team, including personnel decisions. Woody Johnson&#x27;s term as ambassador ended in 2021, and he took over ownership duties from Christopher.

==Stadiums==

Owner Harry Wismer sought out a place for the team to play their home games but was only able to secure the dilapidated Polo Grounds, which had not had a major tenant since the baseball New York Giants vacated the stadium in 1957. The Titans played their first four seasons at the stadium—in the final season they were renamed the Jets. The Titans shared the stadium with baseball&#x27;s new expansion team, the New York Mets, for two years before both teams moved to Shea Stadium in Queens in 1964. The Jets hold the distinction of being the final team to host a game at the Polo Grounds, a 19–10 loss to the Buffalo Bills on December 14, 1963.

Wismer hoped the then Titans could play in what would become known as Shea Stadium beginning in 1961. However, funding difficulties and legal problems delayed construction of the stadium. Wismer signed a memorandum of understanding in late 1961 to secure the Titans&#x27; new home. That memorandum recognized that the Mets would have exclusive use of the stadium until they had completed their season. As the team moved to Shea under new ownership, they were, in most years, required to open the season with several road games, a problem made worse in 1969 and 1973 when the Mets had long playoff runs.

Feeling that this arrangement put the Jets at a disadvantage, the team announced in 1977 that they would play two home games a year during the month of September at the Giants&#x27; new home in New Jersey, Giants Stadium. Litigation began between New York City and the Jets over the issue, and in the lawsuit&#x27;s settlement, the city agreed to allow the Jets to play two September home games a season at Shea beginning in 1978 for the remaining six years in the Jets&#x27; lease. In 1977, the Jets were to play one September game at Giants Stadium and an October 2 game at Shea.

In spite of these issues, majority owner Leon Hess was interested in renewing the team&#x27;s lease at Shea, which was due to expire in 1983. Hess negotiated with New York mayor Ed Koch. Hess wanted the city to redevelop the stadium to expand its capacity. He also hoped to renegotiate other aspects of the lease—the Jets received no money from ticketholders parking at Shea. Hess&#x27;s proposals met resistance from Koch. When negotiations reached an impasse, the Jets announced their intention to depart for New Jersey. On December 10, 1983, the Jets played their final game at Shea and lost to the Steelers 34–7. As fans pillaged the stadium for mementos, the scoreboard read &quot;N.J. Jets&quot; in reference to the Jets&#x27; departure to the Meadowlands.

When the Jets joined the Giants at the stadium, many Jets fans hoped the name, Giants Stadium, would be changed. However, the Giants, who had the authority to approve the change, refused. In an effort to conceal the fact that they played in a stadium built and decorated for another team, the stadium grounds crew was assigned to make the stadium more Jet-friendly during Jets games by putting up green banners and placing the Jets&#x27; logo over the Giants&#x27;. No change could be made to the blue and red seating bowl. The Jets were featured in the first NFL playoff game in the stadium&#x27;s history, falling to the Patriots on December 28, 1985.

As the Jets sought to become a stronger franchise and remove themselves from their counterparts&#x27; shadow, the team entered into negotiations with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in an attempt to build a stadium on the west side of Manhattan, entering a bidding war with TransGas Energy Systems and Cablevision for the rights to the West Side Yard property—Hess, prior to his death, had been approached by former mayor Rudy Giuliani about bringing the team to the West Side when their lease at Giants Stadium expired in 2008. Cablevision was fixated against the Jets owning the land as Madison Square Garden, located only a few blocks away, would be forced to compete with the stadium. Team owners had voted, 31–1, with the Buffalo Bills the only objectors, to award the 2010 Super Bowl to New York contingent on the Jets winning the bid and completing construction of the stadium prior to 2010.
The MTA unanimously voted to sell the land to the Jets for approximately $210 million as the committee agreed that having the stadium would be beneficial in the long run. An angry Cablevision, community groups and transportation advocates were determined to derail the Jets&#x27; attempts at building the stadium and two lawsuits challenging the construction of the stadium on environmental grounds were filed.

Although confident they could secure the stadium, their hopes were dashed when Sheldon Silver and Joseph L. Bruno, both of whom held veto power over the stadium construction, refused to support the project, alleging it would hurt rather than help the development of the West Side.

Defeated, the Jets agreed to enter a 50–50 joint venture with their rival, the Giants, to build a new stadium effectively agreeing to a 99-year lease, which the Giants had signed earlier in the year, to remain in New Jersey. The stadium, known as MetLife Stadium, became the first in the history of the NFL to be jointly built by two franchises. The stadium, which is illuminated in different colors depending on which team is hosting a game, opened in April 2010 and saw the Jets and Giants open the stadium together in a preseason exhibition game. The Jets&#x27; first regular season home game at the new stadium was held on September 13, 2010, and was shown nationwide on Monday Night Football. New York lost to the Ravens 10–9. Team owners voted to have the stadium host Super Bowl XLVIII, held in 2014.

==Rivalries==
===Divisional===
====New England Patriots====

Since the inception of the American Football League, the Jets have maintained what is considered to be a marquee rivalry with the New England Patriots. The rivalry was relatively docile in its early years until 1966 when the Jets removed the Patriots, who had hopes of appearing in Super Bowl I, from playoff contention with a 38–28 defeat at Shea Stadium. The Patriots returned the favor in 1985 when the Jets lost to New England 26–14 in the wild card round; the Patriots went on to Super Bowl XX where they were defeated by the Bears.

The rivalry began to escalate and receive increased media attention in 1997 when a disgruntled Bill Parcells vacated his head coaching position with New England to accept the same position with New York Jets. The following year, the Jets signed Pro Bowl running back Curtis Martin from the Patriots. After the Jets declined during Parcells&#x27; third year, Parcells decided to resign as head coach. His assistant, Bill Belichick, was installed as the new head coach but suddenly resigned the next day at a press conference, just one day after accepting the position, to become the new head coach of the Patriots instead. His decision was influenced by the passing of the team owner, Leon Hess, before the &#x27;99 season, who at one point was offering Belichick a $1 million bonus to stay put. However, Belichick had not spoken to the two potential new owners, Woody Johnson and Charles Dolan, and had issues with both because the original agreement with Hess was no longer there; &quot;the whole ownership configuration at that point in time was a major factor in my decision much more than a personal relationship.&quot;

A critical turning point of the rivalry took place on September 23, 2001, when Jets linebacker Mo Lewis tackled Drew Bledsoe, leaving the veteran with internal bleeding. This provided an opportunity for Tom Brady to take over as the starting quarterback and during his tenure, Brady successfully guided New England to six Super Bowl titles. In 2006, Eric Mangini, an assistant under Belichick, left New England to join the Jets as their head coach. Under Mangini, the infamous Spygate incident took place, further escalating tensions between both clubs. When Rex Ryan was hired as the team&#x27;s head coach, the rivalry further escalated due to an increased war of words between both teams. In January 2011, the two met in a Divisional Round playoff game. The visiting Jets pulled a 28–21 upset to advance to the AFC Championship Game, which they ultimately lost one week later to the Pittsburgh Steelers. As of the 2024 season, the Patriots lead the all-time series 75–56–1.

====Buffalo Bills====
The Jets and the Bills represent the same state (although the Jets play in New Jersey), and this rivalry represents the differences between New York City and Upstate New York. The teams are both charter members of the American Football League and have generally stayed in the same division since, even after the NFL and AFL merged. The first meeting between the two teams saw the New York Titans, later the Jets, defeat the Bills 27–3. Aside from a few notable moments, such as O. J. Simpson breaking an NFL rushing record against the Jets, the lone playoff game in the series between the two teams in the 1981 Wild Card Round, and ex-Jets coach Rex Ryan coaching the Bills for two years, the rivalry has otherwise been characterized by shared mediocrity and uncompetitive games, including notable blunders by quarterbacks Mark Sanchez of the Jets, and J. P. Losman of the Bills. However, in recent years, the series has heated up again due to a friendly rivalry between quarterbacks Sam Darnold and Josh Allen, who were selected in the first round of the 2018 draft. As of the 2024 season, the Bills lead the all-time series 71–58.

====Miami Dolphins====

New York has maintained a rivalry with the Miami Dolphins since the Dolphins&#x27; inception in 1966. The lone tie in the series took place in Week 5 of the 1981 season with a 28–28 draw. The Jets&#x27; best chance to reach the Super Bowl after the Super Bowl III victory was thwarted by A.J. Duhe in 1983 whose interception return for touchdown on a rain-soaked field in the conference championship game was the decisive score. This remains as the lone postseason meeting in the series. One of the most famous games in Jets history took place in 1994 when the Dolphins ran the Fake Spike play, giving them an improbable victory and halting the Jets&#x27; momentum that season, serving as a precursor to the Jets&#x27; next two unsuccessful years under Rich Kotite. The Jets went on to complete an improbable victory of their own on October 23, 2000, in what is known as The Monday Night Miracle. The Jets, trailing the Dolphins 30–7 at the end of the third quarter, rallied in the fourth quarter scoring 23 unanswered points, eventually winning in overtime with a 40-yard John Hall kick.

When Rex Ryan became New York&#x27;s head coach, there was an increased war of words between the clubs culminating with Ryan flashing an obscene gesture to heckling Dolphins fans in January 2010. The rivalry continued between both teams when Sal Alosi, then the strength and conditioning coach of the Jets, tripped Dolphins cornerback Nolan Carroll. Carroll was not seriously injured and Alosi resigned nearly two months later. As of the 2024 season, the Miami Dolphins lead the all-time series, 61–57–1.

===Inter-conference===
====New York Giants====
The New York Jets previously maintained a high tension rivalry against their in-town counterparts, the New York Giants, that has since diminished due to the infrequency of the teams meeting in the regular season. The pinnacle of the rivalry came on August 17, 1969, when the Jets and Giants met for the first time, in a preseason game which was viewed as a &quot;turf war&quot; by both sides. The Giants, considered a mediocre team at the time, were regarded as underdogs and faced considerable scrutiny from their fans and the media. The Jets 37–14 win resulted in the firing of Giants coach Allie Sherman.

The Jets met the Giants in 1988 for the final game of the regular season. The Jets, with a 7–7–1 record, had little to lose as their hopes for playoff contention had vanished. The 10–5 Giants were fighting for a playoff spot, and a victory would have clinched a division title and playoff berth. Although the six point favorites, the Giants were unable to overcome a Jets defense that sacked their quarterback Phil Simms eight times. With the Jets&#x27; victory and wins by the Rams and Eagles, the Giants were eliminated from playoff contention and the Jets gained respect in the eyes of many.

In spite of the big sibling rivalry that has resulted in trash talk between the players, both teams have formed an unexpected and consequently strong partnership sharing Giants Stadium for 26 years and MetLife Stadium, a venture in which both teams own a 50% share of the venue. The rivalry regained much of its tension in the 2011 NFL season when the Jets and Giants met in Week 16. Both teams needed a victory to keep their playoffs hope alive and there was significant trash talk between Rex Ryan and his players and many of the Giants in the weeks leading up to the game. Ryan and Giants running back Brandon Jacobs reportedly came close to blows after the game, a 29–14 Giants win. The two teams met again on December 6, 2015, with the Jets coming from behind and winning 23–20 in overtime. The teams met again in 2019, with the Jets taking the win 34–27. On October 29, 2023, the Jets won 13–10 in overtime as the visitors. As of the 2023 season, the Giants lead the all-time series 8–7.

==Logos and uniforms==

The Jets&#x27; original uniforms, as the Titans of New York in 1960, were navy blue with old gold numerals, gold pants with two parallel blue stripes on each side, and navy blue helmets with a single gold stripe down the center and no logo decals. The white jerseys had navy blue numerals. In 1961, the Titans added UCLA-style shoulder stripes (gold and white on the blue jerseys, gold and navy blue on the white jerseys), changed the pants striping to a blue stripe flanked by white stripes, and employed a somewhat brighter shade of gold.

When the Titans became the Jets in 1963, navy and gold were abandoned in favor of kelly green and white. The jerseys had opposite-colored sleeves with thick stripes on the shoulders and cuffs, above and below the TV numerals, and the pants were white with two parallel green stripes on each side. The new helmets were white with a single green stripe down the center; the logo on each side was a silhouette of a jet airplane in green, with the word &quot;JETS&quot; in thick white sans-serif italics along the fuselage. In 1964 the single green center stripe became two parallel stripes, and the jet-plane decal was replaced with a white football shape outlined in green, with the word &quot;JETS&quot; in thick green sans-serif italics in front of &quot;NY&quot; in green outline serif lettering, and a miniature football at bottom center. The decals were difficult to see from a distance (or on television), so the colors were reversed and the decals slightly enlarged in 1965. This design remained largely unchanged through 1977, apart from some variations to the numeral and lettering typefaces, the angle of the helmet decals, and adjustments to the shoulder and sleeve striping due to changes in NFL jersey tailoring and materials.

The Jets&#x27; first major design change was made for the 1978 season. The kelly green and white color scheme was retained; the new helmets were solid green with white facemasks, no stripes, and a stylized &quot;JETS&quot; wordmark in white on each side. The mark featured angular lettering and a silhouette of a modern jet airplane extending horizontally to the right from the top of the &quot;J&quot; above the &quot;ETS.&quot; The jerseys featured large TV numerals on the shoulders and two thick parallel stripes on the sleeves, while the pants had a single green stripe from hip to knee on each side. In 1990 the Jets modified this design by adding thin black outlines to the numerals, lettering, stripes, and helmet decals, changing the facemasks from white to black, and adding a set of green pants and white socks to be worn with the white jerseys.

The Jets were the first NFL team to wear a &quot;throwback&quot; uniform, in 1993 for a home game against the Cincinnati Bengals, celebrating the 25th anniversary of the 1968 championship team. The jersey and pants mimicked the 1963–77 design, although the team wore its regular green helmets with a white-outlined version of the 1965–77 logo decal. In 1994, as part of the NFL&#x27;s 75th Anniversary celebration, the Jets wore both home and road versions of this uniform in select games, again using their regular green helmets with the 1965–77 logo but with two parallel white stripes down the center.
The Jets adopted a new uniform and logo design in 1998, a modernization of the 1965–77 set with a darker hunter green replacing the bright kelly green, and the primary logo now oval rather than football-shaped and updated with starker lines. Green pants and striped white socks were added in 2002, and were worn with both the white and green jerseys.

In 2007, the Jets introduced a new &quot;throwback&quot; uniform evoking the original Titans of New York and combining elements of the 1960 and 1961–62 uniforms, with navy blue helmets and jerseys, old gold numerals and helmet stripes, gold and white shoulder stripes, and gold pants with blue and white stripes on each side. These uniforms appeared again in 2008, 2009 and 2011, with a white-jersey variation also appearing in 2009 as part of the NFL&#x27;s celebration of the American Football League&#x27;s 50th anniversary.

The Jets abandoned their classic look for a second time in 2019, with a new uniform design featuring a medium shade of green which the franchise called &quot;Gotham Green,&quot; reincorporating black as a third/trim color, and reverting to green helmets with a metallic paint finish and black facemasks. The jerseys and pants now had tapered striping, a &quot;NEW YORK&quot; wordmark on the upper chest, and a new sans-serif block-style numeral font. The primary logo reverted to a football shape, and eliminated the background &quot;NY&quot; initials in favor of &quot;NEW YORK&quot; in sans-serif italics above &quot;JETS,&quot; which was modified to make the &quot;J&quot; the same height as the other letters and moved slightly downward, with the revised football graphic now covering the lower portion of the letters &quot;E&quot; and &quot;T&quot;; the helmet decal was a secondary logo featuring only the &quot;JETS&quot; wordmark and football. The team also introduced a black alternate uniform with green striping and white numerals outlined in green. In 2022, with league rule changes allowing for a second helmet shell, the black uniform was paired with a matte-black alternate helmet with a metallic-green facemask and the &quot;JETS&quot; logo in green outlined in white.

In 2023, the Jets introduced a &quot;legacy white&quot; throwback uniform resembling the 1978–89 design, then announced at the end of the season that this would become the team&#x27;s primary uniform in 2024, with green and black versions added to complete the set. For this rebrand the 1978 &quot;JETS&quot; logo was slightly modified to condense the spacing between the letters, and to widen the tail and streamline the nose of the jet-plane silhouette. The primary uniforms resemble the 1978–89 design in most respects, although the &quot;Gotham Green&quot; shade (renamed &quot;Legacy Green&quot;) and metallic-finish helmet shells were carried over and the set includes a green pants option; the black alternates apply the same color scheme as the outgoing set to the new template. The Jets also released a &quot;Classic&quot; white uniform which is based on the 1965–77 and 1998–2018 designs.

==Cheerleading squad==
The original Jets Flag Crew was established in 2006. In 2007, the group underwent an expansion and was renamed the Jets Flight Crew. The squad regularly performs choreographed routines during the team&#x27;s home contests. Auditions have been held annually since their inception to attract new members.

The Jets Junior Flight Crew was established in 2010, offering children the opportunity to train with the Flight Crew while improving their &quot;talent and abilities in a non-competitive environment.&quot;

==Radio and television==
The Jets&#x27; current flagship radio station is WAXQ, which is owned by iHeartMedia. The station became the Jets&#x27; flagship in February 2024 after Good Karma Brands, the owner of former flagship station WPEN-AM, elected to end its agreement with Emmis Communications to operate WEPN-FM and stop simulcasting its programming on the station.

As of the 2024 season, Bob Wischusen is the play-by-play announcer, with Anthony Becht as the analyst. Wischusen has been the voice of the Jets since the 2002 season, taking over the role when Howard David became the voice of the Miami Dolphins. Becht, the former Jets tight end, took over the analyst role for 2024 after Marty Lyons, a former member of the New York Sack Exchange from the 1980s Jets, resigned his position to take on a new role with the team as a brand ambassador. 

Any preseason games not nationally televised are shown on WCBS-TV. SportsNet New York, which serves as the official home of the Jets, airs over 250 hours of &quot;exclusive, in depth&quot; material on the team in high definition.

Monday Night Football games are televised in a simulcast with ESPN by either sister station WABC-TV, or WPIX-TV if WABC chooses to waive the game to another station to carry regularly scheduled programming. Thursday Night Football games streamed by Amazon Prime are carried locally by WNYW.

==Season-by-season record==
This is a partial list of the Jets&#x27; last five completed seasons.

&quot;Note: The Finish, Wins, Losses, and Ties columns list regular season results and exclude any postseason play.&quot;


==Players==

===Current roster===

===Pro Football Hall of Famers===

Ewbank, Hill, Klecko, Martin, Mawae, Maynard, Namath, and Revis are recognized based upon their achievements with the Jets. Ewbank is also recognized based upon his achievements with the Baltimore Colts, coaching them to NFL championships in 1958 and 1959. Riggins is recognized primarily for his seasons with the Washington Redskins (1976–1979, 1981–1985), as is Monk (1980–1993), who won three Super Bowl championships with Washington. Lott is in the Hall of Fame primarily for his exploits as a member of the San Francisco 49ers. Baugh and Turner are recognized based upon their achievements as players with other teams, rather than their head coaching stints with the Jets. While Parcells reversed the fortunes of the Jets, he had major impact for the New York Giants, coaching them to two Super Bowl victories. Wolf only had a brief stint with the Jets between 1990 and 1991, while most of his major contributions occurred as an executive and player personnel director with the Oakland Raiders (1963–1974, 1979–1989), and later as General Manager of the Green Bay Packers (1991–2001). Favre only played one season as a member of the Jets in 2008, between most of his career with the Packers (1992–2007) and his last two NFL seasons with the Minnesota Vikings (2009–2010). Namath, Riggins, Klecko, and Revis are the only Hall of Famers who were drafted by the Jets.

===Retired numbers===
Additionally, the Jets have not reissued the #80 jersey of Wayne Chrebet (WR, 1995–2005) since he suffered a career-ending concussion in the 2005 season, and it has long been understood that it will not be worn again in the foreseeable future. Along similar lines, Byrd&#x27;s #90 had not been reissued since he suffered a career-ending neck injury in 1992, and it had been understood long before his number was formally retired that no Jet would ever wear it again. Further, the Jets have not reissued #24 since the release of Darrelle Revis in 2016.

===Ring of Honor===
The Jets established a Ring of Honor on July 20, 2010, to commemorate former players. Each season, players will be nominated by an internal committee and then inducted into the Ring. There is no specific amount of honorees to be selected each year.

===American Football League All-Time Team===
The following Titans/Jets were selected to the American Football League All-Time Team on January 14, 1970. The first and second teams were determined by a panel of members of the AFL&#x27;s Hall of Fame Board of Selectors: Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

===All-Time Four Decade Team===

New York announced their official All-Time Four Decade team in 2003, which was determined by the fans of the team. Bold indicates those elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

===Notable first-round draft picks===
Perhaps the most famous of the Jets&#x27; first round picks came in 1965 when they selected Alabama quarterback Joe Namath who boosted the Jets into the national spotlight with his boisterous personality and lifestyle. His physical talents on the field helped improve the Jets&#x27; fortunes, leading them to victory over the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III. Though injuries hampered the latter part of Namath&#x27;s career, he is best remembered, according to former teammate John Dockery, as &quot;a guy that came along and broke a lot of the conventions.&quot; Namath was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1985.

The Jets have had a history of selecting players who turned out to be draft busts. Perhaps one of the most disappointing players in Jets history was running back Blair Thomas. Thomas, who averaged 5.4 yards per carry at Penn State, was an intriguing prospect the Jets were interested in utilizing to help their cumbersome offense. Confident in their decision, the Jets drafted Thomas with the second overall pick in 1990, expecting him to be a solid player for years to come. Thomas ran for only 620 yards in 1990, and failed to meet the high expectations. By the time Thomas left the team as an unrestricted free agent in 1993, he had rushed for 2,009 yards and only five touchdowns. The 2008 first round pick, outside linebacker Vernon Gholston, followed a similar path, failing to record a sack during his three-year tenure with the team.

Kyle Brady in 1995, who was drafted ahead of Warren Sapp, one of many disappointments during Rich Kotite&#x27;s tenure as coach. However, in the same draft, the Jets did better with Hugh Douglas. Dewayne Robertson was a fourth overall selection in 2003 by the Jets. The defensive tackle out of Kentucky failed to make a big impact with the team. He accounted for 14.5 sacks in his 5 seasons with the team, a rather underwhelming player given what the Jets had hoped for. At quarterback, the Jets found themselves dealing with the consequences of drafting University of Alabama quarterback Richard Todd in 1976. In his tenure with the Jets, he threw for more interceptions than he did touchdowns. In the 1982 season, the Jets played vs the Miami Dolphins in the AFC Championship Game. Todd threw for five interceptions and the Jets lost the game. A year later, Todd would be traded to the New Orleans Saints. The most recent bust, Dee Milliner, was drafted by the team in 2013. Milliner played his college career at the University of Alabama and had high expectations after being drafted. Lasting just 3 years with the team, Milliner&#x27;s career was plagued by injuries and inconsistency, recording only 3 interceptions during his brief Jets career.

In the 2013 and 2014 seasons, one of the Jets&#x27; strongest units was their defensive line, manned by first round selections Muhammad Wilkerson (2011) and Sheldon Richardson (2013). In 2013, Wilkerson ended the season with 10.5 sacks, matching the last Jets player to have more than 10 sacks in a single season, John Abraham in 2005. Also that year, Richardson was honored with an award from the AP for Defensive Rookie of the Year. The Jets&#x27; run defense was stout with all three in the line up, finishing fifth as a team in rushing yards allowed in 2014.

In the 2017 NFL draft, the Jets selected Jamal Adams with the sixth overall pick out of LSU. Adams had a strong start to his early career, making the Pro Bowl in the 2018 season and winning the Defensive MVP Award alongside Kansas City Chiefs&#x27; quarterback Patrick Mahomes as the Offensive MVP.

In the 2019 NFL draft, the Jets selected Quinnen Williams from Alabama with the third overall pick. Williams had been touted as the best overall prospect leading up to the draft, being compared to defensive tackle superstar Aaron Donald. Williams ended up being the final first-round pick by then general manager Mike Maccagnan, who was fired shortly after the draft. Williams struggled in his rookie year with injuries and inconsistent play, but showed promise as a defensive anchor in his 2020 season: he recorded 7.0 sacks and 55 total tackles before being added to the Injured Reserved list in the final weeks of the season.

In the 2022 NFL draft, the Jets made three selections in the first round. The Jets selected cornerback Sauce Gardner from the University of Cincinnati fourth overall. He made the 2022 All-Pro Team as a rookie, the first to do so at his position since Ronnie Lott in 1981. The second of their three first round selections was wide receiver Garrett Wilson from Ohio State, who was selected 10th overall. The Jets third and final selection in the first round was defensive end Jermaine Johnson II of Florida State University.

==Coaches and staff==

===Head coaches===

The Jets have had 21 head coaches in their history coach at least one game for the franchise. 18 of their head coaches have served in a full-time role.

===Current staff===
==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* New York Jets at the National Football League official website
*Franchise Encyclopedia at Pro Football Reference</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="4" end="17" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="37" end="54" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="73" end="99" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="125" end="149" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q276530" start="175" end="203" title="American Football Conference" label="American Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="210" end="214" title="AFC East" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="258" end="273" title="MetLife Stadium" label="MetLife Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="300" end="315" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q225108" start="324" end="350" title="Meadowlands Sports Complex" label="Meadowlands Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q746830" start="354" end="381" title="East Rutherford, New Jersey" label="East Rutherford, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="391" end="404" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086712" start="435" end="459" title="Florham Park, New Jersey" label="Florham Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="501" end="526" title="limited liability company" label="limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="542" end="561" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets, LLC."/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="599" end="617" title="New York Jets" label="Titans of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="643" end="667" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="711" end="725" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL–NFL merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="766" end="778" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="822" end="830" title="New York Giants" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="835" end="850" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="baseball Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="937" end="949" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q225108" start="981" end="1007" title="Meadowlands Sports Complex" label="Meadowlands Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623314" start="1080" end="1098" title="Hofstra University" label="Hofstra University"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1102" end="1113" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975669" start="1135" end="1150" title="Atlantic Health System" label="Atlantic Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q939846" start="1288" end="1302" title="Super Bowl III" label="Super Bowl III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515248" start="1327" end="1342" title="1968 Baltimore Colts season" label="Baltimore Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="1400" end="1431" title="Super Bowl" label="AFL–NFL World Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="1578" end="1596" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="1708" end="1724" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="1726" end="1739" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="1775" end="1795" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="1825" end="1839" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q291831" start="1881" end="1889" title="AFC East" label="AFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593852" start="1905" end="1909" title="1998 New York Jets season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600337" start="1914" end="1918" title="2002 New York Jets season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="2052" end="2073" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618188" start="2114" end="2133" title="2010 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4619696" start="2137" end="2141" title="2010–11 NFL playoffs" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591130" start="2223" end="2264" title="List of NFL franchise post-season droughts" label="longest active playoff drought in the NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="2287" end="2301" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="2333" end="2380" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="&amp;quot;Big 4&amp;quot; North American sports leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="2514" end="2530" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513157" start="3202" end="3214" title="Harry Wismer" label="Harry Wismer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="3544" end="3550" title="New York Giants" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562130" start="3981" end="3994" title="Sonny Werblin" label="Sonny Werblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319654" start="4162" end="4179" title="LaGuardia Airport" label="LaGuardia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="4211" end="4224" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="4253" end="4265" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777333" start="4365" end="4376" title="Weeb Ewbank" label="Weeb Ewbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q720558" start="4439" end="4449" title="Joe Namath" label="Joe Namath"/>
<link wikidata="Q939846" start="4548" end="4562" title="Super Bowl III" label="Super Bowl III"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="4651" end="4669" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL and NFL merged"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013949" start="5036" end="5058" title="New York Sack Exchange" label="New York Sack Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977301" start="5190" end="5202" title="Bruce Coslet" label="Bruce Coslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524689" start="5210" end="5219" title="Leon Hess" label="Leon Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758777" start="5226" end="5238" title="Pete Carroll" label="Pete Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323325" start="5331" end="5342" title="Rich Kotite" label="Rich Kotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="5582" end="5602" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="5614" end="5627" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594338" start="5713" end="5734" title="1998–99 NFL playoffs" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="5961" end="5975" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618003" start="6434" end="6442" title="Rex Ryan" label="Rex Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182447" start="6477" end="6482" title="2009 NFL draft" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q946184" start="6529" end="6541" title="Mark Sanchez" label="Mark Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240726" start="6944" end="6954" title="John Idzik, Jr." label="John Idzik"/>
<link wikidata="Q15513157" start="8672" end="8684" title="Harry Wismer" label="Harry Wismer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533680" start="8850" end="8859" title="Letterman (sports)" label="letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="8913" end="8934" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="8939" end="8964" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="9053" end="9064" title="Sports commentator" label="broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="9313" end="9332" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="9878" end="9896" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q304509" start="9921" end="9949" title="Music Corporation of America" label="Music Corporation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524689" start="10470" end="10479" title="Leon Hess" label="Leon Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q124246142" start="10481" end="10497" title="Donald C. Lillis" label="Donald C. Lillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183664" start="10503" end="10519" title="Philip H. Iselin" label="Philip H. Iselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021350" start="10969" end="11011" title="New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority" label="New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615684" start="11149" end="11165" title="Hess Corporation" label="Hess Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="11381" end="11393" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758777" start="12128" end="12140" title="Pete Carroll" label="Pete Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323325" start="12296" end="12307" title="Rich Kotite" label="Rich Kotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="12435" end="12448" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739587" start="12646" end="12657" title="Cablevision" label="Cablevision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569866" start="12679" end="12692" title="Woody Johnson" label="Woody Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351226" start="12712" end="12734" title="Robert Wood Johnson II" label="Robert Wood Johnson II"/>
<link wikidata="Q333718" start="12743" end="12764" title="Johnson &amp;amp; Johnson" label="Johnson &amp;amp; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="12934" end="12940" title="New York Knicks" label="Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565934" start="12957" end="12971" title="Ernie Grunfeld" label="Ernie Grunfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569866" start="13368" end="13381" title="Woody Johnson" label="Woody Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="13409" end="13421" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156830" start="13429" end="13475" title="United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom" label="United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379377" start="13518" end="13537" title="Christopher Johnson (football executive)" label="Christopher Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="13883" end="13895" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="13949" end="13964" title="New York Giants (MLB)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="14135" end="14150" title="Major League Baseball" label="baseball&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="14175" end="14188" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="14231" end="14243" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="14373" end="14386" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="14480" end="14492" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="14614" end="14641" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q375365" start="15220" end="15234" title="Giants Stadium" label="Giants Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="15775" end="15782" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="17170" end="17207" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986524" start="17225" end="17240" title="West Side Stadium" label="build a stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="17261" end="17270" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739587" start="17328" end="17339" title="Cablevision" label="Cablevision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986532" start="17362" end="17376" title="West Side Yard" label="West Side Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="17448" end="17461" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="17615" end="17636" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493559" start="18416" end="18430" title="Sheldon Silver" label="Sheldon Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569412" start="18435" end="18450" title="Joseph L. Bruno" label="Joseph L. Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="19294" end="19315" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="19338" end="19344" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190093" start="19394" end="19411" title="Super Bowl XLVIII" label="Super Bowl XLVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="19619" end="19639" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q847827" start="19771" end="19783" title="Super Bowl I" label="Super Bowl I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582759" start="19933" end="19948" title="1985–86 NFL playoffs" label="wild card round"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="19974" end="19987" title="Super Bowl XX" label="Super Bowl XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="20020" end="20025" title="Chicago Bears" label="Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q364415" start="20123" end="20136" title="Bill Parcells" label="Bill Parcells"/>
<link wikidata="Q952539" start="20295" end="20308" title="Curtis Martin" label="Curtis Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="20443" end="20457" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524689" start="20712" end="20721" title="Leon Hess" label="Leon Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886236" start="21248" end="21256" title="Mo Lewis" label="Mo Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q927434" start="21265" end="21277" title="Drew Bledsoe" label="Drew Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361887" start="21304" end="21321" title="internal bleeding" label="internal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="21356" end="21365" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731504" start="21503" end="21515" title="Eric Mangini" label="Eric Mangini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608979" start="21630" end="21646" title="2007 National Football League videotaping controversy" label="Spygate incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="22170" end="22175" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="22293" end="22306" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="22311" end="22327" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="22631" end="22644" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580208" start="22759" end="22763" title="1981–82 NFL playoffs" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22764" end="22779" title="1981–82_NFL_playoffs#AFC:_Buffalo_Bills_31,_New_York_Jets_27" label="Wild Card Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618003" start="22799" end="22807" title="Rex Ryan" label="Rex Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q946184" start="22976" end="22988" title="Mark Sanchez" label="Mark Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333565" start="23006" end="23018" title="J. P. Losman" label="J. P. Losman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27049069" start="23137" end="23148" title="Sam Darnold" label="Sam Darnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q27966578" start="23153" end="23163" title="Josh Allen" label="Josh Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="23354" end="23368" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647910" start="23599" end="23608" title="A.J. Duhe" label="A.J. Duhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134782" start="23889" end="23904" title="The Clock Play" label="Fake Spike play"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898656" start="24182" end="24206" title="The Monday Night Miracle (American football)" label="The Monday Night Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237345" start="24384" end="24393" title="John Hall (American football)" label="John Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137711" start="24538" end="24553" title="The finger" label="obscene gesture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148299" start="24643" end="24652" title="Sal Alosi" label="Sal Alosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048173" start="24736" end="24749" title="Nolan Carroll" label="Nolan Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="25057" end="25072" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732533" start="25547" end="25560" title="Allie Sherman" label="Allie Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q596953" start="25973" end="25983" title="Phil Simms" label="Phil Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="26041" end="26045" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="26050" end="26056" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q304532" start="26764" end="26778" title="Brandon Jacobs" label="Brandon Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864004" start="27494" end="27498" title="UCLA Bruins football" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798535" start="29860" end="29881" title="Throwback uniform" label="&amp;quot;throwback&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588683" start="29894" end="29898" title="1993 New York Jets season" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="29927" end="29945" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909751" start="29987" end="30009" title="1968 New York Jets season" label="1968 championship team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589618" start="30170" end="30174" title="1994 New York Jets season" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="30191" end="30194" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240514" start="30777" end="30781" title="2007 New York Jets season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611647" start="31133" end="31137" title="2008 New York Jets season" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614453" start="31139" end="31143" title="2009 New York Jets season" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621999" start="31148" end="31152" title="2011 New York Jets season" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="31252" end="31276" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564618" start="34097" end="34101" title="WAXQ" label="WAXQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="34121" end="34132" title="iHeartMedia" label="iHeartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582694" start="34200" end="34217" title="Good Karma Brands" label="Good Karma Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564667" start="34256" end="34263" title="WEPN (AM)" label="WPEN-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373589" start="34299" end="34319" title="Emmis Communications" label="Emmis Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949008" start="34331" end="34338" title="WEPN-FM" label="WEPN-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239010" start="34417" end="34430" title="Bob Wischusen" label="Bob Wischusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="34438" end="34450" title="play-by-play" label="play-by-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852807" start="34467" end="34480" title="Anthony Becht" label="Anthony Becht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919445" start="34587" end="34599" title="Howard David" label="Howard David"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="34624" end="34638" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777475" start="34716" end="34727" title="Marty Lyons" label="Marty Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013949" start="34752" end="34774" title="New York Sack Exchange" label="New York Sack Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043497" start="34937" end="34944" title="WCBS-TV" label="WCBS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q426638" start="34946" end="34964" title="SportsNet New York" label="SportsNet New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="35092" end="35107" title="High-definition television" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="35110" end="35131" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="35172" end="35176" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699014" start="35202" end="35209" title="WABC-TV" label="WABC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068955" start="35214" end="35221" title="WPIX-TV" label="WPIX-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799408" start="35317" end="35340" title="Thursday Night Football" label="Thursday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086634" start="35359" end="35371" title="Amazon Prime" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540364" start="35395" end="35399" title="WNYW" label="WNYW"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="36009" end="36028" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="36207" end="36226" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="36941" end="36958" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750919" start="37044" end="37051" title="NFL draft" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976092" start="37147" end="37160" title="Wayne Chrebet" label="Wayne Chrebet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166605" start="37616" end="37630" title="Darrelle Revis" label="Darrelle Revis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205543" start="38003" end="38041" title="American Football League All-Time Team" label="American Football League All-Time Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574184" start="38972" end="38984" title="John Dockery" label="John Dockery"/>
<link wikidata="Q31603" start="39181" end="39191" title="draft bust" label="draft bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950369" start="39273" end="39285" title="Blair Thomas" label="Blair Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q770013" start="39842" end="39857" title="Vernon Gholston" label="Vernon Gholston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451065" start="39954" end="39964" title="Kyle Brady" label="Kyle Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q180342" start="39999" end="40010" title="Warren Sapp" label="Warren Sapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323325" start="40047" end="40058" title="Rich Kotite" label="Rich Kotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930574" start="40136" end="40148" title="Hugh Douglas (American football)" label="Hugh Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268113" start="40150" end="40167" title="Dewayne Robertson" label="Dewayne Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="40248" end="40256" title="University of Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="40509" end="40530" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431271" start="40543" end="40555" title="Richard Todd (American football)" label="Richard Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="40693" end="40707" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="40715" end="40736" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="40842" end="40860" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249936" start="40884" end="40896" title="Dee Milliner" label="Dee Milliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="40973" end="40994" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866928" start="41333" end="41351" title="Muhammad Wilkerson" label="Muhammad Wilkerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493544" start="41363" end="41381" title="Sheldon Richardson" label="Sheldon Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180862" start="41520" end="41532" title="John Abraham (American football)" label="John Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="41604" end="41606" title="Associated Press" label="AP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41611" end="41639" title="National Football League Rookie of the Year Award#Associated Press NFL ROTY Award" label="Defensive Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q25050788" start="41777" end="41791" title="2017 NFL draft" label="2017 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q21620665" start="41811" end="41822" title="Jamal Adams" label="Jamal Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460028" start="41858" end="41861" title="LSU Tigers football" label="LSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q47090681" start="41936" end="41947" title="2018 NFL season" label="2018 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667998" start="42031" end="42046" title="Patrick Mahomes" label="Patrick Mahomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058215" start="42077" end="42091" title="2019 NFL draft" label="2019 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q57603684" start="42111" end="42127" title="Quinnen Williams" label="Quinnen Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267489" start="42294" end="42306" title="Aaron Donald" label="Aaron Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666255" start="42383" end="42397" title="Mike Maccagnan" label="Mike Maccagnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073069" start="42707" end="42721" title="2022 NFL draft" label="2022 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q102202422" start="42803" end="42816" title="Sauce Gardner" label="Sauce Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="42826" end="42850" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430573" start="42879" end="42896" title="2022 All-Pro Team" label="2022 All-Pro Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q726226" start="42951" end="42962" title="Ronnie Lott" label="Ronnie Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q104524010" start="43039" end="43053" title="Garrett Wilson" label="Garrett Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="43059" end="43069" title="Ohio State" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q108841551" start="43174" end="43193" title="Jermaine Johnson II" label="Jermaine Johnson II"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="43197" end="43221" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="43537" end="43561" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246590" start="43606" end="43628" title="Pro Football Reference" label="Pro Football Reference"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21723" wikidata="Q756033" url="?curid=21723" title="Nonlinear optics">
<text>Nonlinear optics (NLO) is the branch of optics that describes the behaviour of light in nonlinear media, that is, media in which the polarization density P responds non-linearly to the electric field E of the light. The non-linearity is typically observed only at very high light intensities (when the electric field of the light is &gt;108 V/m and thus comparable to the atomic electric field of ~1011 V/m) such as those provided by lasers. Above the Schwinger limit, the vacuum itself is expected to become nonlinear. In nonlinear optics, the superposition principle no longer holds.

==History==
The first nonlinear optical effect to be predicted was two-photon absorption, by Maria Goeppert Mayer for her PhD in 1931, but it remained an unexplored theoretical curiosity until 1961 and the almost simultaneous observation of two-photon absorption at Bell Labs
and the discovery of second-harmonic generation by Peter Franken &quot;et al.&quot; at University of Michigan, both shortly after the construction of the first laser by Theodore Maiman. However, some nonlinear effects were discovered before the development of the laser. The theoretical basis for many nonlinear processes was first described in Bloembergen&#x27;s monograph &quot;Nonlinear Optics&quot;.

==Nonlinear optical processes==
Nonlinear optics explains nonlinear response of properties such as frequency, polarization, phase or path of incident light. These nonlinear interactions give rise to a host of optical phenomena:

===Frequency-mixing processes===
* Second-harmonic generation (SHG), or &quot;frequency doubling&quot;, generation of light with a doubled frequency (half the wavelength), two photons are destroyed, creating a single photon at two times the frequency.
* Third-harmonic generation (THG), generation of light with a tripled frequency (one-third the wavelength), three photons are destroyed, creating a single photon at three times the frequency.
* High-harmonic generation (HHG), generation of light with frequencies much greater than the original (typically 100 to 1000 times greater).
* Sum-frequency generation (SFG), generation of light with a frequency that is the sum of two other frequencies (SHG is a special case of this).
* Difference-frequency generation (DFG), generation of light with a frequency that is the difference between two other frequencies.
* Optical parametric amplification (OPA), amplification of a signal input in the presence of a higher-frequency pump wave, at the same time generating an &quot;idler&quot; wave (can be considered as DFG).
* Optical parametric oscillation (OPO), generation of a signal and idler wave using a parametric amplifier in a resonator (with no signal input).
* Optical parametric generation (OPG), like parametric oscillation but without a resonator, using a very high gain instead.
* Half-harmonic generation, the special case of OPO or OPG when the signal and idler degenerate in one single frequency, 
* Spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC), the amplification of the vacuum fluctuations in the low-gain regime.
* Optical rectification (OR), generation of quasi-static electric fields.
* Nonlinear light-matter interaction with free electrons and plasmas.

===Other nonlinear processes===
* Optical Kerr effect, intensity-dependent refractive index (a formula_1 effect).
* Self-focusing, an effect due to the optical Kerr effect (and possibly higher-order nonlinearities) caused by the spatial variation in the intensity creating a spatial variation in the refractive index.
* Kerr-lens modelocking (KLM), the use of self-focusing as a mechanism to mode-lock laser.
* Self-phase modulation (SPM), an effect due to the optical Kerr effect (and possibly higher-order nonlinearities) caused by the temporal variation in the intensity creating a temporal variation in the refractive index.
* Optical solitons, an equilibrium solution for either an optical pulse (temporal soliton) or spatial mode (spatial soliton) that does not change during propagation due to a balance between dispersion and the Kerr effect (e.g. self-phase modulation for temporal and self-focusing for spatial solitons).
* Self-diffraction, splitting of beams in a multi-wave mixing process with potential energy transfer.
* Cross-phase modulation (XPM), where one wavelength of light can affect the phase of another wavelength of light through the optical Kerr effect.
* Four-wave mixing (FWM), can also arise from other nonlinearities.
* Cross-polarized wave generation (XPW), a formula_1 effect in which a wave with polarization vector perpendicular to the input one is generated.
* Modulational instability.
* Raman amplification
* Optical phase conjugation.
* Stimulated Brillouin scattering, interaction of photons with acoustic phonons
* Multi-photon absorption, simultaneous absorption of two or more photons, transferring the energy to a single electron.
* Multiple photoionisation, near-simultaneous removal of many bound electrons by one photon.
* Chaos in optical systems.

===Related processes===
In these processes, the medium has a linear response to the light, but the properties of the medium are affected by other causes:
* Pockels effect, the refractive index is affected by a static electric field; used in electro-optic modulators.
* Acousto-optics, the refractive index is affected by acoustic waves (ultrasound); used in acousto-optic modulators.
* Raman scattering, interaction of photons with optical phonons.

==Parametric processes==
Nonlinear effects fall into two qualitatively different categories, parametric and non-parametric effects. A parametric non-linearity
is an interaction in which the quantum state of the nonlinear material is not changed by the interaction with the optical field. As a consequence of this, the process is &quot;instantaneous&quot;. Energy and momentum are conserved in the optical field, making phase matching important and polarization-dependent.
===Theory===
Parametric and &quot;instantaneous&quot; (i.e. material must be lossless and dispersionless through the Kramers–Kronig relations) nonlinear optical phenomena, in which the optical fields are not too large, can be described by a Taylor series expansion of the dielectric polarization density (electric dipole moment per unit volume) P(&quot;t&quot;) at time &quot;t&quot; in terms of the electric field E(&quot;t&quot;):
:formula_3
where the coefficients χ(&quot;n&quot;) are the &quot;n&quot;-th-order susceptibilities of the medium, and the presence of such a term is generally referred to as an &quot;n&quot;-th-order nonlinearity. Note that the polarization density P(&quot;t&quot;) and electrical field E(&quot;t&quot;) are considered as scalar for simplicity. In general, χ(&quot;n&quot;) is an (&quot;n&quot; + 1)-th-rank tensor representing both the polarization-dependent nature of the parametric interaction and the symmetries (or lack) of the nonlinear material.

====Wave equation in a nonlinear material====
Central to the study of electromagnetic waves is the wave equation. Starting with Maxwell&#x27;s equations in an isotropic space, containing no free charge, it can be shown that
:formula_4
where PNL is the nonlinear part of the polarization density, and &quot;n&quot; is the refractive index, which comes from the linear term in P.

Note that one can normally use the vector identity
:formula_5
and Gauss&#x27;s law (assuming no free charges, formula_6),
:formula_7
to obtain the more familiar wave equation
:formula_8
For a nonlinear medium, Gauss&#x27;s law does not imply that the identity
:formula_9
is true in general, even for an isotropic medium. However, even when this term is not identically 0, it is often negligibly small and thus in practice is usually ignored, giving us the standard nonlinear wave equation:
:formula_10

====Nonlinearities as a wave-mixing process====
The nonlinear wave equation is an inhomogeneous differential equation. The general solution comes from the study of ordinary differential equations and can be obtained by the use of a Green&#x27;s function. Physically one gets the normal electromagnetic wave solutions to the homogeneous part of the wave equation:
:formula_11
and the inhomogeneous term
:formula_12
acts as a driver/source of the electromagnetic waves. One of the consequences of this is a nonlinear interaction that results in energy being mixed or coupled between different frequencies, which is often called a &quot;wave mixing&quot;.

In general, an &quot;n&quot;-th order nonlinearity will lead to (&quot;n&quot; + 1)-wave mixing. As an example, if we consider only a second-order nonlinearity (three-wave mixing), then the polarization P takes the form
:formula_13
If we assume that &quot;E&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) is made up of two components at frequencies &quot;ω&quot;1 and &quot;ω&quot;2, we can write &quot;E&quot;(&quot;t&quot;) as
:formula_14
and using Euler&#x27;s formula to convert to exponentials,
:formula_15
where &quot;c.c.&quot; stands for complex conjugate. Plugging this into the expression for P gives
:formula_16
which has frequency components at 2&quot;ω&quot;1, 2&quot;ω&quot;2, &quot;ω&quot;1 + &quot;ω&quot;2, &quot;ω&quot;1 − &quot;ω&quot;2, and 0. These three-wave mixing processes correspond to the nonlinear effects known as second-harmonic generation, sum-frequency generation, difference-frequency generation and optical rectification respectively.
Note: Parametric generation and amplification is a variation of difference-frequency generation, where the lower frequency of one of the two generating fields is much weaker (parametric amplification) or completely absent (parametric generation). In the latter case, the fundamental quantum-mechanical uncertainty in the electric field initiates the process.

===Phase matching===

The above ignores the position dependence of the electrical fields. In a typical situation, the electrical fields are traveling waves described by

:formula_17

at position formula_18, with the wave vector formula_19, where formula_20 is the velocity of light in vacuum, and formula_21 is the index of refraction of the medium at angular frequency formula_22. Thus, the second-order polarization at angular frequency formula_23 is

:formula_24

At each position formula_18 within the nonlinear medium, the oscillating second-order polarization radiates at angular frequency formula_26 and a corresponding wave vector formula_27. Constructive interference, and therefore a high-intensity formula_26 field, will occur only if

:formula_29

The above equation is known as the &quot;phase-matching condition&quot;. Typically, three-wave mixing is done in a birefringent crystalline material, where the refractive index depends on the polarization and direction of the light that passes through. The polarizations of the fields and the orientation of the crystal are chosen such that the phase-matching condition is fulfilled. This phase-matching technique is called angle tuning. Typically a crystal has three axes, one or two of which have a different refractive index than the other one(s). Uniaxial crystals, for example, have a single preferred axis, called the extraordinary (e) axis, while the other two are ordinary axes (o) (see crystal optics). There are several schemes of choosing the polarizations for this crystal type. If the signal and idler have the same polarization, it is called &quot;type-I phase matching&quot;, and if their polarizations are perpendicular, it is called &quot;type-II phase matching&quot;. However, other conventions exist that specify further which frequency has what polarization relative to the crystal axis. These types are listed below, with the convention that the signal wavelength is shorter than the idler wavelength.

Most common nonlinear crystals are negative uniaxial, which means that the &quot;e&quot; axis has a smaller refractive index than the &quot;o&quot; axes. In those crystals, type-I and -II phase matching are usually the most suitable schemes. In positive uniaxial crystals, types VII and VIII are more suitable. Types II and III are essentially equivalent, except that the names of signal and idler are swapped when the signal has a longer wavelength than the idler. For this reason, they are sometimes called IIA and IIB. The type numbers V–VIII are less common than I and II and variants.

One undesirable effect of angle tuning is that the optical frequencies involved do not propagate collinearly with each other. This is due to the fact that the extraordinary wave propagating through a birefringent crystal possesses a Poynting vector that is not parallel to the propagation vector. This would lead to beam walk-off, which limits the nonlinear optical conversion efficiency. Two other methods of phase matching avoid beam walk-off by forcing all frequencies to propagate at a 90° with respect to the optical axis of the crystal. These methods are called temperature tuning and quasi-phase-matching.

Temperature tuning is used when the pump (laser) frequency polarization is orthogonal to the signal and idler frequency polarization. The birefringence in some crystals, in particular lithium niobate is highly temperature-dependent. The crystal temperature is controlled to achieve phase-matching conditions.

The other method is quasi-phase-matching. In this method the frequencies involved are not constantly locked in phase with each other, instead the crystal axis is flipped at a regular interval Λ, typically 15 micrometres in length. Hence, these crystals are called periodically poled. This results in the polarization response of the crystal to be shifted back in phase with the pump beam by reversing the nonlinear susceptibility. This allows net positive energy flow from the pump into the signal and idler frequencies. In this case, the crystal itself provides the additional wavevector &quot;k&quot; = 2π/Λ (and hence momentum) to satisfy the phase-matching condition. Quasi-phase-matching can be expanded to chirped gratings to get more bandwidth and to shape an SHG pulse like it is done in a dazzler. SHG of a pump and self-phase modulation (emulated by second-order processes) of the signal and an optical parametric amplifier can be integrated monolithically.

==Higher-order frequency mixing==

The above holds for formula_30 processes. It can be extended for processes where formula_1 is nonzero, something that is generally true in any medium without any symmetry restrictions; in particular resonantly enhanced sum or difference frequency mixing in gasses is frequently used for extreme or &quot;vacuum&quot; ultra-violet light generation. In common scenarios, such as mixing in dilute gases, the non-linearity is weak and so the light beams are focused which, unlike the plane wave approximation used above, introduces a pi phase shift on each light beam, complicating the phase-matching requirements. Conveniently, difference frequency mixing with formula_1 cancels this focal phase shift and often has a nearly self-canceling overall phase-matching condition, which relatively simplifies broad wavelength tuning compared to sum frequency generation. In formula_1 all four frequencies are mixing simultaneously, as opposed to sequential mixing via two formula_30 processes.

The Kerr effect can be described as a formula_1 as well. At high peak powers the Kerr effect can cause filamentation of light in air, in which the light travels without dispersion or divergence in a self-generated waveguide. At even high intensities the Taylor series, which led the domination of the lower orders, does not converge anymore and instead a time based model is used. When a noble gas atom is hit by an intense laser pulse, which has an electric field strength comparable to the Coulomb field of the atom, the outermost electron may be ionized from the atom. Once freed, the electron can be accelerated by the electric field of the light, first moving away from the ion, then back toward it as the field changes direction. The electron may then recombine with the ion, releasing its energy in the form of a photon. The light is emitted at every peak of the laser light field which is intense enough, producing a series of attosecond light flashes. The photon energies generated by this process can extend past the 800th harmonic order up to a few KeV. This is called high-order harmonic generation. The laser must be linearly polarized, so that the electron returns to the vicinity of the parent ion. High-order harmonic generation has been observed in noble gas jets, cells, and gas-filled capillary waveguides.

==Example uses==

===Frequency doubling===
One of the most commonly used frequency-mixing processes is frequency doubling, or second-harmonic generation. With this technique, the 1064 nm output from Nd:YAG lasers or the 800 nm output from Ti:sapphire lasers can be converted to visible light, with wavelengths of 532 nm (green) or 400 nm (violet) respectively.

Practically, frequency doubling is carried out by placing a nonlinear medium in a laser beam. While there are many types of nonlinear media, the most common media are crystals. Commonly used crystals are BBO (β-barium borate), KDP (potassium dihydrogen phosphate), KTP (potassium titanyl phosphate), and lithium niobate. These crystals have the necessary properties of being strongly birefringent (necessary to obtain phase matching, see below), having a specific crystal symmetry, being transparent for both the impinging laser light and the frequency-doubled wavelength, and having high damage thresholds, which makes them resistant against the high-intensity laser light.

===Optical phase conjugation===
It is possible, using nonlinear optical processes, to exactly reverse the propagation direction and phase variation of a beam of light. The reversed beam is called a &quot;conjugate&quot; beam, and thus the technique is known as optical phase conjugation (also called &quot;time reversal&quot;, &quot;wavefront reversal&quot; and is significantly different from &quot;retroreflection&quot;).

A device producing the phase-conjugation effect is known as a phase-conjugate mirror (PCM).

====Principles====
One can interpret optical phase conjugation as being analogous to a real-time holographic process. In this case, the interacting beams simultaneously interact in a nonlinear optical material to form a dynamic hologram (two of the three input beams), or real-time diffraction pattern, in the material. The third incident beam diffracts at this dynamic hologram, and, in the process, reads out the &quot;phase-conjugate&quot; wave. In effect, all three incident beams interact (essentially) simultaneously to form several real-time holograms, resulting in a set of diffracted output waves that phase up as the &quot;time-reversed&quot; beam. In the language of nonlinear optics, the interacting beams result in a nonlinear polarization within the material, which coherently radiates to form the phase-conjugate wave.

Reversal of wavefront means a perfect reversal of photons&#x27; linear momentum and angular momentum. The reversal of angular momentum means reversal of both polarization state and orbital angular momentum. Reversal of orbital angular momentum of optical vortex is due to the perfect match of helical phase profiles of the incident and reflected beams. Optical phase conjugation is implemented via stimulated Brillouin scattering, four-wave mixing, three-wave mixing, static linear holograms and some other tools.

The most common way of producing optical phase conjugation is to use a four-wave mixing technique, though it is also possible to use processes such as stimulated Brillouin scattering.

====Four-wave mixing technique====
For the four-wave mixing technique, we can describe four beams (&quot;j&quot; = 1, 2, 3, 4) with electric fields:

:formula_36

where &quot;Ej&quot; are the electric field amplitudes. Ξ1 and Ξ2 are known as the two pump waves, with Ξ3 being the signal wave, and Ξ4 being the generated conjugate wave.

If the pump waves and the signal wave are superimposed in a medium with a non-zero χ(3), this produces a nonlinear polarization field:

:formula_37

resulting in generation of waves with frequencies given by ω = ±ω1 ± ω2 ± ω3 in addition to third-harmonic generation waves with ω = 3ω1, 3ω2, 3ω3.

As above, the phase-matching condition determines which of these waves is the dominant. By choosing conditions such that ω = ω1 + ω2 − ω3 and k = k1 + k2 − k3, this gives a polarization field:

:formula_38

This is the generating field for the phase-conjugate beam, Ξ4. Its direction is given by k4 = k1 + k2 − k3, and so if the two pump beams are counterpropagating (k1 = −k2), then the conjugate and signal beams propagate in opposite directions (k4 = −k3). This results in the retroreflecting property of the effect.

Further, it can be shown that for a medium with refractive index &quot;n&quot; and a beam interaction length &quot;l&quot;, the electric field amplitude of the conjugate beam is approximated by

:formula_39

where &quot;c&quot; is the speed of light. If the pump beams &quot;E&quot;1 and &quot;E&quot;2 are plane (counterpropagating) waves, then

:formula_40

that is, the generated beam amplitude is the complex conjugate of the signal beam amplitude. Since the imaginary part of the amplitude contains the phase of the beam, this results in the reversal of phase property of the effect.

Note that the constant of proportionality between the signal and conjugate beams can be greater than 1. This is effectively a mirror with a reflection coefficient greater than 100%, producing an amplified reflection. The power for this comes from the two pump beams, which are depleted by the process.

The frequency of the conjugate wave can be different from that of the signal wave. If the pump waves are of frequency ω1 = ω2 = ω, and the signal wave is higher in frequency such that ω3 = ω + Δω, then the conjugate wave is of frequency ω4 = ω − Δω. This is known as &quot;frequency flipping&quot;.

===Angular and linear momenta in optical phase conjugation===

====Classical picture ====

In &quot;classical Maxwell electrodynamics&quot; a phase-conjugating mirror performs reversal of the Poynting vector:

:formula_41

(&quot;in&quot; means incident field, &quot;out&quot; means reflected field) where

:formula_42
which is a linear momentum density of electromagnetic field.
In the same way a phase-conjugated wave has an opposite angular momentum density vector formula_43 
with respect to incident field:

:formula_44

The above identities are valid &quot;locally&quot;, i.e. in each space point formula_45 in a given moment formula_46 for an &quot;ideal phase-conjugating mirror&quot;.

====Quantum picture ====

In &quot;quantum electrodynamics&quot; the photon with energy formula_47 also possesses linear momentum formula_48 and angular momentum, whose projection on propagation axis is formula_49, where formula_50 is &quot;topological charge&quot; of photon, or winding number, formula_51 is propagation axis. The angular momentum projection on propagation axis has &quot;discrete values&quot; formula_52.

In &quot;quantum electrodynamics&quot; the interpretation of phase conjugation is much simpler compared to &quot;classical electrodynamics&quot;. The photon reflected from phase conjugating-mirror (out) has opposite directions of linear and angular momenta with respect to incident photon (in):

:formula_53

== Nonlinear optical pattern formation ==
Optical fields transmitted through nonlinear Kerr media can also display pattern formation owing to the nonlinear medium amplifying spatial and temporal noise. The effect is referred to as optical modulation instability. This has been observed both in photo-refractive, photonic lattices, as well as photo-reactive systems. In the latter case, optical nonlinearity is afforded by reaction-induced increases in refractive index. Examples of pattern formation are spatial solitons and vortex lattices in framework of nonlinear Schrödinger equation.

==Molecular nonlinear optics==
The early studies of nonlinear optics and materials focused on the inorganic solids. With the development of nonlinear optics, molecular optical properties were investigated, forming molecular nonlinear optics. The traditional approaches used in the past to enhance nonlinearities include extending chromophore π-systems, adjusting bond length alternation, inducing intramolecular charge transfer, extending conjugation in 2D, and engineering multipolar charge distributions. Recently, many novel directions were proposed for enhanced nonlinearity and light manipulation, including twisted chromophores, combining rich density of states with bond alternation, microscopic cascading of second-order nonlinearity, etc. Due to the distinguished advantages, molecular nonlinear optics have been widely used in the biophotonics field, including bioimaging, phototherapy, biosensing, etc.

Connecting bulk properties to microscopic properties

Molecular nonlinear optics relate optical properties of bulk matter to their microscopic molecular properties. Just as the polarizability can be described as a Taylor series expansion, one can expand the induced dipole moment in powers of the electric field: formula_54, where μ is the polarizability, α is the first hyperpolarizability, β is the second hyperpolarizability, and so on.

Novel Nonlinear Media

Certain molecular materials have the ability to be optimized for their optical nonlinearity at the microscopic and bulk levels. Due to the delocalization of electrons in π bonds electrons are more easily responsive to applied optical fields and tend to produce larger linear and nonlinear optical responses than those in single (𝜎) bonds. In these systems linear response scales with the length of the conjugated pi system, while nonlinear response scales even more rapidly.

One of the many applications of molecular nonlinear optics is the use in nonlinear bioimaging. These nonlinear materials, like multi-photon chromophores, are used as biomarkers for two-photon spectroscopy, in which  the attenuation of incident light intensity as it passes through the sample is written as formula_55.

where N is the number of particles per unit volume, I is intensity of light, and δ is the two photon absorption cross section. The resulting signal adopts a Lorentzian lineshape with a cross-section proportional to the difference in dipole moments of ground and final states.

Similar highly conjugated chromophores with strong donor-acceptor characteristics are used due to their large difference in the dipole moments, and current efforts in extending their pi-conjugated systems to enhance their nonlinear optical properties are being made.

==Common second-harmonic-generating (SHG) materials==

Ordered by pump wavelength:
* 800 nm: BBO
* 806 nm: lithium iodate (LiIO3)
* 860 nm: potassium niobate (KNbO3)
* 980 nm: KNbO3
* 1064 nm: monopotassium phosphate (KH2PO4, KDP), lithium triborate (LBO) and β-barium borate (BBO)
* 1300 nm: gallium selenide (GaSe)
* 1319 nm: KNbO3, BBO, KDP, potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP), lithium niobate (LiNbO3), LiIO3, and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate (ADP)
* 1550 nm: potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP), lithium niobate (LiNbO3)

==See also==
* Born–Infeld model
* Filament propagation
* :Category:Nonlinear optical materials

==Further reading==
* Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology , with content on nonlinear optics, by Rüdiger Paschotta
* An Intuitive Explanation of Phase Conjugation 
* SNLO - Nonlinear Optics Design Software 
* Robert Boyd plenary presentation: Quantum Nonlinear Optics: Nonlinear Optics Meets the Quantum World SPIE Newsroom

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="0" end="16" title="Nonlinear optics" label="Nonlinear optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="18" end="21" title="Nonlinear optics" label="NLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="40" end="46" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="79" end="84" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="88" end="97" title="Nonlinearity" label="nonlinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050425" start="133" end="153" title="polarization density" label="polarization density"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="154" end="155" title="Nonlinear optics" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="185" end="199" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="200" end="201" title="Nonlinear optics" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="434" end="439" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789519" start="452" end="467" title="Schwinger limit" label="Schwinger limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="545" end="568" title="superposition principle" label="superposition principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q231917" start="654" end="675" title="two-photon absorption" label="two-photon absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q57100" start="680" end="700" title="Maria Goeppert Mayer" label="Maria Goeppert Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="853" end="862" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="884" end="910" title="second-harmonic generation" label="second-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472237" start="914" end="927" title="Peter Franken" label="Peter Franken"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="950" end="972" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="1032" end="1047" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189987" start="1208" end="1219" title="Nicolaas Bloembergen" label="Bloembergen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1367" end="1376" title="Frequency#Light" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="1532" end="1558" title="Second-harmonic generation" label="Second-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79463705" start="1751" end="1776" title="Third-harmonic generation" label="Third-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623464" start="1943" end="1967" title="High-harmonic generation" label="High-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123190" start="2084" end="2108" title="Sum-frequency generation" label="Sum-frequency generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424759" start="2229" end="2260" title="Difference-frequency generation" label="Difference-frequency generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286948" start="2361" end="2393" title="Optical parametric amplification" label="Optical parametric amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q834512" start="2566" end="2596" title="Optical parametric oscillation" label="Optical parametric oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286948" start="2712" end="2741" title="Optical parametric generation" label="Optical parametric generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455833" start="2836" end="2860" title="Half-harmonic generation" label="Half-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689728" start="2958" end="2996" title="Spontaneous parametric down-conversion" label="Spontaneous parametric down-conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098892" start="3076" end="3097" title="Optical rectification" label="Optical rectification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3150" end="3216" title="Nonlinear light-matter interaction with free electrons and plasmas" label="Nonlinear light-matter interaction with free electrons and plasmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q883038" start="3261" end="3272" title="Kerr effect" label="Kerr effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681145" start="3335" end="3348" title="Self-focusing" label="Self-focusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q883038" start="3379" end="3390" title="Kerr effect" label="Kerr effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q597069" start="3448" end="3482" title="Spatial mode" label="spatial variation in the intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830209" start="3539" end="3560" title="Kerr-lens modelocking" label="Kerr-lens modelocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681145" start="3579" end="3592" title="self-focusing" label="self-focusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166583" start="3611" end="3620" title="Mode-locking" label="mode-lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183467" start="3630" end="3651" title="Self-phase modulation" label="Self-phase modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q883038" start="3688" end="3699" title="Kerr effect" label="Kerr effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412691" start="3757" end="3792" title="Wavepacket" label="temporal variation in the intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128993" start="3850" end="3866" title="Soliton (optics)" label="Optical solitons"/>
<link wikidata="Q844471" start="3906" end="3919" title="Optical pulses" label="optical pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q597069" start="3942" end="3954" title="spatial mode" label="spatial mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="4038" end="4048" title="dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q883038" start="4057" end="4068" title="Kerr effect" label="Kerr effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q183467" start="4075" end="4096" title="self-phase modulation" label="self-phase modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681145" start="4114" end="4127" title="self-focusing" label="self-focusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188186" start="4255" end="4277" title="Cross-phase modulation" label="Cross-phase modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424759" start="4402" end="4418" title="Four-wave mixing" label="Four-wave mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188192" start="4470" end="4501" title="Cross-polarized wave generation" label="Cross-polarized wave generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104082" start="4616" end="4640" title="Modulational instability" label="Modulational instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129992" start="4644" end="4663" title="Raman amplification" label="Raman amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="4666" end="4691" title="Optical phase conjugation" label="Optical phase conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4695" end="4726" title="Brillouin scattering#Stimulated Brillouin scattering" label="Stimulated Brillouin scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q231917" start="4775" end="4798" title="Two-photon absorption" label="Multi-photon absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="4865" end="4871" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10284378" start="4905" end="4920" title="photoionisation" label="photoionisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072815" start="4989" end="5013" title="Optical chaos" label="Chaos in optical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q899456" start="5172" end="5186" title="Pockels effect" label="Pockels effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747700" start="5257" end="5280" title="electro-optic modulator" label="electro-optic modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181689" start="5285" end="5299" title="Acousto-optics" label="Acousto-optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q424118" start="5374" end="5397" title="acousto-optic modulator" label="acousto-optic modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="5402" end="5418" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="5456" end="5462" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049014" start="5559" end="5569" title="Parametric process (optics)" label="parametric"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="5656" end="5669" title="quantum state" label="quantum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424764" start="6055" end="6079" title="Kramers–Kronig relations" label="Kramers–Kronig relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886678" start="6146" end="6155" title="Perturbation theory" label="too large"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="6179" end="6192" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="6210" end="6220" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050425" start="6221" end="6241" title="polarization density" label="polarization density"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="6243" end="6265" title="electric dipole moment" label="electric dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="6338" end="6352" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q598305" start="6453" end="6469" title="Electric susceptibility" label="susceptibilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="6779" end="6785" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="6808" end="6820" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="6876" end="6886" title="Crystal symmetry" label="symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q533281" start="7024" end="7037" title="Electromagnetic wave equation" label="wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="7053" end="7077" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050425" start="7199" end="7219" title="polarization density" label="polarization density"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="7246" end="7262" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q173356" start="7370" end="7386" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q533281" start="7465" end="7478" title="Electromagnetic wave equation" label="wave equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173356" start="7514" end="7530" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="7971" end="8002" title="ordinary differential equations" label="ordinary differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q378435" start="8039" end="8060" title="Green&amp;#x27;s function" label="Green&amp;#x27;s function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="8093" end="8113" title="electromagnetic wave" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q184871" start="8886" end="8906" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="8981" end="8998" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="9278" end="9304" title="second-harmonic generation" label="second-harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123190" start="9306" end="9330" title="sum-frequency generation" label="sum-frequency generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424759" start="9332" end="9363" title="difference-frequency generation" label="difference-frequency generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098892" start="9368" end="9389" title="optical rectification" label="optical rectification"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="9687" end="9705" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum-mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="9980" end="9991" title="wave vector" label="wave vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="10684" end="10700" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q430909" start="11219" end="11233" title="crystal optics" label="crystal optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q504186" start="12572" end="12587" title="Poynting vector" label="Poynting vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269466" start="12930" end="12950" title="quasi-phase-matching" label="quasi-phase-matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q424481" start="13137" end="13152" title="lithium niobate" label="lithium niobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168643" start="13527" end="13545" title="Periodic poling" label="periodically poled"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674742" start="14061" end="14068" title="Acousto-optic programmable dispersive filter" label="dazzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q183467" start="14088" end="14109" title="self-phase modulation" label="self-phase modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286948" start="14168" end="14196" title="optical parametric amplifier" label="optical parametric amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14565" end="14613" title="Ultraviolet#Tunable vacuum ultraviolet (VUV)" label="&amp;quot;vacuum&amp;quot; ultra-violet light generation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14892" end="14919" title="difference frequency mixing" label="difference frequency mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448268" start="15355" end="15368" title="Filament propagation" label="filamentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="15506" end="15519" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483628" start="16187" end="16197" title="attosecond" label="attosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="16313" end="16315" title="Electronvolt" label="eV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623464" start="16332" end="16362" title="High harmonic generation" label="high-order harmonic generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110547" start="16778" end="16791" title="Nd-YAG laser" label="Nd:YAG lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166376" start="16818" end="16836" title="Ti-sapphire laser" label="Ti:sapphire lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q830818" start="17150" end="17165" title="β-barium borate" label="β-barium borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415049" start="17173" end="17203" title="potassium dihydrogen phosphate" label="potassium dihydrogen phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q414260" start="17211" end="17238" title="potassium titanyl phosphate" label="potassium titanyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q424481" start="17245" end="17260" title="lithium niobate" label="lithium niobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q108779" start="17325" end="17337" title="birefringence" label="birefringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835" start="18017" end="18032" title="retroreflector" label="retroreflection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18222" end="18251" title="holography#Dynamic holography" label="real-time holographic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="19088" end="19104" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="19323" end="19348" title="Optical phase conjugation" label="Optical phase conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q504186" start="22211" end="22226" title="Poynting vector" label="Poynting vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955627" start="23563" end="23580" title="pattern formation" label="pattern formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104082" start="23687" end="23709" title="Modulational instability" label="modulation instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579914" start="24005" end="24035" title="nonlinear Schrödinger equation" label="nonlinear Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q869891" start="25130" end="25144" title="polarizability" label="polarizability"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="25167" end="25190" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477036" start="25324" end="25343" title="hyperpolarizability" label="hyperpolarizability"/>
<link wikidata="Q533543" start="26033" end="26044" title="chromophore" label="chromophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118134" start="26313" end="26337" title="absorption cross section" label="absorption cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q830818" start="26850" end="26853" title="β-barium borate" label="BBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647955" start="26864" end="26878" title="lithium iodate" label="lithium iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631815" start="26897" end="26914" title="potassium niobate" label="potassium niobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415049" start="26950" end="26973" title="monopotassium phosphate" label="monopotassium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410487" start="26989" end="27006" title="lithium triborate" label="lithium triborate"/>
<link wikidata="Q830818" start="27017" end="27032" title="β-barium borate" label="β-barium borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954753" start="27050" end="27066" title="Gallium(II) selenide" label="gallium selenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q414260" start="27102" end="27129" title="potassium titanyl phosphate" label="potassium titanyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q424481" start="27137" end="27152" title="lithium niobate" label="lithium niobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q419087" start="27174" end="27203" title="ammonium dihydrogen phosphate" label="ammonium dihydrogen phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q852824" start="27297" end="27314" title="Born–Infeld model" label="Born–Infeld model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448268" start="27317" end="27337" title="Filament propagation" label="Filament propagation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27340" end="27377" title=":Category:Nonlinear optical materials" label=":Category:Nonlinear optical materials"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21724" wikidata="Q15878" url="?curid=21724" title="Normandy">
<text>Normandy (; or ) is a geographical and cultural region in northwestern Europe, roughly coextensive with the historical Duchy of Normandy.

Normandy comprises mainland Normandy (a part of France) and insular Normandy (mostly the British Channel Islands). It covers . Its population in 2017 was 3,499,280. The inhabitants of Normandy are known as Normans; the region is the historic homeland of the Norman language. Large settlements include Rouen, Caen, Le Havre and Cherbourg.

The cultural region of Normandy is roughly similar to the historical Duchy of Normandy, which includes small areas now part of the departments of Mayenne and Sarthe. The Channel Islands (French: &quot;Îles Anglo-Normandes&quot;) are also historically part of Normandy; they cover and comprise two bailiwicks: Guernsey and Jersey, which are British Crown Dependencies.

Normandy&#x27;s name comes from the settlement of the territory by Vikings (&quot;Northmen&quot;) starting in the 9th century, and confirmed by treaty in the 10th century between King Charles III of France and the Viking &quot;jarl&quot; Rollo. For almost 150 years following the Norman conquest of England in 1066, Normandy and England were linked by having the same person reign as both Duke of Normandy and King of England.

==History==
===Prehistory===
Archaeological finds, such as cave paintings, prove that humans were present in the region in prehistoric times. Normandy also has many megalithic monuments.

===Celtic period===
Celts (also known as Belgae and Gauls) have populated Normandy since at least the Bronze Age. When Julius Caesar invaded Gaul (58–50 BC), there were nine different Celtic tribes living in this part of Gaul.

===Romanisation===

The Romanisation of this region partly included in the &quot;Gallia Celtica&quot; and in the &quot;Gallia Belgica&quot; (the Seine being more or less the limit between them) was achieved by the usual methods: Roman roads and a policy of urbanisation. Classicists mention many Gallo-Roman villas and archeology found their traces in the past 30 years. In the Late Roman Empire a new province was created and called &quot;Lugdunensis Secunda&quot;, it sketched the later ecclesiastical province of Rouen, with the &quot;Metropolis civitas Rotomagensium&quot;
(Rouen), &quot;Civitas Baiocassium&quot; (&quot;Augustodorum&quot;, Bayeux), &quot;Civitas Abrincatum&quot; (&quot;Ingena&quot;, Avranches), &quot;Civitas Ebroicorum&quot; (&quot;Mediolanum&quot;, Évreux), &quot;Civitas Saiorum&quot; (Sées), &quot;Civitas Lexoviorum&quot; (&quot;Noviomagus&quot;, Lisieux / Lieuvin) and &quot;Civitas Constantia&quot; (Coutances).

===Germanic invasions and settlements===
In the late 3rd century AD, Germanic raids devastated &quot;Lugdunensis Secunda&quot;, as the modern area of Normandy was known at the time. The Romans built a system of coastal defences known as Saxon Shore on both sides of the English Channel. Coastal settlements were raided by Saxon pirates that finally settled mainly in the Bessin region. Modern archeology reveals their presence in different Merovingian cemeteries excavated east of Caen. Christianity also began to enter the area during this period and Rouen already had a metropolitan bishop by the 4th century. The ecclesiastical province of Rouen was based on the frame of the Roman &quot;Lugdunensis Secunda&quot;, whose limits corresponded almost exactly to the future duchy of Normandy. In 406, Germanic tribes began invading from the east, followed by dispersed settlements mainly in the Pays de Bray, Pays de Caux and Vexin. As early as 487, the area between the rivers Somme and Loire came under the control of the Frankish lord Clovis.

===Viking raids and foundation of the Norman state===
Vikings started to raid along the river Seine during the middle of the 9th century. As early as 841, a Viking fleet appeared at the mouth of the Seine, the principal route by which they entered the kingdom. After attacking and destroying monasteries, including one at Jumièges, they took advantage of the power vacuum created by the disintegration of Charlemagne&#x27;s empire to take Northern France. The fiefdom of Normandy was created for the Viking leader &quot;Hrólfr&quot;, known in Medieval Latin as &quot;Rollo&quot;. Rollo had besieged Paris but in 911 entered vassalage to the king of the West Franks, Charles the Simple, through the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte. In exchange for his homage and fealty, Rollo legally gained the territory that he and his Viking allies had previously conquered. The name &quot;Normandy&quot; reflects Rollo&#x27;s Viking (&quot;Norseman&quot;) origins.

The descendants of &quot;Rollo&quot; and his followers created an aristocracy that step by step adopted the local Gallo-Romance language, intermarried with the area&#x27;s native Gallo-Frankish inhabitants, and adopted Christianity. Nevertheless, the first generations of Scandinavian and Anglo-Scandinavian settlers brought slaves, mainly from the British Isles, and often turned the women into &quot;frilla&quot;, a Scandinavian tradition which became known as &quot;more Danico&quot;, medieval Latin meaning &quot;Danish marriage&quot;. The first counts of Rouen and the dukes of Normandy had concubines too. While very little archeological excavations about the Vikings were done in Normandy, the Norman toponymy retains a large Scandinavian and Anglo-Scandinavian heritage, due to a constant use of Old Norse during four or five generations in certain parts of Normandy.

They then became the Normans – a Norman French-speaking mixture of Norsemen and indigenous Gallo-Franks.
Rollo&#x27;s descendant William became king of England in 1066 after defeating Harold Godwinson, the last of the Anglo-Saxon kings, at the Battle of Hastings, while retaining the fiefdom of Normandy for himself and his descendants.

===Norman expansion===

Aside from the conquest of England and the subsequent invasions of Wales and Ireland, the Normans expanded into other areas. Norman families, such as that of Tancred of Hauteville, Rainulf Drengot and Guimond de Moulins played important parts in the conquest of southern Italy and the Crusades.

The Drengot lineage, de Hauteville&#x27;s sons William Iron Arm, Drogo, and Humphrey, Robert Guiscard and Roger the Great Count progressively claimed territories in southern Italy until founding the Kingdom of Sicily in 1130. They also carved out a place for themselves and their descendants in the Crusader states of Asia Minor and the Holy Land.

The 14th-century explorer Jean de Béthencourt established a kingdom in the Canary Islands in 1404. He received the title King of the Canary Islands from Pope Innocent VII but recognized Henry III of Castile as his overlord, who had provided him with military and financial aid during the conquest.

===13th to 17th centuries===

In 1204, during the reign of John, King of England, mainland Normandy was captured from the English by the forces of Philip II of France, ending some 293 years of relative Norman independence from the French crown. Insular Normandy (the Channel Islands) remained under control of the English, though still attached to the ecclesiastical province of Rouen. In the 1259 Treaty of Paris, Henry III of England recognized the legitimacy of the French possession of mainland Normandy. His successors, however, often fought to regain control of their ancient fiefdom.

The &quot;Charte aux Normands&quot; granted by Louis X of France in 1315 (and later re-confirmed in 1339) – like the analogous Magna Carta granted in England in the aftermath of 1204 – guaranteed the liberties and privileges of the province of Normandy.

Normandy was devastated by various civil wars and the Hundred Years&#x27; War. Between 1419 and 1450, the English controlled all of Normandy apart from Mont-Saint-Michel, and made Rouen the seat of their power in France. Normandy ultimately saw its population decline by three quarters as a result of the various conflicts which took place in the region during the late Middle Ages. Afterwards, prosperity returned to Normandy until the Wars of Religion. When many Norman towns (Alençon, Rouen, Caen, Coutances, Bayeux) joined the Protestant Reformation, battles ensued throughout the province. In the Channel Islands, a period of Calvinism following the Reformation was suppressed when Anglicanism was imposed following the Stuart Restoration.

Samuel de Champlain left the port of Honfleur in 1604 and founded Acadia. Four years later, he founded the City of Québec. From then onwards, Normans engaged in a policy of expansion in North America. They continued the exploration of the New World: René-Robert Cavelier de La Salle travelled in the area of the Great Lakes, then on the Mississippi River. Pierre Le Moyne d&#x27;Iberville and his brother Lemoyne de Bienville founded Louisiana, Biloxi, Mobile and New Orleans. Territories located between Québec and the Mississippi Delta were opened up to establish Canada and Louisiana. Colonists from Normandy were among the most active in New France, comprising Acadia, Canada, and Louisiana.

Honfleur and Le Havre were two of the principal slave trade ports of France.

===18th century to present===
Although agriculture remained important, industries such as weaving, metallurgy, sugar refining, ceramics, and shipbuilding were introduced and developed.

In the 1780s, the economic crisis and the crisis of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; struck Normandy as well as other parts of the nation, leading to the French Revolution. Bad harvests, technical progress and the effects of the Eden Agreement signed in 1786 affected employment and the economy of the province. Normans laboured under a heavy fiscal burden.

In 1790, the five departments of Normandy replaced the former province.

On 13 July 1793, the Norman Charlotte Corday assassinated Jean-Paul Marat.

The Normans reacted little to the many political upheavals which characterized the 19th century. Overall, they warily accepted the changes of régime (First French Empire, Bourbon Restoration, July Monarchy, French Second Republic, Second French Empire, French Third Republic).

Following the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815), there was an economic revival that included the mechanization of textile manufacturing and the introduction of the first trains.

Also, with seaside tourism in the 19th century came the advent of the first beach resorts.
During the Second World War, following the armistice of 22 June 1940, continental Normandy was part of the German occupied zone of France. The Channel Islands were occupied by German forces between 30 June 1940 and 9 May 1945. The town of Dieppe was the site of the unsuccessful Dieppe Raid by Allied forces.

The Allies coordinated a massive build-up of troops and supplies to support a large-scale invasion of Normandy in the D-Day landings on 6 June 1944 under the code name Operation Overlord. German forces dug into fortified emplacements above the beaches. Caen, Cherbourg, Carentan, Falaise and other Norman towns endured many casualties in the Battle of Normandy, which continued until the closing of the so-called Falaise gap between Chambois and Mont Ormel. The liberation of Le Havre followed. This was a significant turning point in the war in western Europe and led to the restoration of the French Republic.

The remainder of Normandy was liberated by Allied forces only on 9 May 1945 at the end of the war, when the Channel Island occupation effectively ended.

Despite the renunciation of the Duke of Normandy title by Henry III of England in the 1259 Treaty of Paris, and the extinction of the duchy itself in modern-day, republican France, in the Channel Islands the monarch of the United Kingdom (whether a king or queen) is regardless still sometimes informally referred to by the title &quot;Duke of Normandy&quot;.

==Geography==


The historical Duchy of Normandy was a formerly independent duchy occupying the lower Seine area, the Pays de Caux and the region to the west through the Pays d&#x27;Auge as far as the Cotentin Peninsula and Channel Islands.

Western Normandy belongs to the Armorican Massif, while most of the region lies in the Paris Basin. France&#x27;s oldest rocks are exposed in Jobourg, on the Cotentin peninsula. The region is bounded to the north and west by the English Channel. There are granite cliffs in the west and limestone cliffs in the east. There are also long stretches of beach in the centre of the region. The &quot;bocage&quot; typical of the western areas caused problems for the invading forces in the Battle of Normandy. A notable feature of the landscape is created by the meanders of the Seine as it approaches its estuary.

The highest point is the Signal d&#x27;Écouves (417 m), in the Armorican Massif.

Normandy is sparsely forested: 12.8% of the territory is wooded, compared to a French average of 23.6%, although the proportion varies between the departments. Eure has the most cover, at 21%, while Manche has the least, at 4%, a characteristic shared with the Channel Islands.

===Sub-regions===

==== Mainland Normandy ====
* Avranchin
* Bessin
* Bauptois
* Bocage virois
* Campagne d&#x27;Alençon
* Campagne d&#x27;Argentan
* Campagne de Caen
* Campagne de Falaise
* Campagne du Neubourg
* Campagne de Saint-André (or d’Évreux)
* Cotentin
* Perche
* Domfrontais or Passais
* Hiémois
* Lieuvin
* Mortainais
* Pays d&#x27;Auge, central Normandy, is characterized by excellent agricultural land.
* Pays de Bray
* Pays de Caux
* Pays d&#x27;Houlme
* Pays de Madrie, area between the Seine and the Eure.
* Pays d&#x27;Ouche
* Roumois et Marais-Vernier
* Suisse Normande (Norman Switzerland), in the south, presents hillier terrain.
* Val de Saire 
* Vexin normand

====Insular Normandy (Channel Islands)====
* The bailiwick of Jersey
* The bailiwick of Guernsey (Fr. &quot;Bailliage de Guernesey&quot;)

The Channel Islands are considered culturally and historically a part of Normandy. However, they are British Crown Dependencies, and are not part of the modern French administrative region of Normandy.

Although the British surrendered claims to mainland Normandy, France, and other French possessions in 1801, the monarch of the United Kingdom retains the title Duke of Normandy in respect to the Channel Islands. The Channel Islands (except for Chausey) remain Crown Dependencies of the British Crown in the present era. Thus the Loyal Toast in the Channel Islands is &quot;Le Roi, notre Duc&quot; (&quot;The King, our Duke&quot;). The British monarch is understood to &quot;not&quot; be the Duke with regards to mainland Normandy described herein, by virtue of the Treaty of Paris of 1259, the surrender of French possessions in 1801, and the belief that the rights of succession to that title are subject to Salic Law which excludes inheritance through female heirs.

===Rivers===
Rivers in Normandy include:
* the Seine and its tributaries:
** the Andelle
** the Epte
** the Eure
** the Risle
** the Robec
And many coastal rivers:
* the Bresle
* the Couesnon, which traditionally marks the boundary between the Duchy of Brittany and the Duchy of Normandy
* the Dives
* the Orne
* the Sée
* the Sélune
* the Touques
* the Veules, the shortest French coastal river
* the Vire

== Politics ==

=== Mainland Normandy ===
The modern region of Normandy was created by the territorial reform of French Regions in 2014 by the merger of Lower Normandy, and Upper Normandy. The new region took effect on 1 January 2016, after the regional elections in December 2015.

The Regional Council has 102 members who are elected under a system of proportional representation. The executive consists of a president and vice-presidents. Hervé Morin from the Centre party was elected president of the council in January 2016.

=== Channel Islands ===
The Channel Islands are not part of French territory, but are instead British Crown Dependencies. They are self-governing, each having its own parliament, government and legal system. The head of state of both territories is Charles III and each have an appointed Lieutenant-Governor.

The Bailiwick of Guernsey comprises three separate jurisdictions: Guernsey, Alderney and Sark. Administratively, Herm forms part of Guernsey.

==Economy==
Much of Normandy is predominantly agricultural in character, with cattle breeding the most important sector (although in decline from the peak levels of the 1970s and 1980s). The &quot;bocage&quot; is a patchwork of small fields with high hedges, typical of western areas. Areas near the Seine (the former Upper Normandy region) contain a higher concentration of industry. Normandy is a significant cider-producing region, and also produces calvados, a distilled cider or apple brandy. Other activities of economic importance are dairy produce, flax (60% of production in France), horse breeding (including two French national stud farms), fishing, seafood, and tourism. The region contains three French nuclear power stations.
There is also easy access to and from the UK using the ports of Cherbourg, Caen (Ouistreham), Le Havre and Dieppe. Jersey and Guernsey are often considered to be tax havens, due to having large financial services sectors and low tax rates.

== Demographics ==
In January 2006 the population of French Normandy (including the part of Perche which lies inside the Orne &quot;département&quot; but excluding the Channel Islands) was estimated at 3,260,000 with an average population density of 109 inhabitants per km2, just under the French national average, but rising to 147 for Upper Normandy. The population of the Channel Islands is estimated around 174,000 (2021).

The main cities (population given from the 1999 census) are Rouen (518,316 in the metropolitan area), the capital since 2016 of the province and formerly of Upper Normandy; Caen (420,000 in the metropolitan area) and formerly the capital of Lower Normandy; Le Havre (296,773 in the metropolitan area); and Cherbourg (117,855 in the metropolitan area).

==Culture==

===Flag===
The traditional provincial flag of Normandy, &quot;gules, two leopards passant or&quot;, is used in the region and its predecessors. The three-leopard version (known in the Norman language as &quot;les treis cats&quot;, &quot;the three cats&quot;) is used by some associations and individuals, especially those who support cultural links with the Channel Islands and England. Jersey and Guernsey use three leopards in their national symbols. The leopards represents the strength and courage Normandy has towards the neighbouring provinces.

The unofficial anthem of the region is the song &quot;Ma Normandie&quot;.

===Language===

The Norman language, including its insular variations Jèrriais and Guernésiais, is a regional language, spoken by a minority of the population on the continent and the islands, with a concentration in the Cotentin Peninsula in the far west (the Cotentinais dialect), and in the Pays de Caux in the East (the Cauchois dialect).

Many words and place names demonstrate the Old English and Norse (Anglo-Scandinavian) influence in this Oïl language; for example, words : &quot;mauve&quot; (seagull), &quot;fifotte&quot; (starfish), &quot;hâ&quot; (catshark), &quot;mucre&quot; (humid, wet), &quot;(é)griller&quot; (slide, slip), &quot;fale&quot; (throat), etc. place-names : &quot;-bec&quot; (stream), &quot;-fleur&quot; (river), &quot;-hou&quot; (island), &quot;-tot&quot; (homestead), &quot;-dal&quot; / &quot;-dalle&quot; (valley), &quot;Hogue&quot; / &quot;Hougue&quot; (hill, mound), &quot;-lon&quot; / &quot;-londe&quot; (grove, wood), &quot;-vy&quot; / &quot;-vic&quot; (bay, cove), &quot;-mare&quot; (pond), &quot;-beuf&quot; (booth, cabin), etc. French is the only official language in continental Normandy and English is also an official language in the Channel Islands.

===Architecture===

Architecturally, Norman cathedrals, abbeys (such as the Abbey of Bec) and castles characterise the former duchy in a way that mirrors the similar pattern of Norman architecture in England following the Norman Conquest of 1066.

Domestic architecture in upper Normandy is typified by half-timbered buildings that also recall vernacular English architecture, although the farm enclosures of the more harshly landscaped Pays de Caux are a more idiosyncratic response to socio-economic and climatic imperatives. Much urban architectural heritage was destroyed during the Battle of Normandy in 1944 – post-war urban reconstruction, such as in Le Havre and Saint-Lô, could be said to demonstrate both the virtues and vices of modernist and brutalist trends of the 1950s and 1960s. Le Havre, the city rebuilt by Auguste Perret, was added to Unesco&#x27;s World Heritage List in 2005.

Vernacular architecture in lower Normandy takes its form from granite, the predominant local building material. The Channel Islands also share this influence – Chausey was for many years a source of quarried granite, including that used for the construction of Mont Saint-Michel.

The south part of Bagnoles-de-l&#x27;Orne is filled with bourgeois villas in &quot;Belle Époque&quot; style with polychrome façades, bow windows and unique roofing. This area, built between 1886 and 1914, has an authentic &quot;Bagnolese&quot; style and is typical of high-society country vacation of the time. The Chapel of Saint Germanus (&quot;Chapelle Saint-Germain&quot;) at Querqueville with its trefoil floorplan incorporates elements of one of the earliest surviving places of Christian worship in the Cotentin – perhaps second only to the Gallo-Roman baptistry at Port-Bail. It is dedicated to Germanus of Normandy.

===Gastronomy===

Parts of Normandy consist of rolling countryside typified by pasture for dairy cattle and apple orchards. A wide range of dairy products are produced and exported. Norman cheeses include Camembert, Livarot, Pont l&#x27;Évêque, Brillat-Savarin, Neufchâtel, Petit Suisse and Boursin. Normandy butter and Normandy cream are lavishly used in gastronomic specialties. Jersey and Guernsey cattle are famous cattle breeds worldwide, especially to North America.

Turbot and oysters from the Cotentin Peninsula are major delicacies throughout France. Normandy is the chief oyster-cultivating, scallop-exporting, and mussel-raising region in France.

Normandy is a major cider-producing region (very little wine is produced). Perry is also produced, but in less significant quantities. Apple brandy, of which the most famous variety is calvados, is also popular. The mealtime &quot;trou normand&quot;, or &quot;Norman hole&quot;, is a pause between meal courses in which diners partake of a glassful of calvados in order to improve the appetite and make room for the next course, and this is still observed in many homes and restaurants. &quot;Pommeau&quot; is an &quot;apéritif&quot; produced by blending unfermented cider and apple brandy. Another aperitif is the &quot;kir normand&quot;, a measure of crème de cassis topped up with cider. &quot;Bénédictine&quot; is produced in Fécamp.

Other regional specialities include &quot;tripes à la mode de Caen&quot;, &quot;andouilles&quot; and &quot;andouillettes&quot;, , salt meadow (&quot;pré salé&quot;) lamb, seafood (mussels, scallops, lobsters, mackerel...), and &quot;teurgoule&quot; (spiced rice pudding).

Normandy dishes include duckling &quot;à la rouennaise&quot;, sautéed chicken &quot;yvetois&quot;, and goose &quot;en daube&quot;. Rabbit is cooked with morels, or &quot;à la havraise&quot; (stuffed with truffled pigs&#x27; trotters). Other dishes are sheep&#x27;s trotters &quot;à la rouennaise&quot;, casseroled veal, larded calf&#x27;s liver braised with carrots, and veal (or turkey) in cream and mushrooms.

Normandy is also noted for its pastries. Normandy turns out &quot;douillons&quot; (pears baked in pastry), &quot;craquelins&quot;, &quot;roulettes&quot; in Rouen, &quot;fouaces&quot; in Caen, &quot;fallues&quot; in Lisieux, &quot;sablés&quot; in Lisieux. It is the birthplace of brioches (especially those from Évreux and Gisors). Confectionery of the region includes Rouen apple sugar, Isigny caramels, Bayeux mint chews, Falaise berlingots, Le Havre marzipans, Argentan &quot;croquettes&quot;, and Rouen macaroons.

Normandy is the native land of Taillevent, cook of the kings of France Charles V and Charles VI. He wrote the earliest French cookery book named &quot;Le Viandier&quot;. &quot;Confiture de lait&quot; was also made in Normandy around the 14th century.

===Literature===
The dukes of Normandy commissioned and inspired epic literature to record and legitimise their rule. Wace, Orderic Vitalis and Stephen of Rouen were among those who wrote in the service of the dukes. After the division of 1204, French literature provided the model for the development of literature in Normandy. Olivier Basselin wrote of the Vaux de Vire, the origin of literary &quot;vaudeville&quot;. Notable Norman writers include Jean Marot, Rémy Belleau, Guy de Maupassant, Jules Barbey d&#x27;Aurevilly, Gustave Flaubert, Octave Mirbeau, and Remy de Gourmont, and Alexis de Tocqueville. The Corneille brothers, Pierre and Thomas, born in Rouen, were great figures of French classical literature.

David Ferrand (1591–1660) in his &quot;Muse Normande&quot; established a landmark of Norman language literature. In the 16th and 17th centuries, the workers and merchants of Rouen established a tradition of polemical and satirical literature in a form of language called the &quot;parler purin&quot;. At the end of the 18th century and beginning of the 19th century, a new movement arose in the Channel Islands, led by writers such as George Métivier, which sparked a literary renaissance on the Norman mainland. In exile in Jersey and then Guernsey, Victor Hugo took an interest in the vernacular literature. &quot;Les Travailleurs de la mer&quot; is a well-known novel by Hugo set in the Channel Islands. The boom in insular literature in the early 19th century encouraged production especially in La Hague and around Cherbourg, where Alfred Rossel, Louis Beuve and Côtis-Capel became active. The typical medium for literary expression in Norman has traditionally been newspaper columns and almanacs. The novel &quot;Zabeth&quot; by André Louis which appeared in 1969 was the first novel published in Norman.

===Painting===
Normandy has a rich tradition of painting and gave to France some of its most important artists.

In the 17th century, some major French painters were Normans like Nicolas Poussin, born in Les Andelys and Jean Jouvenet.

Romanticism drew painters to the Channel coasts of Normandy. Richard Parkes Bonington and J. M. W. Turner crossed the Channel from Great Britain, attracted by the light and landscapes. Théodore Géricault, a native of Rouen, was a notable figure in the Romantic movement, its famous &quot;Radeau de la Méduse&quot; being considered come the breakthrough of pictorial romanticism in France when it was officially presented at the Salon of 1819. The competing Realist tendency was represented by Jean-François Millet, a native of La Hague. The landscape painter Eugène Boudin, born in Honfleur, was a determining influence on the impressionists and was highly considered by Monet.
Breaking away from the more formalised and classical themes of the early part of the 19th century, Impressionist painters preferred to paint outdoors, in natural light, and to concentrate on landscapes, towns and scenes of daily life.

Leader of the movement and father of modern painting, Claude Monet is one of the best known Impressionists and a major character in Normandy&#x27;s artistic heritage. His house and gardens at Giverny are one of the region&#x27;s major tourist sites, much visited for their beauty and their water lilies, as well as for their importance to Monet&#x27;s artistic inspiration. Normandy was at the heart of his creation, from the paintings of Rouen&#x27;s cathedral to the famous depictions of the cliffs at Étretat, the beach and port at Fécamp and the sunrise at Le Havre. It was &quot;Impression, Sunrise&quot;, Monet&#x27;s painting of Le Havre, that led to the movement being dubbed Impressionism. After Monet, all the main avant-garde painters of the 1870s and 1880s came to Normandy to paint its landscapes and its changing lights, concentrating along the Seine valley and the Norman coast.

Landscapes and scenes of daily life were also immortalised on canvas by artists that have included : William Turner, Gustave Courbet, the Honfleur born Eugène Boudin, Camille Pissarro, Alfred Sisley, Auguste Renoir, Gustave Caillebotte, Eugène Chigot, Paul Gauguin, Georges Seurat, Paul Signac, Pierre Bonnard, Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso. While Monet&#x27;s work adorns galleries and collections all over the world, a remarkable quantity of Impressionist works can be found in galleries throughout Normandy, such as the Museum of Fine Arts in Rouen, the Musée Eugène Boudin in Honfleur or the André Malraux Museum in Le Havre.

Maurice Denis, one of the leaders and theoricists of the Nabis movement in the 1890s, was a native of Granville, in the department of Manche. Marie-Thérèse Auffray, an expressionist painter and member of the French resistance during WWII, lived and painted in the village of Échauffour.

The &quot;Société Normande de Peinture Moderne&quot; was founded in 1909 by Pierre Dumont, Robert Antoine Pinchon, Yvonne Barbier and Eugène Tirvert. Among members were Raoul Dufy, a native of Le Havre, Albert Marquet, Francis Picabia and Maurice Utrillo. Also in this movement were the Duchamp brothers, Jacques Villon and Marcel Duchamp, considered one of the father of modern art, also natives of Normandy. Jean Dubuffet, one of the leading French artist of the 1940s and the 1950s was born in Le Havre.

===Religion===
Christian missionaries implanted monastic communities in the territory in the 5th and 6th centuries. Some of these missionaries came from across the Channel. The influence of Celtic Christianity can still be found in the Cotentin. By the terms of the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, Rollo, a Viking pagan, accepted Christianity and was baptised. The Duchy of Normandy was therefore formally a Christian state from its foundation. The cathedrals of Normandy have exerted influence down the centuries in matters of both faith and politics. King Henry II of England did penance at the cathedral of Avranches on 21 May 1172 and was absolved from the censures incurred by the assassination of Thomas Becket. Mont Saint-Michel is a historic pilgrimage site.

Normandy does not have one generally agreed patron saint, although this title has been ascribed to Saint Michael, and to Saint Ouen. Many saints have been revered in Normandy down the centuries, including:
* Aubert who&#x27;s remembered as the founder of Mont Saint-Michel
* Marcouf and Laud who are important saints in Normandy
* Helier and Samson of Dol who are evangelizers of the Channel Islands
* Thomas Becket, an Anglo-Norman whose parents were from Rouen, who was the object of a considerable following in mainland Normandy following his martyrdom
* Joan of Arc who was martyred in Rouen, and who is especially remembered in that city
* Thérèse de Lisieux whose birthplace in Alençon and later home in Lisieux are a focus for religious pilgrims.
* Germanus of Normandy

Since the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, there is no established church in mainland Normandy. In the Channel Islands, the Church of England is the established church.

===People===
:&quot;See :Category:People from Normandy&quot;

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Duchy of Normandy
* Duke of Normandy
* Integration of Normandy into the royal domain of the Kingdom of France

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* Normandie Héritage 
* The Norman Worlds
* Gallery of photos of Normandy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="0" end="8" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="119" end="136" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677875" start="158" end="175" title="Normandy (administrative region)" label="mainland Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="236" end="251" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="345" end="352" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="397" end="412" title="Norman language" label="Norman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="440" end="445" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="447" end="451" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="453" end="461" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21008210" start="466" end="475" title="Cherbourg-en-Cotentin" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12620" start="624" end="631" title="Mayenne" label="Mayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12740" start="636" end="642" title="Sarthe" label="Sarthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996207" start="775" end="784" title="bailiwick" label="bailiwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="787" end="795" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="800" end="806" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="914" end="920" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="929" end="937" title="Norsemen" label="Northmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187519" start="1031" end="1052" title="Charles the Simple" label="Charles III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="1074" end="1078" title="Earl" label="jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q273773" start="1085" end="1090" title="Rollo" label="Rollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1127" end="1153" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q460244" start="1236" end="1252" title="Duke of Normandy" label="Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1257" end="1272" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="1334" end="1348" title="cave paintings" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="1440" end="1459" title="megalithic monument" label="megalithic monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="1483" end="1488" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q337104" start="1504" end="1510" title="Belgae" label="Belgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="1515" end="1520" title="Gauls" label="Gauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1565" end="1575" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="1582" end="1595" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="1715" end="1727" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="Romanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15161327" start="1772" end="1786" title="Gallia Celtica" label="Gallia Celtica"/>
<link wikidata="Q206443" start="1810" end="1824" title="Gallia Belgica" label="Gallia Belgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="1920" end="1931" title="Roman roads" label="Roman roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1962" end="1972" title="Classicist" label="Classicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="1987" end="1998" title="Gallo-Roman" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950" start="1999" end="2004" title="villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q120754706" start="2069" end="2086" title="Late Roman Empire" label="Late Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10971" start="2131" end="2150" title="Gallia Lugdunensis" label="Lugdunensis Secunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q569265" start="2180" end="2212" title="Archbishopric of Rouen" label="ecclesiastical province of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="2269" end="2274" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773614" start="2871" end="2882" title="Saxon Shore" label="Saxon Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="2956" end="2961" title="Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q830209" start="3005" end="3011" title="Bessin" label="Bessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="3407" end="3412" title="duchy" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q252090" start="3434" end="3449" title="List of early Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373432" start="3528" end="3540" title="Pays de Bray" label="Pays de Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640051" start="3542" end="3554" title="Pays de Caux" label="Pays de Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476089" start="3559" end="3564" title="Vexin" label="Vexin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37646" start="3611" end="3616" title="Somme (river)" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="3621" end="3626" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="3657" end="3665" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="3671" end="3677" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="3734" end="3741" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q658613" start="4002" end="4010" title="Jumièges" label="Jumièges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="4085" end="4096" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="4140" end="4159" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="fiefdom of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="4223" end="4237" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815192" start="4270" end="4284" title="Siege of Paris (885–886)" label="besieged Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="4304" end="4310" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="4333" end="4344" title="Western Francia" label="West Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q187519" start="4346" end="4364" title="Charles the Simple" label="Charles the Simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072330" start="4378" end="4408" title="Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte" label="Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="4430" end="4436" title="Homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813294" start="4441" end="4447" title="fealty" label="fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="4606" end="4614" title="Norsemen" label="Norseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="4746" end="4768" title="Gallo-Romance languages" label="Gallo-Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4981" end="4994" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="5034" end="5040" title="Concubine" label="frilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311180" start="5101" end="5112" title="More danico" label="more Danico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373060" start="5333" end="5348" title="Norman toponymy" label="Norman toponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="5436" end="5445" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="5530" end="5537" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="5542" end="5555" title="Norman language" label="Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="5638" end="5645" title="William the Conqueror" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="5693" end="5709" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="5727" end="5744" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="5753" end="5771" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="5793" end="5800" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26731" start="6029" end="6050" title="Tancred of Hauteville" label="Tancred of Hauteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q559516" start="6052" end="6067" title="Rainulf Drengot" label="Rainulf Drengot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120599" start="6072" end="6090" title="Guimond de Moulins" label="Guimond de Moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="6121" end="6147" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="conquest of southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="6156" end="6164" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q550499" start="6171" end="6178" title="Drengot family" label="Drengot"/>
<link wikidata="Q559539" start="6214" end="6230" title="William Iron Arm" label="William Iron Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q426192" start="6232" end="6237" title="Drogo of Hauteville" label="Drogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q982697" start="6243" end="6251" title="Humphrey of Hauteville" label="Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q203792" start="6253" end="6268" title="Robert Guiscard" label="Robert Guiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="6273" end="6294" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger the Great Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="6366" end="6383" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="6466" end="6481" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="6485" end="6495" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="6504" end="6513" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q447602" start="6542" end="6561" title="Jean de Béthencourt" label="Jean de Béthencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412684" start="6576" end="6583" title="Kingdom of the Canary Islands" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="6591" end="6605" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q227713" start="6674" end="6686" title="Pope Innocent VII" label="Innocent VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q312104" start="6702" end="6722" title="Henry III of Castile" label="Henry III of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="6874" end="6895" title="John, King of England" label="John, King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="6962" end="6981" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="7213" end="7228" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="7230" end="7250" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="7454" end="7471" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="7534" end="7545" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="7716" end="7739" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="7814" end="7831" title="Mont-Saint-Michel" label="Mont-Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="8099" end="8115" title="French Wars of Religion" label="Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181269" start="8141" end="8148" title="Alençon" label="Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="8157" end="8161" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q202565" start="8163" end="8172" title="Coutances" label="Coutances"/>
<link wikidata="Q183910" start="8174" end="8180" title="Bayeux" label="Bayeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="8193" end="8215" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="8293" end="8302" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="8349" end="8360" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="8387" end="8405" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Stuart Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="8408" end="8427" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q231720" start="8445" end="8453" title="Honfleur" label="Honfleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="8474" end="8480" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="8658" end="8690" title="René-Robert Cavelier de La Salle" label="René-Robert Cavelier de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="8720" end="8731" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="8745" end="8762" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q55250" start="8764" end="8796" title="Pierre Le Moyne d&amp;#x27;Iberville" label="Pierre Le Moyne d&amp;#x27;Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q55266" start="8813" end="8833" title="Lemoyne de Bienville" label="Lemoyne de Bienville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="8842" end="8851" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q490720" start="8853" end="8859" title="Biloxi, Mississippi" label="Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426203" start="8928" end="8945" title="Mississippi Delta" label="Mississippi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="8974" end="8980" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="8985" end="8994" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="9050" end="9060" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="9073" end="9079" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="9118" end="9126" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="9153" end="9164" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="9431" end="9444" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="9520" end="9537" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536706" start="9595" end="9609" title="Eden Agreement" label="Eden Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q216063" start="9826" end="9842" title="Charlotte Corday" label="Charlotte Corday"/>
<link wikidata="Q122290" start="9856" end="9871" title="Jean-Paul Marat" label="Jean-Paul Marat"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="10024" end="10043" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="10045" end="10064" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="10066" end="10079" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="10081" end="10103" title="French Second Republic" label="French Second Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="10105" end="10125" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="10127" end="10148" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="10166" end="10191" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="10200" end="10215" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="10493" end="10518" title="Second Armistice at Compiègne" label="armistice of 22 June 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="10557" end="10587" title="Military Administration in France (Nazi Germany)" label="German occupied zone of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="10614" end="10639" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="occupied by German forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="10689" end="10695" title="Dieppe" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="10729" end="10740" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="10744" end="10750" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="10878" end="10892" title="D-Day landings" label="D-Day landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="10928" end="10946" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="11013" end="11017" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="11019" end="11028" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q242091" start="11030" end="11038" title="Carentan" label="Carentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193306" start="11040" end="11047" title="Falaise, Calvados" label="Falaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="11102" end="11120" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="11173" end="11184" title="Falaise pocket" label="Falaise gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048755" start="11193" end="11201" title="Chambois, Orne" label="Chambois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945426" start="11206" end="11216" title="Mont Ormel" label="Mont Ormel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="11236" end="11244" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947756" start="11481" end="11506" title="Liberation of the German-occupied Channel Islands" label="Channel Island occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="11585" end="11605" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="11618" end="11633" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="11715" end="11730" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="11735" end="11764" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="monarch of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640051" start="12006" end="12018" title="Pays de Caux" label="Pays de Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536316" start="12058" end="12074" title="Pays d&amp;#x27;Auge" label="Pays d&amp;#x27;Auge"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="12089" end="12107" title="Cotentin Peninsula" label="Cotentin Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980627" start="12162" end="12178" title="Armorican Massif" label="Armorican Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q755001" start="12217" end="12228" title="Paris Basin" label="Paris Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="12288" end="12296" title="Cotentin" label="Cotentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="12359" end="12374" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q888961" start="12525" end="12531" title="bocage" label="bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="12614" end="12632" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="12687" end="12694" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q791363" start="13150" end="13159" title="Avranchin" label="Avranchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q830209" start="13162" end="13168" title="Bessin" label="Bessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q975190" start="13171" end="13179" title="Baupte" label="Bauptois"/>
<link wikidata="Q220684" start="13182" end="13195" title="Vire" label="Bocage virois"/>
<link wikidata="Q181269" start="13198" end="13221" title="Alençon" label="Campagne d&amp;#x27;Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207622" start="13224" end="13248" title="Argentan" label="Campagne d&amp;#x27;Argentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="13251" end="13267" title="Caen" label="Campagne de Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="13270" end="13289" title="Falaise pocket" label="Campagne de Falaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q872004" start="13292" end="13312" title="Le Neubourg" label="Campagne du Neubourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171800" start="13315" end="13338" title="Évreux" label="Campagne de Saint-André"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="13355" end="13363" title="Cotentin" label="Cotentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q958603" start="13366" end="13372" title="Perche" label="Perche"/>
<link wikidata="Q659992" start="13375" end="13386" title="Domfront, Orne" label="Domfrontais"/>
<link wikidata="Q736192" start="13400" end="13407" title="Exmes" label="Hiémois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824400" start="13410" end="13417" title="Lieuvin" label="Lieuvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q325187" start="13420" end="13427" title="Mortain" label="Mortain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536316" start="13433" end="13449" title="Pays d&amp;#x27;Auge" label="Pays d&amp;#x27;Auge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373432" start="13520" end="13532" title="Pays de Bray" label="Pays de Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640051" start="13535" end="13547" title="Pays de Caux" label="Pays de Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377324" start="13550" end="13568" title="Le Houlme" label="Pays d&amp;#x27;Houlme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074122" start="13571" end="13585" title="Merey, Eure" label="Pays de Madrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q999891" start="13626" end="13643" title="Pays d&amp;#x27;Ouche" label="Pays d&amp;#x27;Ouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q279019" start="13646" end="13653" title="Roumois" label="Roumois"/>
<link wikidata="Q656681" start="13657" end="13671" title="Marais-Vernier" label="Marais-Vernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q936918" start="13691" end="13709" title="Norman Switzerland" label="Norman Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419295" start="13754" end="13766" title="Val de Saire" label="Val de Saire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476089" start="13770" end="13783" title="Vexin normand" label="Vexin normand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996207" start="13834" end="13843" title="bailiwick" label="bailiwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="13847" end="13853" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="13860" end="13881" title="bailiwick of Guernsey" label="bailiwick of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="13928" end="13943" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="14033" end="14051" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677875" start="14091" end="14124" title="Normandy (administrative region)" label="administrative region of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q292600" start="14371" end="14378" title="Chausey" label="Chausey"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="14387" end="14405" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="14413" end="14426" title="The Crown" label="British Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694454" start="14456" end="14467" title="Loyal Toast" label="Loyal Toast"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="14692" end="14715" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="Treaty of Paris of 1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="14836" end="14845" title="Salic Law" label="Salic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="14943" end="14948" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q490151" start="14977" end="14984" title="Andelle" label="Andelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q990106" start="14992" end="14996" title="Epte" label="Epte"/>
<link wikidata="Q23798" start="15004" end="15008" title="Eure (river)" label="Eure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074385" start="15016" end="15021" title="Risle" label="Risle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434334" start="15029" end="15034" title="Robec" label="Robec"/>
<link wikidata="Q661525" start="15066" end="15072" title="Bresle (river)" label="Bresle"/>
<link wikidata="Q632961" start="15079" end="15087" title="Couesnon" label="Couesnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q71747" start="15140" end="15157" title="Duchy of Brittany" label="Duchy of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="15166" end="15183" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q118784" start="15190" end="15195" title="Dives (river)" label="Dives"/>
<link wikidata="Q659526" start="15202" end="15206" title="Orne (river)" label="Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247758" start="15213" end="15216" title="Sée" label="Sée"/>
<link wikidata="Q776590" start="15223" end="15229" title="Sélune" label="Sélune"/>
<link wikidata="Q969618" start="15236" end="15243" title="Touques (river)" label="Touques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346326" start="15298" end="15302" title="Vire (river)" label="Vire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18677875" start="15367" end="15375" title="Normandy (administrative region)" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954" start="15457" end="15471" title="Lower Normandy" label="Lower Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961" start="15477" end="15491" title="Upper Normandy" label="Upper Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18769744" start="15549" end="15584" title="2015 French regional elections" label="regional elections in December 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q583157" start="15591" end="15607" title="Regional Council (France)" label="Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="15658" end="15685" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q521021" start="15746" end="15757" title="Hervé Morin" label="Hervé Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="15937" end="15955" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="16084" end="16095" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516453" start="16123" end="16142" title="Lieutenant governor" label="Lieutenant-Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="16149" end="16170" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Bailiwick of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="16211" end="16219" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q179313" start="16221" end="16229" title="Alderney" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405693" start="16234" end="16238" title="Sark" label="Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="16277" end="16285" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q888961" start="16485" end="16491" title="bocage" label="bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="16588" end="16593" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961" start="16606" end="16620" title="Upper Normandy" label="Upper Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="16699" end="16704" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268" start="16741" end="16749" title="calvados (spirit)" label="calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q222216" start="16772" end="16784" title="apple brandy" label="apple brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="16845" end="16849" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265288" start="16881" end="16895" title="horse breeding" label="horse breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="17004" end="17025" title="nuclear power station" label="nuclear power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="17092" end="17101" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="17103" end="17107" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q274825" start="17109" end="17119" title="Ouistreham" label="Ouistreham"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="17122" end="17130" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="17135" end="17141" title="Dieppe, Seine-Maritime" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q958603" start="17361" end="17367" title="Perche" label="Perche"/>
<link wikidata="Q12679" start="17390" end="17394" title="Orne" label="Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="17401" end="17412" title="departments of France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="17437" end="17452" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961" start="17606" end="17620" title="Upper Normandy" label="Upper Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="17870" end="17874" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="17954" end="17962" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="18003" end="18012" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039109" start="18101" end="18117" title="flag of Normandy" label="flag of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361290" start="18669" end="18681" title="Ma Normandie" label="Ma Normandie"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="18760" end="18768" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="18773" end="18784" title="Guernésiais" label="Guernésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q496250" start="18791" end="18808" title="languages of France" label="regional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047032" start="18951" end="18962" title="Cotentinais" label="Cotentinais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640051" start="18984" end="18996" title="Pays de Caux" label="Pays de Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943069" start="19014" end="19030" title="Cauchois dialect" label="Cauchois dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="19077" end="19088" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="19093" end="19098" title="Old Norse language" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903299" start="19100" end="19118" title="Anglo-Scandinavian" label="Anglo-Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37351" start="19138" end="19150" title="Oïl languages" label="Oïl language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048822" start="19438" end="19442" title="-hou" label="-hou"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="19776" end="19793" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32989" start="19960" end="19972" title="Abbey of Bec" label="Abbey of Bec"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="20061" end="20080" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="20106" end="20121" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="20187" end="20200" title="Half-timbered construction" label="half-timbered"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="20624" end="20633" title="Modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="20638" end="20647" title="Brutalism" label="brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q381978" start="20709" end="20723" title="Auguste Perret" label="Auguste Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q930314" start="20782" end="20805" title="Vernacular architecture" label="Vernacular architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="20844" end="20851" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q292600" start="20942" end="20949" title="Chausey" label="Chausey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="21043" end="21060" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003125" start="21081" end="21104" title="Bagnoles-de-l&amp;#x27;Orne" label="Bagnoles-de-l&amp;#x27;Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q466887" start="21146" end="21158" title="Belle Époque" label="Belle Époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q815477" start="21443" end="21455" title="Querqueville" label="Querqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q905612" start="21465" end="21472" title="trefoil" label="trefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q630364" start="21636" end="21645" title="Port-Bail" label="Port-Bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104158" start="21666" end="21686" title="Germanus of Normandy" label="Germanus of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131480" start="21894" end="21903" title="Camembert (cheese)" label="Camembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144668" start="21905" end="21912" title="Livarot cheese" label="Livarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233145" start="21914" end="21932" title="Pont-l&amp;#x27;Évêque cheese" label="Pont l&amp;#x27;Évêque"/>
<link wikidata="Q724855" start="21934" end="21949" title="Brillat-Savarin cheese" label="Brillat-Savarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241190" start="21951" end="21961" title="Neufchâtel (cheese)" label="Neufchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q585246" start="21963" end="21975" title="Petit suisse (cheese)" label="Petit Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q895261" start="21980" end="21987" title="Boursin (cheese)" label="Boursin"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="22070" end="22076" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q890780" start="22081" end="22096" title="Guernsey cattle" label="Guernsey cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="22272" end="22278" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="22369" end="22374" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047030" start="22424" end="22429" title="Perry" label="Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268" start="22534" end="22542" title="calvados (spirit)" label="calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q780059" start="22842" end="22849" title="Pommeau" label="Pommeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755250" start="22868" end="22876" title="apéritif" label="apéritif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524947" start="22970" end="22973" title="Kir (cocktail)" label="kir"/>
<link wikidata="Q968019" start="23002" end="23017" title="crème de cassis" label="crème de cassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498750" start="23046" end="23057" title="Bénédictine" label="Bénédictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q269732" start="23079" end="23085" title="Fécamp" label="Fécamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q356690" start="23130" end="23154" title="tripes à la mode de Caen" label="tripes à la mode de Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q492769" start="23168" end="23177" title="andouille" label="andouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311395" start="23277" end="23284" title="scallop" label="scallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519244" start="23321" end="23330" title="teurgoule" label="teurgoule"/>
<link wikidata="Q371101" start="23514" end="23519" title="morel" label="morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188743" start="23989" end="23996" title="Lisieux" label="Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q917574" start="24053" end="24060" title="brioche" label="brioche"/>
<link wikidata="Q171800" start="24085" end="24091" title="Évreux" label="Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q271072" start="24096" end="24102" title="Gisors" label="Gisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q183910" start="24178" end="24184" title="Bayeux" label="Bayeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="24217" end="24225" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207622" start="24237" end="24245" title="Argentan" label="Argentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699636" start="24280" end="24289" title="macaroons" label="macaroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q935382" start="24323" end="24333" title="Taillevent" label="Taillevent"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="24363" end="24372" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="24377" end="24387" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q917761" start="24468" end="24485" title="Confiture de lait" label="Confiture de lait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382" start="24662" end="24666" title="Wace" label="Wace"/>
<link wikidata="Q356298" start="24668" end="24683" title="Orderic Vitalis" label="Orderic Vitalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592436" start="24688" end="24704" title="Stephen of Rouen" label="Stephen of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q327763" start="24873" end="24889" title="Olivier Basselin" label="Olivier Basselin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="24946" end="24956" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q377324" start="24995" end="25005" title="Jean Marot" label="Jean Marot"/>
<link wikidata="Q561709" start="25007" end="25019" title="Rémy Belleau" label="Rémy Belleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="25021" end="25038" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q314963" start="25040" end="25069" title="Jules Barbey d&amp;#x27;Aurevilly" label="Jules Barbey d&amp;#x27;Aurevilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="25071" end="25087" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23441" start="25089" end="25103" title="Octave Mirbeau" label="Octave Mirbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q353876" start="25109" end="25125" title="Remy de Gourmont" label="Remy de Gourmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="25131" end="25152" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q747" start="25178" end="25184" title="Pierre Corneille" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q551787" start="25189" end="25195" title="Thomas Corneille" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103264" start="25699" end="25714" title="George Métivier" label="George Métivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="25815" end="25826" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211109" start="25880" end="25906" title="Les Travailleurs de la mer" label="Les Travailleurs de la mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010752" start="26132" end="26143" title="Côtis-Capel" label="Côtis-Capel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="26555" end="26570" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209770" start="26580" end="26591" title="Les Andelys" label="Les Andelys"/>
<link wikidata="Q712455" start="26596" end="26609" title="Jean Jouvenet" label="Jean Jouvenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="26612" end="26623" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q380395" start="26673" end="26697" title="Richard Parkes Bonington" label="Richard Parkes Bonington"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="26702" end="26717" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q184212" start="26797" end="26815" title="Théodore Géricault" label="Théodore Géricault"/>
<link wikidata="Q212616" start="26900" end="26919" title="Le Radeau de la Méduse" label="Radeau de la Méduse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305001" start="27040" end="27053" title="Salon of 1819" label="Salon of 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q148458" start="27105" end="27125" title="Jean-François Millet" label="Jean-François Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212600" start="27171" end="27184" title="Eugène Boudin" label="Eugène Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="27580" end="27592" title="Claude Monet" label="Claude Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473446" start="27697" end="27714" title="Fondation Monet in Giverny" label="house and gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q165061" start="27718" end="27725" title="Giverny" label="Giverny"/>
<link wikidata="Q290936" start="28030" end="28037" title="Étretat" label="Étretat"/>
<link wikidata="Q269732" start="28061" end="28067" title="Fécamp" label="Fécamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="28087" end="28095" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q328523" start="28110" end="28129" title="Impression, Sunrise" label="Impression, Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="28210" end="28223" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="28251" end="28262" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019587" start="28522" end="28536" title="William Turner (artist)" label="William Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="28538" end="28553" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="28588" end="28604" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q175130" start="28606" end="28619" title="Alfred Sisley" label="Alfred Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="28621" end="28635" title="Auguste Renoir" label="Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q295144" start="28637" end="28656" title="Gustave Caillebotte" label="Gustave Caillebotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407022" start="28658" end="28671" title="Eugène Chigot" label="Eugène Chigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="28673" end="28685" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="28687" end="28701" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="28703" end="28714" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q26408" start="28716" end="28730" title="Pierre Bonnard" label="Pierre Bonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q153793" start="28732" end="28746" title="Georges Braque" label="Georges Braque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="28751" end="28764" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086934" start="28947" end="28966" title="Musée des Beaux-Arts de Rouen" label="Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q231720" start="29004" end="29012" title="Honfleur" label="Honfleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329541" start="29020" end="29040" title="Musée Malraux" label="André Malraux Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="29044" end="29052" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q440369" start="29055" end="29068" title="Maurice Denis" label="Maurice Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503708" start="29112" end="29117" title="Les Nabis" label="Nabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q63322940" start="29197" end="29218" title="Marie-Thérèse Auffray" label="Marie-Thérèse Auffray"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="29223" end="29236" title="expressionism" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q206218" start="29330" end="29340" title="Échauffour" label="Échauffour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962140" start="29353" end="29389" title="Société Normande de Peinture Moderne" label="Société Normande de Peinture Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q674956" start="29419" end="29432" title="Pierre Dumont (painter)" label="Pierre Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434445" start="29434" end="29456" title="Robert Antoine Pinchon" label="Robert Antoine Pinchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45205" start="29512" end="29522" title="Raoul Dufy" label="Raoul Dufy"/>
<link wikidata="Q267858" start="29546" end="29560" title="Albert Marquet" label="Albert Marquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q157321" start="29562" end="29577" title="Francis Picabia" label="Francis Picabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108301" start="29582" end="29597" title="Maurice Utrillo" label="Maurice Utrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q452254" start="29648" end="29662" title="Jacques Villon" label="Jacques Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="29667" end="29681" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q170076" start="29753" end="29766" title="Jean Dubuffet" label="Jean Dubuffet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="29899" end="29919" title="monastic communities" label="monastic communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="30015" end="30022" title="English Channel" label="Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="30041" end="30060" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="30087" end="30095" title="Cotentin" label="Cotentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="30404" end="30417" title="Henry II of England" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="30433" end="30440" title="penance" label="penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942301" start="30461" end="30470" title="Avranches Cathedral" label="Avranches"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="30554" end="30567" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="30569" end="30586" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="30601" end="30611" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="30663" end="30675" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="30724" end="30731" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q651657" start="30740" end="30750" title="Saint Ouen" label="Saint Ouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q758463" start="30827" end="30833" title="St. Aubert" label="Aubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="30874" end="30891" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q685409" start="30894" end="30901" title="Saint Marcouf" label="Marcouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218578" start="30906" end="30910" title="Laud of Coutances" label="Laud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401089" start="30950" end="30956" title="Helier" label="Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269091" start="30961" end="30974" title="Samson of Dol" label="Samson of Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="31021" end="31034" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="31039" end="31051" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="31177" end="31188" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="31197" end="31203" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="31264" end="31282" title="Thérèse de Lisieux" label="Thérèse de Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q181269" start="31303" end="31310" title="Alençon" label="Alençon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104158" start="31375" end="31395" title="Germanus of Normandy" label="Germanus of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518944" start="31407" end="31470" title="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State" label="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="31532" end="31547" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="31553" end="31570" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="31578" end="31596" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31623" end="31653" title=":Category:People from Normandy" label=":Category:People from Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="31689" end="31706" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460244" start="31709" end="31725" title="Duke of Normandy" label="Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851540" start="31728" end="31798" title="Integration of Normandy into the royal domain of the Kingdom of France" label="Integration of Normandy into the royal domain of the Kingdom of France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21725" wikidata="Q662029" url="?curid=21725" title="Neuromancer">
<text>Neuromancer is a 1984 science fiction novel by American-Canadian author William Gibson. Set in a near-future dystopia, the narrative follows Case, a computer hacker enlisted into a crew by a powerful artificial intelligence and a traumatised former soldier to complete a high-stakes heist. It was Gibson&#x27;s debut novel and, following its success, served as the first entry in the Sprawl trilogy, followed by &quot;Count Zero&quot; (1986) and &quot;Mona Lisa Overdrive&quot; (1988).

Gibson had primarily written countercultural short stories for science-fiction periodicals before &quot;Neuromancer&quot;. Influences on the novel include the detective stories of Raymond Chandler, the comic art of Jean Giraud, and William S. Burroughs&#x27;s &quot;Naked Lunch&quot; (1959). &quot;Neuromancer&quot; expanded and popularised the setting and concepts of an earlier Gibson story, &quot;Burning Chrome&quot; (1981), which introduced cyberspace—a digital space traversable by humans—and &quot;jacking in&quot;, a bio-mechanical method of interfacing with computers. 

&quot;Neuromancer&quot; is agreed as foundational work of early cyberpunk, although critics differ on whether the novel ignited the genre or if it was lifted by its inevitable rise. They agree it highlighted the genre&#x27;s key features, like the placement of technological advancement against societal decay and criminality. Gibson&#x27;s novel also defined the major conventions and language of the genre—cyberspace, jacking in, and ICE. Critics discuss the novel in the historical context of the 1970s and 1980s, a period marked by conservatism, deregulation, and free-market economics. 

&quot;Neuromancer&quot; was released without significant hype but became an underground hit through word of mouth. Following release, it received critical acclaim and transformed the science-fiction genre. Mainstream recognition raised Gibson from relative obscurity. It remains the first and only novel to win the Hugo Award and Nebula Award for Best Novel, and the Philip K. Dick Award for best original paperback. It remains an enduring classic and was named one of &quot;Time&quot; All-Time 100 Novels.

== Background ==

=== Author and composition ===
In 1981, while working as a teaching assistant at his alma mater, the University of British Columbia, Gibson&#x27;s Nebula Award-nominated short story &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot; introduced one of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; main characters, Molly. &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot; infused elements of crime fiction, like marginalised communities and criminal society, with technology, blurring the boundary of human and machine. The setting of the Sprawl and the concept of cyberspace first appeared in &quot;Omni&quot; the following year in his short story &quot;Burning Chrome&quot;, and were popularised by &quot;Neuromancer&quot;. Later in 1981, Gibson was commissioned to write a novel by science-fiction editor Terry Carr for his second series of Ace Science Fiction Specials; he submitted an outline later that year with the working title &quot;Jacked In&quot;, eventually renaming it &quot;Neuromancer&quot;. Gibson did not understand computing or networking in much detail, primarily wanting the shared vocabulary surrounding the topics.

The novel underwent considerable revision, with Gibson saying he rewrote the first two-thirds twelve times to ensure there was both stylistic consistency and a &quot;vaguely plausible&quot; plot. Gibson&#x27;s sought to eliminate &quot;clunk&quot;, contracting his prose to ensure &quot;individual parts carry more weight&quot;. He did not write the novel with a concrete outline, or initially know how it would end, writing the novel in &quot;blind animal panic&quot; because he thought the novel would fail if he did not hold the reader&#x27;s attention. Towards the end of the process, Gibson added the novel&#x27;s final sentence (&quot;He never saw Molly again&quot;) to prevent himself from writing a sequel, confident the novel would fail.

=== Inspiration ===
&quot;Neuromancer&quot; has many literary progenitors. Detective fiction, like the work of Raymond Chandler, is frequently cited as an influence on &quot;Neuromancer.&quot; For example, critics note similarities between Gibson&#x27;s Case and Chandler&#x27;s Philip Marlowe: Case is described as a &quot;cowboy&quot; and a &quot;detective&quot; and is involved in a heist; Molly, the novel&#x27;s primary female character, has connections to the &quot;molls&quot; of 1940s film noir. Case&#x27;s illegal practices, like theft and murder, situate him within a wider tradition of transgressive detectives, like the opiate addiction of Arthur Conan Doyle&#x27;s Sherlock Holmes. Gibson stated that the pulp noir core of the novel was key to engaging his readers, and cited the works of Dashiell Hammett and Robert Stone as major influences on its style. For dialogue, the author incorporated late 1960s Toronto drug dealer and biker slang into the novel.

Gibson&#x27;s prose style—fast-paced, fragmented imagery—resembles the styles of William S. Burroughs and J. G. Ballard. Burroughs&#x27;s &quot;Naked Lunch&quot; (1959) is frequently cited by critics as an influence on &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, including by one as its &quot;principal source&quot;, as a literary predecessor of Gibson&#x27;s &quot;cyberspace&quot;. Gibson&#x27;s conception of cyberspace was compared by Samuel R. Delany to Roger Zelazny&#x27;s early short stories; Delany and other critics have explored the character of Molly as a development on the cyborg assassin of Joanna Russ&#x27;s &quot;The Female Man&quot; (1975). 

Visual media likewise impacted the style of &quot;Neuromancer&quot;. Gibson has repeatedly mentioned the artwork of the 1970s French magazine &quot;Métal Hurlant&quot;, with critics noting the proto-cyberpunk aesthetic of Jean &quot;Moebius&quot; Giraud&#x27;s &quot;The Long Tomorrow&quot; (1976), republished in the American &quot;Heavy Metal&quot; magazine in 1977. John Carpenter&#x27;s &quot;Escape from New York&quot; (1981) influenced Gibson&#x27;s approach to world-building, pointing to throwaway lines that suggested much about the film&#x27;s world and its history beyond the narrative itself. Upon seeing Ridley Scott&#x27;s &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982), Gibson worried readers would think he had copied the film&#x27;s &quot;fine visual texture&quot;. Gibson wrote in his introduction to the graphic novel of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; that &quot;Blade Runner&quot; was not a conscious influence; in a later interview, he recounted a lunch with Scott where they both acknowledged a shared debt to Moebius&#x27;s work in &quot;Métal Hurlant&quot;.

==Plot==
Case is a low-level hustler in the dystopian underworld of Chiba City, Japan. Once a talented computer hacker and &quot;console cowboy&quot;, Case was caught stealing from his employer, who retaliated by damaging Case&#x27;s central nervous system, leaving him unable to access the virtual reality dataspace called the &quot;matrix&quot;. Case is approached by Molly, an augmented &quot;razorgirl&quot; and mercenary on behalf of a shadowy US ex-military officer named Armitage, who offers to cure Case in exchange for his services as a hacker. Case undergoes the cure, but discovers that Armitage has sabotaged him with a time-delayed poison. If Case completes the job, Armitage will disarm the poison; if not, he will find himself crippled again.

Armitage has Case and Molly steal a ROM module that contains the saved consciousness of one of Case&#x27;s mentors, legendary hacker McCoy Pauley. Suspicious of his motives and the unusual nature of the job, Molly and Case begin to investigate Armitage on the side. They discover that Armitage is actually Colonel Willis Corto, the only survivor of the failed anti-Soviet mission &quot;Screaming Fist&quot;. He was returned to the United States for extensive psychotherapy and reconstructive surgery, but snapped after learning that the government had been aware the mission would likely fail and went ahead with it regardless. He killed his handler and disappeared into the criminal underworld, eventually resurfacing under the name Armitage.

In Istanbul, the team recruits Peter Riviera, a sociopathic thief and drug addict. The trail leads Case to Wintermute, an artificial intelligence created by the eccentric Tessier-Ashpool family. The Tessier-Ashpools spend their time in rotating cryonic preservation in their home, the Villa Straylight. The Villa is located on Freeside, a cylindrical space habitat which functions as a Las Vegas-style space resort for the wealthy.

Wintermute reveals itself to Case and explains that it is one half of a super-AI entity planned by the family. It is programmed with a need to merge with its other half, Neuromancer, but because of the severe restrictions placed on AI programs by the Turing Registry, it cannot achieve this on its own. It has manipulated and recruited Armitage and his team to bring it into contact with Neuromancer, access to which is physically secured within the Villa Straylight. Case is tasked with entering cyberspace to pierce the software barriers around Neuromancer with an icebreaker program. Riviera is to obtain the password to the physical terminal from Lady 3Jane Marie-France Tessier-Ashpool, the only member of the family awake and at the Villa.

Armitage&#x27;s personality starts to disintegrate and he begins to believe he is back in Screaming Fist. It is revealed that Wintermute had originally contacted Corto through a computer during his psychotherapy, during which time he manipulated Corto to create the Armitage persona. As Corto breaks through, he becomes violently unstable and Wintermute ejects him into space.

Riviera meets Lady 3Jane and betrays the team, helping Lady 3Jane and Hideo, her ninja bodyguard, capture Molly. Under orders from Wintermute, Case tracks Molly down. Neuromancer traps Case within a simulated reality after he enters cyberspace. He finds the consciousness of Linda Lee, his girlfriend from Chiba City, who was murdered by one of his underworld contacts. He also meets Neuromancer, who takes the form of a young boy. Neuromancer tries to convince Case to remain in the virtual world with Linda, but Case refuses.

With Wintermute guiding them, Case goes to confront Lady 3Jane, Riviera, and Hideo. Riviera tries to kill Case, but Lady 3Jane is sympathetic towards Case and Molly, and Hideo protects him. Riviera flees, and Molly explains that he is doomed anyway, as she had spiked his drugs with a lethal toxin. The team makes it to the computer terminal. Case enters cyberspace to guide the icebreaker; Lady 3Jane is induced to give up her password, and the lock opens. Wintermute unites with Neuromancer, becoming a superconsciousness. The poison in Case&#x27;s bloodstream is washed out and he and Molly are profusely paid, while Pauley&#x27;s ROM construct is apparently erased at his own request.

Molly leaves Case, who finds a new girlfriend and resumes his hacking work. Wintermute/Neuromancer contacts him, claiming it has become &quot;the sum total of the works, the whole show&quot; and is looking for others like itself. Scanning recorded transmissions, the super-AI finds a transmission from the Alpha Centauri star system.

While logged into cyberspace, Case glimpses Neuromancer standing in the distance with Linda Lee, and himself. He also hears inhuman laughter, which suggests that Pauley still lives. The sighting implies that Neuromancer created a copy of Case&#x27;s consciousness, which now exists in cyberspace with those of Linda and Pauley.

== Genre ==

When Gibson was writing &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, the term &quot;cyberpunk&quot; did not exist. Coined by Bruce Bethke for a short-story title, the term &quot;cyberpunk&quot; was popularised by Gardner Dozois in a 1984 &quot;The Washington Post&quot; article, using the term to describe Gibson, Bruce Sterling, Lewis Shiner, and Greg Bear. Gibson communicated via letter with these individuals, sharing ideas, criticism and praise with Sterling, Shiner, and, additionally, Rudy Rucker. This created a kind of shared outlook through recurring themes and motifs. As with the New Wave, the term could reflect a desire for the writers to be distinguished from the &quot;old farts&quot; previously eminent in science fiction.The cyberpunk style contrasted control and communications technologies with the rebellious, countercultural punk aesthetic, and used metaphor to blur the boundaries of human and machine: &quot;drugs and sex and other thrills turn you on, you get a buzz, you get wired, you space out, you go on automatic&quot;.

Although frequently cited as the quintessential cyberpunk novel, &quot;Neuromancer&quot; prototype status has provided wider analytical significance, extending beyond the cyberpunk movement. Owing to its clear influences, critics have discussed the novel and its structure in relation to pulp literature.

== Context and interpretation ==
=== Political and economic ===
&quot;Neuromancer&quot;, its sequels and other cyberpunk stories are often discussed within the socio-economic context of the 1980s, a period of economic restructuring, corporate globalization, and government deregulation. In the 1990s, a particularly influential view was that the novel reflected the &quot;dilemmas of post-Fordist work and life&quot;, with Gibson reflecting or recreating the societal change brought on by the economic and industrial changes of the 1970s and 1980s. Cyberspace&#x27;s reliance on the circulation of data can be understood as a metaphor for the global circulation of financial capital, and its addictiveness parodies the culture of workaholism among Silicon Valley developers. His protagonists have been identified as resembling contract workers, with Case dependent on diazepam to cope with the barrage of &quot;relentless and fragmented data [and] get through the workday&quot;. The novel&#x27;s characters represent the professional–managerial class and the novel was popular with the demographic.

While the novel represents anxiety about societal change, it is not generally viewed as being about resisting it. Gibson&#x27;s protagonists do not threaten the social order of his worlds. Corporations view the novel&#x27;s freelance criminal protagonists as another tool at their disposal. Gibson&#x27;s inexperience as an author led to the novel capturing the essence of 1980s inequality but reinforcing and appealing to the dominant power structure, leaving his &quot;dead-cynicism [and] fashionable survival&quot;. Caroline Alpin writes that human life is worth whatever it is worth to an employer. After his nervous system is damaged and he loses his ability to work as a hacker, Case must murder people for money to replenish his human capital because of Chiba City&#x27;s neoliberalist order, expanding that death in the novel is represented as &quot;failure to maximise one&#x27;s human capital&quot;. The novel shows that human minds can be saved to a CD-ROM, preserving deceased or unwilling people&#x27;s technical skills for at-will use by corporations.

Critics have devoted attention to the novel&#x27;s depiction of an in-orbit Rastafarian cluster called Zion. Scholar Andrew Strombeck writes that their vocabulary is distinct from the jargon used elsewhere, but notes that the portrayal embodies stereotypes about Rastafarians. He highlights both the group&#x27;s origin as a labor protest movement and that they are the only group to perform manual labor in the novel. Their society could provide an alternative to corporate hegemony but ultimately form &quot;another node in the capitalist network&quot;. Samuel R. Delany, an African-American writer, criticized the portrayal, highlighting their &quot;shrunken hearts&quot; and brittle bones. Tom Moylan notes that &quot;Neuromancer&quot; loses its &quot;critical edge&quot; in exploring Zion&#x27;s within the primary narrative, and describes a pattern in Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Sprawl&quot; trilogy of including the racial Other but limiting their role to &quot;happy helper&quot;.

=== Technological ===
Gibson&#x27;s generation was the first to write science fiction at a time when the genre&#x27;s concepts were becoming part of daily life. Gibson recognised, and benefitted from, the growing public fascination with the evolving technology landscape, and used these concerns to &quot;create an entire cultural vocabulary&quot;, merging the language of human experience with the electronic. Bruce Sterling relates the cyborg to the increasing use of technology that directly interfaces with the human body, citing contact lenses and the Sony Walkman. 

== Reception ==
&quot;Neuromancer&quot; was released to immense critical success, becoming the first, and remains the only, novel to win the &quot;triple crown&quot;—Hugo Award for Best Novel, the Nebula Award for Best Novel and the Philip K. Dick Award for original paperback fiction. It was nominated or shortlisted for virtually every other science-fiction prize, including the 1984 BSFA Award for Best Novel. Released &quot;without fanfare&quot; as a mass-market paperback, &quot;Neuromancer&quot; gained an audience primarily through word of mouth, coinciding with the boom in personal computing. &quot;The Observer&quot; noted that &quot;The New York Times&quot; didn&#x27;t mention the novel until 10 years after release, but contemporary reviews were largely positive. &quot;The Observer&quot; and &quot;The Evening Sun&quot;, agreed that the novel presented a compelling image of a near-future. One critic compared Gibson&#x27;s cyberspace to Disney&#x27;s Tron (1982). It appealed to people who were fans of Gibson&#x27;s short stories, and found success with readers who were not previously interested in computer fiction.
== Impact ==
The novel catalysed the cyberpunk movement, influencing artists across virtually all forms of media, including film, literature, visual art, fashion and video gaming. It has been described as &quot;the quintessential cyberpunk novel&quot;, and the &quot;archetypal cyberpunk work&quot;, and the most notable 1980s science-fiction novel. Edward Bryant sarcastically referred to subsequent cyberpunk works as NOGS—novels of Gibsonian sensibility. In 2005, &quot;Time&quot; named &quot;Neuromancer&quot; one of its All-Time 100 Novels.

The novel&#x27;s immense success, alongside the continuous output work of other early cyberpunk writers—most commonly listed as Bruce Sterling, Lewis Shiner, John Shirley and Rudy Rucker—virtually guaranteed the genre&#x27;s immediate survival. In particular, &quot;Neuromancer&quot; provided future cyberpunk stories with a basic structure and vocabulary: protagonists who interface with computer hardware using a biological port, circumvent anti-hacking protocols (Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics, or ICE) and navigate a three-dimensional virtual world (cyberspace). 

Motifs and terminology popularised by the novel—the matrix, flatlining, cranial jack, biological microchips and traversal in cyberspace—were replicated or parodied by other authors. Developments anticipated by the novel include reality TV, nanomachines and virtual communities. It inspired early computer programmers in the creation of the Internet and impacted early computer culture. In 1992, John Perry Barlow, co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, introduced the term &quot;cyberspace&quot; to the US Intelligence Community during a speech in 1992, mentioning &quot;Neuromancer&quot; directly. To Gibson&#x27;s dismay, the term provided a name for a product by Autodesk.

==Adaptations==

===Graphic novel===

In 1989, Marvel&#x27;s Epic Comics imprint published a 48-page graphic novel version by Tom de Haven and Bruce Jensen. It only covers the first two chapters, &quot;Chiba City Blues&quot; and &quot;The Shopping Expedition&quot;, and was never continued.

===Video game===
A video-game adaptation, also titled &quot;Neuromancer,&quot; was published in 1988 by Interplay. Designed by Bruce J. Balfour, Brian Fargo, Troy A. Miles, and Michael A. Stackpole, the game had many of the same locations and themes as the novel, but a different protagonist and plot. It was available for a variety of platforms, including Amiga, Apple II, Commodore 64, and MS-DOS-based IBM PC compatibles.

===Radio play===
The BBC World Service Drama production of &quot;Neuromancer&quot; aired in two one-hour parts, on 8 and 15 September 2002. Dramatised by Mike Walker, and directed by Andy Jordan, it starred Owen McCarthy as Case, Nicola Walker as Molly, James Laurenson as Armitage, John Shrapnel as Wintermute, Colin Stinton as Dixie, David Webber as Maelcum, David Holt as Riviera, Peter Marinker as Ashpool, and Andrew Scott as The Finn. 

In Finland, Yle Radioteatteri produced a 4-part radio play of Neuromancer.

===Audiobook===
Gibson read an abridged version of his novel &quot;Neuromancer&quot; on four audio cassettes for Time Warner Audio Books (1994), which are now unavailable. An unabridged version of this book was read by Arthur Addison and made available from Books on Tape (1997). In 2011, Penguin Audiobooks produced a new unabridged recording of the book, read by Robertson Dean. In 2021, Audible released an unabridged recording, read by Jason Flemyng.

===Film===
There have been several proposed film adaptations of &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, with drafts of scripts written by British director Chris Cunningham and Chuck Russell, with Aphex Twin providing the soundtrack. The box packaging for the video game adaptation had even carried the promotional mention for a major motion picture to come from &quot;Cabana Boy Productions.&quot; None of these projects have come to fruition, though Gibson had stated his belief that Cunningham is the only director with a chance of doing the film correctly.

In May 2007, reports emerged that a film was in the works, with Joseph Kahn (director of &quot;Torque&quot;) in line to direct and Milla Jovovich in the lead role. In May 2010, this story was supplanted with news that Vincenzo Natali, director of &quot;Cube&quot; and &quot;Splice&quot;, had taken over directing duties and would rewrite the screenplay. In March 2011, with the news that Seven Arts and GFM Films would be merging their distribution operations, it was announced that the joint venture would be purchasing the rights to &quot;Neuromancer&quot; under Vincenzo Natali&#x27;s direction. In August 2012, GFM Films announced that it had begun casting for the film and made offers to Liam Neeson and Mark Wahlberg, but no cast members have been confirmed yet. In November 2013, Natali shed some light on the production situation; announcing that the script had been completed for &quot;years&quot;, and had been written with assistance from Gibson himself. In May 2015, it was reported the movie got new funding from Chinese company C2M, but Natali was no longer available for directing.

In August 2017, it was announced that &quot;Deadpool&quot; director Tim Miller was signed on to direct a new film adaptation by Fox, with Simon Kinberg producing.

===Television===
In November 2022, it was rumored that Apple TV+ was looking to begin work on a project to adapt &quot;Neuromancer&quot; into a TV series and were looking to cast Miles Teller in the lead role and with Graham Roland serving as writer, producer, and showrunner. In February 2024, Apple TV+ announced that it had greenlit a series, co-produced by Skydance Television, Anonymous Content, and DreamCrew Entertainment—for 10 episodes, with J. D. Dillard joining Roland as co-showrunner. Callum Turner was announced in April 2024 to play Case. Briana Middleton joins the cast as Molly on June 2024. Joseph Lee was cast as Hideo in December 2024. Mark Strong was cast as Armitage in February 2025.

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
==Bibliography==
=== Books ===
* 
* 
** 
** 
** 
** 
* 
* 
* 
** 
** 
** 
* 
* 
=== Articles===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== News ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Reviews===
* 
* 
=== Websites===
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Neuromancer&quot; at the William Gibson Aleph, featuring cover art and adaptations
* &quot;Neuromancer&quot; at Worlds Without End
* &quot;Neuromancer&quot; at Goodreads
* Study Guide for William Gibson: &quot;Neuromancer&quot; (1984) by Paul Brians of Washington State University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22" end="37" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="72" end="86" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="200" end="223" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610590" start="384" end="398" title="Sprawl trilogy" label="Sprawl trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384854" start="418" end="428" title="Count Zero" label="Count Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q663215" start="452" end="471" title="Mona Lisa Overdrive" label="Mona Lisa Overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="516" end="531" title="countercultural" label="countercultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="667" end="683" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q309240" start="702" end="713" title="Jean Giraud" label="Jean Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="719" end="739" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q379286" start="753" end="764" title="Naked Lunch" label="Naked Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="887" end="901" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="933" end="943" title="cyberspace" label="cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="1131" end="1140" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122382" start="1503" end="1506" title="Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="1603" end="1615" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="1617" end="1629" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="1635" end="1656" title="free-market economics" label="free-market economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="1760" end="1773" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="1975" end="1985" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="1990" end="2002" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="2027" end="2047" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="2066" end="2075" title="paperback" label="paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2135" end="2139" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="2287" end="2317" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="2333" end="2345" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q674586" start="2374" end="2389" title="Johnny Mnemonic" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896639" start="2455" end="2460" title="Molly Millions" label="Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="2683" end="2693" title="cyberspace" label="cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="2712" end="2728" title="Omni (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Omni&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755162" start="2773" end="2787" title="Burning Chrome" label="Burning Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292432" start="2926" end="2936" title="Terry Carr" label="Terry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673011" start="2962" end="2990" title="Ace Science Fiction Specials" label="Ace Science Fiction Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="4116" end="4132" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q623732" start="4284" end="4298" title="Philip Marlowe" label="Philip Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="4498" end="4507" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="4638" end="4644" title="opiate" label="opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="4658" end="4676" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="4684" end="4699" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259584" start="4724" end="4733" title="pulp noir" label="pulp noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="4808" end="4824" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633025" start="4829" end="4841" title="Robert Stone (novelist)" label="Robert Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="4925" end="4932" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q182391" start="4949" end="4954" title="Motorcycle club" label="biker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="4955" end="4960" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="5059" end="5079" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="5084" end="5097" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q379286" start="5122" end="5133" title="Naked Lunch" label="Naked Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="5398" end="5414" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="5418" end="5431" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q265270" start="5565" end="5576" title="Joanna Russ" label="Joanna Russ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202654" start="5590" end="5604" title="The Female Man" label="The Female Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503317" start="5763" end="5788" title="Métal hurlant" label="&amp;quot;Métal Hurlant&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q309240" start="5843" end="5874" title="Jean Giraud" label="Jean &amp;quot;Moebius&amp;quot; Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q654659" start="5954" end="5965" title="Heavy Metal (magazine)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="5990" end="6004" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q403033" start="6018" end="6038" title="Escape from New York" label="Escape from New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="6238" end="6250" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="6264" end="6276" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="6736" end="6746" title="Organized crime" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q170616" start="6750" end="6760" title="Chiba (city)" label="Chiba City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="6785" end="6800" title="hacker (computer security)" label="computer hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6916" end="6938" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="6973" end="6988" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q370685" start="6989" end="6998" title="Dataspaces" label="dataspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896639" start="7052" end="7057" title="Molly Millions" label="Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="7098" end="7107" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="7477" end="7480" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267982" start="7506" end="7525" title="Mind transfer" label="saved consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="8189" end="8197" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="8234" end="8245" title="Psychopathy" label="sociopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="8431" end="8438" title="cryonic" label="cryonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043389" start="8525" end="8550" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill cylinder" label="cylindrical space habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q745608" start="8572" end="8581" title="Las Vegas Strip" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="8697" end="8699" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122382" start="9186" end="9196" title="Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics" label="icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9402" start="9825" end="9830" title="ninja" label="ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="9943" end="9960" title="simulated reality" label="simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073080" start="10534" end="10540" title="Mickey Finn (drugs)" label="spiked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566000" start="10778" end="10796" title="Superintelligence" label="superconsciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206825" start="11247" end="11259" title="Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="11269" end="11283" title="Alpha Centauri" label="Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085972" start="11745" end="11757" title="Bruce Bethke" label="Bruce Bethke"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="11833" end="11847" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="11864" end="11883" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="11934" end="11948" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095977" start="11950" end="11962" title="Lewis Shiner" label="Lewis Shiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q317491" start="11968" end="11977" title="Greg Bear" label="Greg Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q92849" start="12112" end="12123" title="Rudy Rucker" label="Rudy Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296283" start="12212" end="12220" title="New Wave (science fiction)" label="New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106106" start="13361" end="13373" title="Post-Fordism" label="post-Fordist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="13642" end="13659" title="financial capital" label="financial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="13669" end="13682" title="addictiveness" label="addictiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q629149" start="13707" end="13718" title="Workaholic" label="workaholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="13725" end="13739" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="13845" end="13853" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247914" start="13998" end="14027" title="professional–managerial class" label="professional–managerial class"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="14813" end="14826" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q170616" start="14838" end="14848" title="Chiba (city)" label="Chiba City"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="14856" end="14869" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="15038" end="15044" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="15220" end="15231" title="Rastafarianism" label="Rastafarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="15328" end="15334" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="15469" end="15491" title="Labour movement" label="labor protest movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485549" start="15536" end="15548" title="Manual labour" label="manual labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="15700" end="15716" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="15721" end="15737" title="African Americans" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="15823" end="15836" title="Osteogenesis imperfecta" label="brittle bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007065" start="15838" end="15848" title="Tom Moylan" label="Tom Moylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="16067" end="16072" title="Other (philosophy)" label="Other"/>
<link wikidata="Q23797" start="16661" end="16675" title="contact lenses" label="contact lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="16684" end="16696" title="Walkman" label="Sony Walkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="16866" end="16891" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="16897" end="16924" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Nebula Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341487" start="16933" end="16953" title="Philip K. Dick Award" label="Philip K. Dick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836602" start="17086" end="17111" title="BSFA Award for Best Novel" label="BSFA Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="17155" end="17176" title="Paperback" label="mass-market paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17344" end="17362" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="17652" end="17658" title="Disney Corporation" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q626483" start="17666" end="17670" title="Tron" label="Tron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342047" start="18184" end="18197" title="Edward Bryant" label="Edward Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="18301" end="18317" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="18509" end="18523" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095977" start="18525" end="18537" title="Lewis Shiner" label="Lewis Shiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346126" start="18539" end="18551" title="John Shirley" label="John Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q92849" start="18556" end="18567" title="Rudy Rucker" label="Rudy Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122382" start="18848" end="18885" title="Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics" label="Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="19294" end="19306" title="the Internet" label="the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q534428" start="19353" end="19370" title="John Perry Barlow" label="John Perry Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="19390" end="19420" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="19472" end="19497" title="US Intelligence Community" label="US Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q628051" start="19635" end="19643" title="Autodesk" label="Autodesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="19693" end="19699" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465548" start="19707" end="19718" title="Epic Comics" label="Epic Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="19747" end="19760" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815549" start="19772" end="19784" title="Tom De Haven" label="Tom de Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977738" start="19789" end="19801" title="Bruce Jensen" label="Bruce Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126146" start="19998" end="20009" title="Neuromancer (video game)" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q628249" start="20042" end="20051" title="Interplay Entertainment" label="Interplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q607104" start="20083" end="20094" title="Brian Fargo" label="Brian Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347163" start="20115" end="20135" title="Michael A. Stackpole" label="Michael A. Stackpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="20295" end="20300" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="20302" end="20310" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="20312" end="20324" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="20330" end="20336" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="20385" end="20402" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849196" start="20518" end="20529" title="Mike Walker (radio dramatist)" label="Mike Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915749" start="20594" end="20607" title="Nicola Walker" label="Nicola Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137826" start="20618" end="20633" title="James Laurenson" label="James Laurenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375689" start="20647" end="20660" title="John Shrapnel" label="John Shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q501750" start="20676" end="20689" title="Colin Stinton" label="Colin Stinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235118" start="20725" end="20735" title="David Holt (voice actor)" label="David Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q507322" start="20779" end="20791" title="Andrew Scott (actor)" label="Andrew Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="20810" end="20817" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54718" start="20819" end="20822" title="Yle" label="Yle"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="21273" end="21280" title="Audible (service)" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q472504" start="21323" end="21336" title="Jason Flemyng" label="Jason Flemyng"/>
<link wikidata="Q861161" start="21479" end="21495" title="Chris Cunningham" label="Chris Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q725006" start="21500" end="21513" title="Chuck Russell" label="Chuck Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="21520" end="21530" title="Aphex Twin" label="Aphex Twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363428" start="21949" end="21960" title="Joseph Kahn (director)" label="Joseph Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q670055" start="21980" end="21986" title="Torque (film)" label="Torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q170576" start="22016" end="22030" title="Milla Jovovich" label="Milla Jovovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q610764" start="22103" end="22118" title="Vincenzo Natali" label="Vincenzo Natali"/>
<link wikidata="Q467840" start="22138" end="22142" title="Cube (1997 film)" label="Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q377043" start="22159" end="22165" title="Splice (film)" label="Splice"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="22578" end="22589" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="22594" end="22607" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19347291" start="23027" end="23035" title="Deadpool (film)" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19561563" start="23051" end="23061" title="Tim Miller (director)" label="Tim Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q219507" start="23121" end="23134" title="Simon Kinberg" label="Simon Kinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="23202" end="23211" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q267330" start="23326" end="23338" title="Miles Teller" label="Miles Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593190" start="23365" end="23378" title="Graham Roland" label="Graham Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486445" start="23508" end="23527" title="Skydance Television" label="Skydance Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q567633" start="23529" end="23546" title="Anonymous Content" label="Anonymous Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q115536180" start="23598" end="23611" title="J. D. Dillard" label="J. D. Dillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162913" start="23645" end="23658" title="Callum Turner" label="Callum Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q109228995" start="23701" end="23717" title="Briana Middleton" label="Briana Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55734474" start="23756" end="23766" title="Joseph Lee (actor)" label="Joseph Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q312712" start="23803" end="23814" title="Mark Strong" label="Mark Strong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21726" wikidata="Q3029" url="?curid=21726" title="November 16">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 951 – Emperor Li Jing sends a Southern Tang expeditionary force of 10,000 men under Bian Hao to conquer Chu. Li Jing removes the ruling family to his own capital in Nanjing, ending the Chu Kingdom.
*1272 – While travelling during the Ninth Crusade, Prince Edward becomes King of England upon Henry III of England&#x27;s death, but he will not return to England for nearly two years to assume the throne.
*1491 – An auto-da-fé, held in the Brasero de la Dehesa outside of Ávila, concludes the case of the Holy Child of La Guardia with the public execution of several Jewish and converso suspects.
*1532 – Francisco Pizarro and his men capture Inca Emperor Atahualpa at the Battle of Cajamarca.
===1601–1900===
*1632 – King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden was killed at the Battle of Lützen during the Thirty Years&#x27; War.
*1776 – American Revolutionary War: British and Hessian units capture Fort Washington from the Patriots.
*1793 – French Revolution: Ninety dissident Roman Catholic priests are executed by drowning at Nantes.
*1797 – The Prussian heir apparent, Frederick William, becomes King of Prussia as Frederick William III.
*1805 – Napoleonic Wars: Battle of Schöngrabern: Russian forces under Pyotr Bagration delay the pursuit by French troops under Joachim Murat.
*1822 – American Old West: Missouri trader William Becknell arrives in Santa Fe, New Mexico, over a route that became known as the Santa Fe Trail.
*1828 – Greek War of Independence: The London Protocol entails the creation of an autonomous Greek state under Ottoman suzerainty, encompassing the Morea and the Cyclades.
*1849 – A Russian court sentences writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky to death for anti-government activities linked to a radical intellectual group; his sentence is later commuted to hard labor.
*1855 – David Livingstone becomes the first European to see the Victoria Falls in what is now Zambia-Zimbabwe.
*1857 – Second relief of Lucknow: Twenty-four Victoria Crosses are awarded, the most in a single day.
*1863 – American Civil War: In the Battle of Campbell&#x27;s Station, Confederate troops unsuccessfully attack Union forces which allows General Ambrose Burnside to secure Knoxville, Tennessee.
*1871 – The National Rifle Association of America receives its charter from New York State.
*1885 – Canadian rebel leader of the Métis and &quot;Father of Manitoba&quot; Louis Riel is executed for treason.
===1901–present===
*1904 – English engineer John Ambrose Fleming receives a patent for the thermionic valve (vacuum tube).
*1907 – Indian Territory and Oklahoma Territory join to form Oklahoma, which is admitted as the 46th U.S. state.
*1914 – The Federal Reserve Bank of the United States officially opens.
*1920 – Qantas, Australia&#x27;s national airline, is founded as Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services Limited.
*1933 – The United States and the Soviet Union establish formal diplomatic relations.
*1938 – LSD is first synthesized by Albert Hofmann from ergotamine at the Sandoz Laboratories in Basel.
*1940 – World War II: In response to the leveling of Coventry by the German Luftwaffe two days before, the Royal Air Force bombs Hamburg.
* 1940 – The Holocaust: In occupied Poland, the Nazis close off the Warsaw Ghetto from the outside world.
* 1940 – New York City&#x27;s &quot;Mad Bomber&quot; George Metesky places his first bomb at a Manhattan office building used by Consolidated Edison.
*1944 – World War II: In support of the Battle of Hürtgen Forest, the town of Düren is destroyed by Allied aircraft.
* 1944 – The Jussi Awards, the Finnish film award ceremony, is held for the first time at Restaurant Adlon in Helsinki.
*1945 – UNESCO is founded.
*1958 – National Airlines Flight 967 explodes in mid-air over the Gulf of Mexico, killing all 42 aboard.
*1959 – Aeroflot Flight 315 crashes on approach to Lviv Airport, killing all 40 people on board.
*1965 – Venera program: The Soviet Union launches the &quot;Venera 3&quot; space probe toward Venus, which will be the first spacecraft to reach the surface of another planet.
*1967 – Aeroflot Flight 2230 crashes near Koltsovo Airport, killing 107.
*1973 – Skylab program: NASA launches &quot;Skylab 4&quot; with a crew of three astronauts from Cape Canaveral, Florida for an 84-day mission.
* 1973 – U.S. President Richard Nixon signs the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act into law, authorizing the construction of the Alaska Pipeline.
*1974 – The Arecibo message is broadcast from Puerto Rico.
*1979 – The first line of Bucharest Metro (Line M1) is opened from Timpuri Noi to Semănătoarea in Bucharest, Romania.
*1981 – Aeroflot Flight 3603 crashes during landing at Norilsk Airport, killing 99.
*1988 – The Supreme Soviet of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic declares that Estonia is &quot;sovereign&quot; but stops short of declaring independence.
* 1988 – In the first open election in more than a decade, voters in Pakistan elect populist candidate Benazir Bhutto to be Prime Minister of Pakistan.
*1989 – El Salvadoran army troops kill six Jesuit priests and two others at Jose Simeon Canas University.
*1990 – Pop group Milli Vanilli are stripped of their Grammy Award because the duo did not sing at all on the &quot;Girl You Know It&#x27;s True&quot; album. Session musicians had provided all the vocals.
*1992 – The Hoxne Hoard is discovered by metal detectorist Eric Lawes in Hoxne, Suffolk.
*1997 – After nearly 18 years of incarceration, China releases Wei Jingsheng, a pro-democracy dissident, from jail for medical reasons.
*2002 – The first cases of the 2002–2004 SARS outbreak are traced to Foshan, Guangdong Province, China.
*2004 – Half-Life 2 is released, a game winning 39 Game of the Year awards and being cited as one of the best games ever made.
*2005 – Following a 31-year wait, Australia defeats Uruguay in a penalty shootout to qualify for the 2006 FIFA World Cup.
*2009 – Space Shuttle program: Space Shuttle &quot;Atlantis&quot; is launched on mission STS-129 to the International Space Station.
*2022 – Artemis Program: NASA launches &quot;Artemis 1&quot; on the first flight of the Space Launch System, the start of the program&#x27;s future missions to the moon.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*42 BC – Tiberius, Roman emperor (d. 37 AD)
*1436 – Leonardo Loredan, Italian ruler (d. 1521)
*1457 – Beatrice of Naples, Hungarian queen (d. 1508)
*1466 – Francesco Cattani da Diacceto, Florentine philosopher (d. 1522)
*1483 – Elisabeth of the Palatinate, Landgravine of Hesse, German noble (d. 1522) 
*1528 – Jeanne d&#x27;Albret, Queen of Navarre (d. 1572)
*1531 – Anna d&#x27;Este, Duchess consort of Nemours (d. 1607)
*1538 – Saint Turibius of Mongrovejo, Spanish Grand Inquisitioner, Archbishop of Lima (d. 1606)
*1540 – Princess Cecilia of Sweden (d. 1627)
*1566 – Anna Juliana Gonzaga, Archduchess of Austria and nun (d. 1621)
*1569 – Paul Sartorius, German organist and composer (d. 1609)
===1601–1900===
*1603 – Augustyn Kordecki, Polish monk (d. 1673)
*1643 – Jean Chardin, French-English jeweler and explorer (d. 1703)
*1648 – Charles Duncombe, English banker and politician (d. 1711)
*1715 – Girolamo Abos, Maltese-Italian composer and educator (d. 1760)
*1717 – Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert, French mathematician, physicist, and philosopher (d. 1793)
*1720 – Carlo Antonio Campioni, French-Italian composer (d. 1788)
*1750 – Edward Law, 1st Baron Ellenborough, English lawyer, judge, and politician (d. 1818)
*1753 – James McHenry, Irish-American surgeon and politician (d. 1816)
*1758 – Peter Andreas Heiberg, Danish philologist and author (d. 1841)
*1774 – Georg von Cancrin, German-Russian Minister of Finance (d. 1845)
*1793 – Francis Danby, Irish painter of the Romantic era (d. 1861)
*1806 – Mary Tyler Peabody Mann, American author and educator (d. 1887)
*1807 – Jónas Hallgrímsson, Icelandic poet, author and naturalist (d. 1845)
*1811 – John Bright, English academic and politician (d. 1889)
*1836 – Kalākaua of Hawaii (d. 1891)
*1839 – Louis-Honoré Fréchette, Canadian poet, author, and politician (d. 1908)
*1841 – Jules Violle, French physicist and academic (d. 1923)
*1847 – Edmund James Flynn, Canadian lawyer and politician (d. 1927)
*1851 – Minnie Hauk, American-Swiss soprano and actress (d. 1929)
*1856 – Jürgen Kröger, German architect (d. 1928)
*1861 – Luigi Facta, Italian politician and journalist (d. 1930)
* 1861 – Georgina Febres-Cordero, Venezuelan nun (d. 1925)
*1862 – Charles Turner, Australian cricketer (d. 1944)
*1873 – W. C. Handy, American trumpet player and composer (d. 1958)
*1874 – Alexander Kolchak, Russian admiral and explorer (d. 1920)
*1883 – Emil Breitkreutz, American runner and coach (d. 1972)
*1888 – Luis Cluzeau Mortet, Uruguayan pianist and composer (d. 1957)
*1889 – George S. Kaufman, American director, producer, and playwright (d. 1961)
* 1889 – Dietrich Kraiß, German general (d. 1944)
*1890 – Elpidio Quirino, 6th President of the Philippines (d. 1956)
*1892 – Guo Moruo, Chinese historian, author, and poet (d. 1978)
* 1892 – Tazio Nuvolari, Italian race car driver and motorcycle racer (d. 1953)
*1894 – Bobby Cruickshank, American golfer (d. 1975)
* 1894 – Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, Austrian philosopher and politician (d. 1972)
*1895 – Paul Hindemith, German composer, violist and conductor (d. 1963)
*1896 – Joan Lindsay, Australian author and critic (d. 1984)
* 1896 – Oswald Mosley, English fascist leader and politician (d. 1980)
* 1896 – Lawrence Tibbett, American actor and singer (d. 1960)
*1897 – Choudhry Rahmat Ali, Indian-Pakistani academic (d. 1951)
*1899 – Mary Margaret McBride, American radio host (d. 1976)
*1900 – Eliška Junková, Czechoslovakian race car driver (d. 1994)
===1901–present===
*1904 – Nnamdi Azikiwe, Nigerian statesman, 1st President of Nigeria (d. 1996)
*1905 – Eddie Condon, American guitarist and banjo player (d. 1973)
*1907 – Burgess Meredith, American actor, singer, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1997)
*1909 – Mirza Nasir Ahmad, Indian-Pakistani religious leader (d. 1982)
*1912 – George O. Petrie, American actor and director (d. 1997)
* 1912 – W. E. D. Ross, Canadian actor, playwright, and author (d. 1995)
*1913 – Ellen Albertini Dow, American actress (d. 2015)
*1914 – Eddie Chapman, English spy (d. 1997)
*1915 – Jean Fritz, Chinese-American author (d. 2017)
*1916 – Harold Baigent, New Zealand actor and director (d. 1996)
* 1916 – Daws Butler, American voice actor and singer (d. 1988)
* 1916 – Al Lucas, Canadian-American bassist (d. 1983)
*1922 – Gene Amdahl, American computer scientist, physicist, and engineer (d. 2015)
* 1922 – José Saramago, Portuguese novelist and Nobel laureate in Literature (d. 2010)
*1924 – Sam Farber, American businessman (d. 2013)
* 1924 – Mel Patton, American sprinter and coach (d. 2014)
*1927 – Dolo Coker, American pianist and composer (d. 1983)
*1928 – Clu Gulager, American actor and director (d. 2022)
*1929 – Peter Boizot, English businessman (d. 2018)
*1930 – Chinua Achebe, Nigerian novelist, poet, and critic (d. 2013)
* 1930 – Paul Foytack, American baseball player (d. 2021)
* 1930 – Salvatore Riina, Italian mob boss (d. 2017)
*1931 – Luciano Bottaro, Italian author and illustrator (d. 2006)
* 1931 – Hubert Sumlin, American singer and guitarist (d. 2011)
*1933 – Garnet Mimms, American R&amp;B singer
*1935 – Elizabeth Drew, American journalist and author
* 1935 – Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah, Iraqi-Lebanese cleric, educator, and author (d. 2010)
* 1935 – Magdi Yacoub, Egyptian-English surgeon and academic
*1936 – John Moore, Australian businessman and politician
*1937 – Alan Budd, English economist and academic (d. 2023)
*1938 – Ahmed Bouanani, Moroccan filmmaker (d. 2011)
* 1938 – Kang Ning-hsiang, Taiwanese politician
* 1938 – Walter Learning, Canadian actor (d. 2020)
* 1938 – Robert Nozick, American philosopher, author, and academic (d. 2002)
* 1938 – Troy Seals, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1939 – Michael Billington, English author and critic
*1940 – Donna McKechnie, American actress, singer, and dancer
*1941 – Angelo Gilardino, Italian guitarist, composer, and musicologist (d. 2022)
* 1941 – Gerry Marshall, English race car driver (d. 2005)
* 1941 – Dan Penn, American singer-songwriter and producer
*1942 – Willie Carson, Scottish jockey and sportscaster
* 1942 – Joanna Pettet, English-Canadian actress
*1944 – Oliver Braddick, English psychologist and academic (d. 2022)
*1945 – Teenie Hodges, American guitarist and songwriter (d. 2014)
* 1945 – Lynn Hunt, American historian, author, and academic
* 1945 – Steve Railsback, American actor
*1946 – Colin Burgess, Australian drummer and songwriter (d. 2023)
* 1946 – Terence McKenna, American botanist, philosopher, and author (d. 2000)
* 1946 – Barbara Smith, American writer
* 1946 – Beverly Smith, American writer
* 1946 – Jo Jo White, American basketball player and coach (d. 2018)
*1947 – Omar Ruiz Hernández, Cuban journalist and activist
*1948 – Horst Bertram, German footballer and manager (d. 2023)
* 1948 – Chi Coltrane, American singer-songwriter and pianist
* 1948 – Bonnie Greer, American-English playwright and critic
* 1948 – Ken James, Australian actor
*1950 – Harvey Martin, American football player (d. 2001)
* 1950 – Manuel Zamora, Filipino farmer and politician
*1951 – Andy Dalton, New Zealand rugby player
* 1951 – Miguel Sandoval, American actor
*1952 – Shigeru Miyamoto, Japanese video game designer
*1953 – Griff Rhys Jones, Welsh comedian, actor, and author
*1954 – Andrea Barrett, American novelist and short story writer
* 1954 – Dick Gross, Australian lawyer and politician
*1955 – Héctor Cúper, Argentine footballer, coach, and manager
* 1955 – Pierre Larouche, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
* 1955 – Guillermo Lasso, Ecuadoran businessman, 47th President of Ecuador
* 1955 – Jun Kunimura, Japanese actor
* 1955 – Esteban Trapiello, Venezuelan businessman
*1956 – Terry Labonte, American race car driver and businessman
*1957 – Jacques Gamblin, French actor
*1958 – Marg Helgenberger, American actress
* 1958 – Boris Krivokapić, Serbian author and academic
*1959 – Glenda Bailey, English journalist
* 1959 – Francis M. Fesmire, American cardiologist and physician (d. 2014)
*1961 – Frank Bruno, English boxer
*1962 – Darwyn Cooke, Canadian writer and artist (d. 2016)
* 1962 – Mani, English bass player
*1963 – Steve Argüelles, English drummer and producer
* 1963 – William Bonner, Brazilian newscaster, publicist and journalist
* 1963 – Zina Garrison, American tennis player
*1964 – Waheed Alli, Baron Alli, English businessman and politician
* 1964 – Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, Italian-French actress, director, and screenwriter
* 1964 – Dwight Gooden, American baseball player
* 1964 – Diana Krall, Canadian singer-songwriter and pianist
* 1964 – Harry Lennix, American actor
* 1964 – Maeve Quinlan, American actress
*1965 – Mika Aaltonen, Finnish footballer
*1966 – Joey Cape, American singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer
* 1966 – Dave Kushner, American guitarist 
* 1966 – Christian Lorenz, German keyboard player 
* 1966 – Dean McDermott, Canadian-American actor and producer
* 1966 – Tahir Shah, English journalist, author, and explorer
*1967 – Craig Arnold, American poet and academic (d. 2009)
* 1967 – Lisa Bonet, American actress and director
*1968 – Tammy Lauren, American actress
* 1968 – Shobha Nagi Reddy, Indian politician (d. 2014)
* 1968 – Melvin Stewart, American swimmer
*1970 – Logan Mader, Canadian-American guitarist and producer 
* 1970 – Martha Plimpton, American actress 
*1971 – Tanja Damaske, German javelin thrower and shot putter
* 1971 – Mustapha Hadji, Moroccan footballer and manager
* 1971 – Annely Peebo, Estonian soprano and actress
* 1971 – Alexander Popov, Russian swimmer and coach
* 1971 – Waqar Younis, Pakistani cricketer and coach
*1972 – Missi Pyle, American actress and singer 
*1973 – Christian Horner, English race car driver and manager
* 1973 – Brendan Laney, New Zealand-Scottish rugby player and sportscaster
*1974 – Brooke Elliott, American actress and singer
* 1974 – Maurizio Margaglio, Italian ice dancer and coach
* 1974 – Paul Scholes, English footballer and sportscaster
*1975 – Julio Lugo, Dominican baseball player (d. 2021)
* 1975 – Yuki Uchida, Japanese actress, model, and singer
*1976 – Dan Black, English singer-songwriter 
* 1976 – Juha Pasoja, Finnish footballer
* 1976 – Martijn Zuijdweg, Dutch swimmer
*1977 – Oksana Baiul, Ukrainian-American figure skater
* 1977 – Gigi Edgley, Australian singer-songwriter and actress
* 1977 – Maggie Gyllenhaal, American actress and singer
* 1977 – Mauricio Ochmann, Mexican actor and producer
*1978 – Kip Bouknight, American baseball player
* 1978 – Mehtap Doğan-Sızmaz, Turkish runner
* 1978 – Takashi Nagayama, Japanese actor
* 1978 – Gary Naysmith, Scottish footballer and manager
* 1978 – Carolina Parra, Brazilian guitarist and drummer 
*1979 – Bruce Irons, American surfer
*1980 – Moris Carrozzieri, Italian footballer
* 1980 – Kayte Christensen, American basketball player
* 1980 – Nicole Gius, Italian skier
* 1980 – Carol Huynh, Canadian wrestler
* 1980 – Hasan Üçüncü, Turkish footballer
*1981 – Fernando Cabrera, Puerto Rican baseball player
* 1981 – Allison Crowe, Canadian singer-songwriter 
* 1981 – Caitlin Glass, American voice actress, singer, and director
* 1981 – Kate Miller-Heidke, Australian singer-songwriter
* 1981 – Osi Umenyiora, English-American football player
*1982 – Nonito Donaire, Filipino-American boxer
* 1982 – Jannie du Plessis, South African rugby player
* 1982 – Ronald Pognon, French sprinter
* 1982 – Amar&#x27;e Stoudemire, American-Israeli basketball player
*1983 – Kool A.D., American rapper 
* 1983 – Kari Lehtonen, Finnish ice hockey player
* 1983 – Britta Steffen, German swimmer
*1984 – Gemma Atkinson, English model and actress
* 1984 – Kimberly J. Brown, American actress
* 1984 – Mark Bunn, English footballer
* 1984 – Tamawashi Ichiro, Mongolian sumo wrestler
*1985 – Aditya Roy Kapur, Indian actor
* 1985 – Sanna Marin, Finnish politician, former Prime Minister of Finland
*1986 – Omar Mateen, Islamic terrorist, perpetrator of the Orlando nightclub shooting (d. 2016)
* 1986 – Maxime Médard, French rugby player
*1987 – Eitan Tibi, Israeli footballer
* 1987 – Jordan Walden, American baseball player
*1989 – Iamsu!, American rapper and producer 
*1990 – Arjo Atayde, Filipino actor
* 1990 – Dénes Dibusz, Hungarian football player
*1991 – Nemanja Gudelj, Serbian footballer
* 1991 – Tomomi Kasai, Japanese actress and singer 
*1992 – George Akpabio, Nigerian footballer
* 1992 – Matthew Allwood, Australian rugby league player
* 1992 – Marcelo Brozović, Croatian footballer
* 1992 – Shane Prince, American-Belarusian ice hockey player
*1993 – C. J. Beathard, American football player
* 1993 – Pete Davidson, American comedian and actor
* 1993 – Nélson Semedo, Portuguese footballer
* 1993 – Denzel Valentine, American basketball player
*1994 – Brandon Larracuente, American actor
* 1994 – Yoshiki Yamamoto, Japanese footballer
*1995 – Noah Gray-Cabey, American actor and pianist
* 1995 – André-Frank Zambo Anguissa, Cameroonian footballer
*1996 – Boulaye Dia, Senegalese footballer
*1997 – Bruno Guimarães, Brazilian footballer
*1999 – Bol Bol, South Sudanese-American basketball player
*1999 – Mats Wieffer, Dutch footballer
*2000 – Josh Green, Australian basketball player
*2006 – Mason Ramsey, American singer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 897 – Gu Yanhui, Chinese warlord
* 987 – Shen Lun, Chinese scholar-official
*1005 – Ælfric of Abingdon, Archbishop of Canterbury
*1093 – Saint Margaret of Scotland (b. 1045)
*1131 – Dobrodeia of Kiev, Rus princess and author of medical books
*1240 – Edmund Rich, English archbishop and saint (b. 1175)
* 1240 – Ibn Arabi, Andalusian Arab philosopher (b. 1165)
*1264 – Emperor Lizong of Song China (b. 1205)
*1272 – Henry III of England (b. 1207)
*1322 – Nasr, Sultan of Granada (b. 1287)
*1328 – Prince Hisaaki, Japanese shōgun (b. 1276)
*1464 – John, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach (b. 1406)
*1494 – Theda Ukena, German noble (b. 1432)
*1580 – Marie of Baden-Sponheim, German Noblewoman (b. 1507)
===1601–1900===
*1601 – Charles Neville, 6th Earl of Westmorland (b. 1542)
*1603 – Pierre Charron, French Catholic theologian and philosopher (b. 1541)
*1613 – Trajano Boccalini, Italian author and educator (b. 1556)
*1625 – Sofonisba Anguissola, Italian painter (b. c. 1532)
*1628 – Paolo Quagliati, Italian organist and composer (b. 1555)
*1688 – Bengt Gottfried Forselius, Swedish-Estonian scholar and author (b. 1660)
*1695 – Pierre Nicole, French philosopher and author (b. 1625)
*1724 – Jack Sheppard, English criminal (b. 1702)
*1745 – James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde, Irish general and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (b. 1665)
*1773 – John Hawkesworth, English journalist and author (b. 1715)
*1779 – Pehr Kalm, Finnish botanist and explorer (b. 1716)
*1790 – Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer, American politician (b. 1723)
*1797 – Frederick William II of Prussia (b. 1744)
*1802 – André Michaux, French botanist and explorer (b. 1746)
*1806 – Moses Cleaveland, American general, lawyer, and politician, founded Cleveland, Ohio (b. 1754)
*1808 – Mustafa IV, Ottoman sultan (b. 1779)
*1836 – Christiaan Hendrik Persoon, South African-French mycologist and academic (b. 1761)
*1878 – Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine (b. 1874)
*1884 – František Chvostek, Czech-Austrian soldier and physician (b. 1835)
*1885 – Louis Riel, Canadian lawyer and politician (b. 1844)
===1901–present===
*1903 – Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine (b. 1895)
*1907 – Robert I, Duke of Parma (b. 1848)
*1908 – Henri-Gustave Joly de Lotbinière, French-Canadian lawyer and politician, 4th Premier of Quebec (b. 1829)
*1911 – A. A. Ames, American physician and politician, 9th Mayor of Minneapolis (b. 1842)
* 1911 – Lawrence Feuerbach, American shot putter (b. 1879)
*1913 – George Barham, English businessman, founded Express County Milk Supply Company (b. 1836)
*1922 – Max Abraham, Polish-German physicist and academic (b. 1875)
*1939 – Pierce Butler, American lawyer and jurist (b. 1866)
*1941 – Eduard Eelma, Estonian footballer (b. 1902)
* 1941 – Miina Härma, Estonian organist, composer, and conductor (b. 1864)
*1947 – Giuseppe Volpi, Italian businessman and politician, founded the Venice Film Festival (b. 1877) 
*1950 – Bob Smith, American physician and surgeon, co-founded Alcoholics Anonymous (b. 1879)
*1956 – Ōtori Tanigorō, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 24th Yokozuna (b. 1887)
*1960 – Clark Gable, American actor (b. 1901)
*1961 – Sam Rayburn, American lawyer and politician, 48th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (b. 1882)
*1964 – Donald C. Peattie, American botanist and author (b. 1898)
*1971 – Edie Sedgwick, American model and actress (b. 1943)
*1972 – Vera Karalli, Russian ballerina and actress (b. 1889)
*1973 – Alan Watts, English-American philosopher, author, and educator (b. 1915)
*1974 – Walther Meissner, German physicist and engineer (b. 1882)
*1976 – Jack Foster, English cricketer (b. 1905)
*1982 – Pavel Alexandrov, Russian mathematician and academic (b. 1896)
*1984 – Vic Dickenson, American trombonist (b. 1906)
*1986 – Siobhán McKenna, Irish actress (b. 1923)
* 1986 – Panditrao Agashe, Indian businessman (b. 1936)
*1987 – Jim Brewer, American baseball player and coach (b. 1937)
*1989 – Jean-Claude Malépart, Canadian lawyer and politician (b. 1938)
*1990 – Ege Bagatur, Turkish politician (b. 1937)
*1993 – Lucia Popp, Slovak-German soprano (b. 1939)
* 1993 – Achille Zavatta, Tunisia-born French clown (b. 1915)
*1994 – Chet Powers, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1943)
*1999 – Daniel Nathans, American microbiologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1928)
*2000 – Robert Earl Davis, American hip-hop artist (b. 1971)
* 2000 – Ahmet Kaya, Turkish-French singer-songwriter (b. 1957)
*2001 – Tommy Flanagan, American pianist and composer (b. 1930)
*2005 – Ralph Edwards, American radio and television host and producer (b. 1913)
* 2005 – Henry Taube, Canadian-American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1915)
* 2005 – Donald Watson, English activist, founded the Vegan Society (b. 1910)
*2006 – Milton Friedman, American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1912)
* 2006 – Yuri Levada, Russian sociologist and political scientist (b. 1930)
*2007 – Harold Alfond, American businessman (b. 1914)
* 2007 – Grethe Kausland, Norwegian actress and singer (b. 1947)
* 2007 – Trond Kirkvaag, Norwegian actor and screenwriter (b. 1946)
* 2007 – Vernon Scannell, English boxer, poet, and author (b. 1922)
*2008 – Jan Krugier; Polish-Swiss art dealer (b. 1928)
* 2008 – Reg Varney, English actor and screenwriter (b. 1916)
*2009 – Antonio de Nigris, Mexican footballer (b. 1978)
* 2009 – Sergei Magnitsky, Ukrainian-Russian accountant and lawyer (b. 1972)
* 2009 – Edward Woodward, English actor (b. 1930)
*2010 – Britton Chance, American biologist and sailor (b. 1913)
* 2010 – Ronni Chasen, American publicist (b. 1946)
* 2010 – Wyngard Tracy, Filipino DJ and talent manager (b. 1952)
*2012 – John Chapman, Australian evangelist and academic (b. 1930)
* 2012 – Subhash Dutta, Bangladeshi actor and director (b. 1930)
* 2012 – Patrick Edlinger, French mountaineer (b. 1960)
* 2012 – Aliu Mahama, Ghanaian engineer and politician, 3rd Vice President of Ghana (b. 1946)
* 2012 – Eliyahu Nawi, Iraqi-Israeli lawyer, judge, and politician (b. 1920)
* 2012 – Bob Scott, New Zealand rugby player (b. 1921)
*2013 – Robert Conley, American journalist (b. 1928)
* 2013 – Billy Hardwick, American bowler (b. 1941)
* 2013 – William McDonough Kelly, Canadian lieutenant and politician (b. 1925)
* 2013 – Tanvir Ahmad Khan, Indian-Pakistani diplomat, 19th Foreign Secretary of Pakistan (b. 1932)
* 2013 – Oscar Lanford, American mathematician and academic (b. 1940)
* 2013 – Arne Pedersen, Norwegian footballer and manager (b. 1931)
* 2013 – Louis D. Rubin, Jr., American author, critic, and academic (b. 1923)
* 2013 – Charles Waterhouse, American painter, sculptor, and illustrator (b. 1924)
*2014 – Charles Champlin, American historian, author, and critic (b. 1926)
* 2014 – Jovan Ćirilov, Serbian poet and playwright (b. 1931)
* 2014 – Ian Craig, Australian cricketer (b. 1935)
* 2014 – Juan Joseph, American football player and coach (b. 1987)
* 2014 – Jadwiga Piłsudska, Polish soldier, pilot, and architect (b. 1920)
* 2014 – Carl Sanders, American soldier, pilot, and politician, 74th Governor of Georgia (b. 1925)
*2015 – David Canary, American actor (b. 1938)
* 2015 – Michael C. Gross, American graphic designer and producer (b. 1945)
* 2015 – Bert Olmstead, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (b. 1926)
* 2015 – Alton D. Slay, American general (b. 1924)
*2016 – Jay Wright Forrester, American computer engineer (b. 1918)
* 2016 – Melvin Laird, American politician and writer (b. 1922)
* 2016 – Daniel Prodan, Romanian football player (b. 1972)
*2017 – Hiromi Tsuru, Japanese actress (b. 1960)
* 2017 – Ann Wedgeworth, American actress (b. 1934)
*2018 – William Goldman, American novelist, playwright, and screenwriter (b. 1931)
*2019 – John Campbell Brown, Scottish astronomer (b. 1947)
* 2019 – Terry O&#x27;Neill, British photographer (b. 1938)
*2020 – Sheila Nelson, English string teacher (b. 1936)
*2021 – Jyrki Kasvi, Finnish journalist and politician (b. 1964)
*2022 – Robert Clary, French-American actor and author (b. 1926)
*2024 – Vladimir Shklyarov, Russian ballet dancer (b. 1985)
==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast day:
**Africus
**Agnes of Assisi
**Edmund of Abingdon
**Elfric of Abingdon
**Eucherius of Lyon
**Gertrude the Great (Roman Catholic Church)
**Giuseppe Moscati
**Gobrain
**Hugh of Lincoln
**Margaret of Scotland
**Matthew the Evangelist (Eastern Christianity)
**Othmar
**Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn
**Roch Gonzalez, Juan de Castillo, and Alonso Rodriguez, SJ 
**November 16 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Day of Declaration of Sovereignty (Estonia)
*Earliest day on which Day of Repentance and Prayer can fall, while November 22 is the latest; celebrated 11 days before Advent Sunday (Lutheran, Reformed (Calvinist) and United Protestant churches, Saxony, Bavaria), and its related observance:
**Volkstrauertag (Germany)
*Icelandic Language Day or &quot;Dagur íslenskrar tungu&quot; (Iceland)
*International Day for Tolerance (United Nations)
*Statia Day in Sint Eustatius (Caribbean Netherlands)
*Intergenerational Fairness Day (International day of action for rights of younger and future generations)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23654" start="28" end="31" title="951" label="951"/>
<link wikidata="Q718254" start="42" end="49" title="Li Jing (Southern Tang)" label="Li Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326742" start="58" end="71" title="Southern Tang" label="Southern Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16075512" start="112" end="120" title="Bian Hao" label="Bian Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192347" start="132" end="135" title="Chu (Ten Kingdoms)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="193" end="200" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524" start="227" end="231" title="1272" label="1272"/>
<link wikidata="Q316743" start="262" end="275" title="Ninth Crusade" label="Ninth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="277" end="290" title="Edward I of England" label="Prince Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="320" end="340" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676" start="433" end="437" title="1491" label="1491"/>
<link wikidata="Q209966" start="443" end="453" title="auto-da-fé" label="auto-da-fé"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="499" end="504" title="Ávila, Spain" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607269" start="532" end="556" title="Holy Child of La Guardia" label="Holy Child of La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="605" end="613" title="converso" label="converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436" start="625" end="629" title="1532" label="1532"/>
<link wikidata="Q44741" start="632" end="649" title="Francisco Pizarro" label="Francisco Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="670" end="674" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q179577" start="683" end="692" title="Atahualpa" label="Atahualpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425362" start="700" end="719" title="Battle of Cajamarca" label="Battle of Cajamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865" start="738" end="742" title="1632" label="1632"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="745" end="777" title="King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden" label="King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q167259" start="796" end="812" title="Battle of Lützen (1632)" label="Battle of Lützen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="824" end="846" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703" start="849" end="853" title="1776" label="1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="856" end="882" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="896" end="903" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q706755" start="910" end="917" title="Battle of Fort Washington" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438808" start="918" end="933" title="Fort Washington (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="954" end="958" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="961" end="978" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436102" start="1024" end="1044" title="Drownings at Nantes" label="executed by drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="1048" end="1054" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="1057" end="1061" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="1138" end="1159" title="Frederick William III of Prussia" label="Frederick William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898" start="1162" end="1166" title="1805" label="1805"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1169" end="1184" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q948810" start="1186" end="1208" title="Battle of Schöngrabern" label="Battle of Schöngrabern"/>
<link wikidata="Q239260" start="1231" end="1246" title="Pyotr Bagration" label="Pyotr Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="1288" end="1301" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983" start="1304" end="1308" title="1822" label="1822"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="1311" end="1328" title="American Old West" label="American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="1330" end="1338" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q563003" start="1346" end="1362" title="William Becknell" label="William Becknell"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="1374" end="1394" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="1434" end="1448" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570" start="1451" end="1455" title="1828" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="1458" end="1483" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934084" start="1489" end="1504" title="London Protocol (1828)" label="London Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196055" start="1598" end="1603" title="Morea" label="Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="1612" end="1620" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="1623" end="1627" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="1663" end="1681" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673" start="1809" end="1813" title="1855" label="1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="1816" end="1833" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43278" start="1872" end="1886" title="Victoria Falls, Zambia" label="Victoria Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="1902" end="1908" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="1909" end="1917" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680" start="1920" end="1924" title="1857" label="1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q815165" start="1927" end="1951" title="Siege of Lucknow" label="Second relief of Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="1965" end="1979" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="2022" end="2026" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2029" end="2047" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853552" start="2056" end="2089" title="Battle of Campbell&amp;#x27;s Station" label="Battle of Campbell&amp;#x27;s Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2091" end="2102" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="2132" end="2137" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q355444" start="2166" end="2182" title="Ambrose Burnside" label="Ambrose Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="2193" end="2213" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="2216" end="2220" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="2227" end="2264" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="2308" end="2312" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="2344" end="2349" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="2370" end="2378" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q313691" start="2385" end="2395" title="Louis Riel" label="Louis Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="2412" end="2419" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="2441" end="2445" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q128823" start="2465" end="2485" title="John Ambrose Fleming" label="John Ambrose Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="2512" end="2528" title="vacuum tube" label="thermionic valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="2545" end="2549" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="2552" end="2568" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="2573" end="2591" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="2605" end="2613" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="2658" end="2662" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481787" start="2669" end="2689" title="Federal Reserve Bank" label="Federal Reserve Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2697" end="2710" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="2730" end="2734" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="2737" end="2743" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866111" start="2780" end="2790" title="History of Qantas" label="is founded"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="2854" end="2858" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2887" end="2899" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424262" start="2917" end="2937" title="Soviet Union–United States relations" label="diplomatic relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="2940" end="2944" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="2947" end="2950" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="2975" end="2989" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="3044" end="3048" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3051" end="3063" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875586" start="3084" end="3104" title="Coventry Blitz" label="leveling of Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q316868" start="3166" end="3179" title="Bombing of Hamburg in World War II" label="bombs Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="3190" end="3203" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3229" end="3234" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="3249" end="3262" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101761" start="3340" end="3354" title="George Metesky" label="George Metesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3382" end="3391" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127536" start="3416" end="3435" title="Consolidated Edison" label="Consolidated Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="3438" end="3442" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q162287" start="3477" end="3501" title="Battle of Hürtgen Forest" label="Battle of Hürtgen Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884" start="3515" end="3520" title="Düren" label="Düren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258149" start="3567" end="3579" title="Jussi Awards" label="Jussi Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11867970" start="3630" end="3640" title="1st Jussi Awards" label="first time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="3664" end="3672" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="3675" end="3679" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3682" end="3688" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="3702" end="3706" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970264" start="3709" end="3737" title="National Airlines Flight 967" label="National Airlines Flight 967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="3807" end="3811" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662322" start="3814" end="3833" title="Aeroflot Flight 315 (1959)" label="Aeroflot Flight 315"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="3904" end="3908" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="3911" end="3925" title="Venera program" label="Venera program"/>
<link wikidata="Q719607" start="3963" end="3971" title="Venera 3" label="Venera 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="3997" end="4002" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="4028" end="4038" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="4071" end="4077" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="4080" end="4084" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q15642802" start="4087" end="4107" title="Aeroflot Flight 2230" label="Aeroflot Flight 2230"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334495" start="4121" end="4137" title="Koltsovo International Airport" label="Koltsovo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="4153" end="4157" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q190776" start="4160" end="4166" title="Skylab" label="Skylab"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4176" end="4180" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239477" start="4196" end="4204" title="Skylab 4" label="Skylab 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="4232" end="4241" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q966657" start="4248" end="4271" title="Cape Canaveral, Florida" label="Cape Canaveral, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4319" end="4332" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833485" start="4343" end="4382" title="Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act" label="Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q937088" start="4429" end="4444" title="Alaska Pipeline" label="Alaska Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="4447" end="4451" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q384071" start="4458" end="4473" title="Arecibo message" label="Arecibo message"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="4506" end="4510" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q622884" start="4531" end="4546" title="Bucharest Metro" label="Bucharest Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120902" start="4572" end="4583" title="Timpuri Noi metro station" label="Timpuri Noi"/>
<link wikidata="Q963995" start="4587" end="4599" title="Petrache Poenaru metro station" label="Semănătoarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="4603" end="4612" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="4624" end="4628" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621252" start="4631" end="4651" title="Aeroflot Flight 3603" label="Aeroflot Flight 3603"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406531" start="4678" end="4693" title="Alykel International Airport" label="Norilsk Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="4708" end="4712" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091606" start="4719" end="4733" title="Supreme Soviet" label="Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q130280" start="4741" end="4775" title="Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401642" start="4776" end="4784" title="Estonian Sovereignty Declaration" label="declares"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="4790" end="4797" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="4935" end="4943" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34413" start="4969" end="4983" title="Benazir Bhutto" label="Benazir Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q735575" start="4990" end="5016" title="Prime Minister of Pakistan" label="Prime Minister of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="5019" end="5023" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q63033289" start="5052" end="5075" title="1989 murders of Jesuits in El Salvador" label="kill six Jesuit priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814702" start="5094" end="5122" title="Central American University (San Salvador)" label="Jose Simeon Canas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="5125" end="5129" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="5132" end="5141" title="Pop music" label="Pop group"/>
<link wikidata="Q850540" start="5142" end="5155" title="Milli Vanilli" label="Milli Vanilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="5178" end="5190" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837587" start="5240" end="5268" title="All or Nothing (Milli Vanilli album)" label="Girl You Know It&amp;#x27;s True"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="5282" end="5298" title="Session musician" label="Session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="5330" end="5334" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629914" start="5341" end="5352" title="Hoxne Hoard" label="Hoxne Hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211959" start="5370" end="5384" title="metal detector" label="metal detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q239776" start="5402" end="5407" title="Hoxne" label="Hoxne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="5419" end="5423" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5466" end="5471" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q318130" start="5481" end="5494" title="Wei Jingsheng" label="Wei Jingsheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="5555" end="5559" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q834456" start="5585" end="5608" title="2002–2004 SARS outbreak" label="2002–2004 SARS outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q34412" start="5623" end="5629" title="Foshan" label="Foshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="5659" end="5663" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q193581" start="5666" end="5677" title="Half-Life 2" label="Half-Life 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="5786" end="5790" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q268208" start="5819" end="5828" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="5837" end="5844" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334022" start="5850" end="5866" title="penalty shootout" label="penalty shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="5886" end="5905" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="5908" end="5912" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775296" start="5915" end="5936" title="Space Shuttle program" label="Space Shuttle program"/>
<link wikidata="Q54381" start="5938" end="5972" title="Space Shuttle Atlantis" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Atlantis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q628739" start="5996" end="6003" title="STS-129" label="STS-129"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="6011" end="6038" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="6041" end="6045" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q63819987" start="6048" end="6063" title="Artemis Program" label="Artemis Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6065" end="6069" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389152" start="6085" end="6094" title="Artemis 1" label="Artemis 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q64127" start="6128" end="6147" title="Space Launch System" label="Space Launch System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201" start="6238" end="6243" title="42 BC" label="42 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="6246" end="6254" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369" start="6282" end="6286" title="1436" label="1436"/>
<link wikidata="Q250210" start="6289" end="6305" title="Leonardo Loredan" label="Leonardo Loredan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518" start="6332" end="6336" title="1457" label="1457"/>
<link wikidata="Q236886" start="6339" end="6357" title="Beatrice of Naples" label="Beatrice of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559" start="6386" end="6390" title="1466" label="1466"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749759" start="6393" end="6422" title="Francesco Cattani da Diacceto" label="Francesco Cattani da Diacceto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637" start="6458" end="6462" title="1483" label="1483"/>
<link wikidata="Q91230" start="6465" end="6514" title="Elisabeth of the Palatinate, Landgravine of Hesse" label="Elisabeth of the Palatinate, Landgravine of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415" start="6541" end="6545" title="1528" label="1528"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="6548" end="6568" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret" label="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Albret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431" start="6598" end="6602" title="1531" label="1531"/>
<link wikidata="Q563705" start="6605" end="6621" title="Anna d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Anna d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470" start="6661" end="6665" title="1538" label="1538"/>
<link wikidata="Q467993" start="6674" end="6696" title="Turibius of Mongrovejo" label="Turibius of Mongrovejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482" start="6757" end="6761" title="1540" label="1540"/>
<link wikidata="Q271940" start="6764" end="6790" title="Princess Cecilia of Sweden" label="Princess Cecilia of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638" start="6802" end="6806" title="1566" label="1566"/>
<link wikidata="Q509449" start="6809" end="6829" title="Anna Juliana Gonzaga" label="Anna Juliana Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653" start="6873" end="6877" title="1569" label="1569"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153439" start="6880" end="6894" title="Paul Sartorius (composer)" label="Paul Sartorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735" start="6952" end="6956" title="1603" label="1603"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734848" start="6959" end="6976" title="Augustyn Kordecki" label="Augustyn Kordecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917" start="7001" end="7005" title="1643" label="1643"/>
<link wikidata="Q714834" start="7008" end="7020" title="Jean Chardin" label="Jean Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941" start="7069" end="7073" title="1648" label="1648"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077005" start="7076" end="7092" title="Charles Duncombe (English banker)" label="Charles Duncombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884" start="7135" end="7139" title="1715" label="1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397669" start="7142" end="7155" title="Girolamo Abos" label="Girolamo Abos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895" start="7206" end="7210" title="1717" label="1717"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="7213" end="7241" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908" start="7303" end="7307" title="1720" label="1720"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659003" start="7310" end="7332" title="Carlo Antonio Campioni" label="Carlo Antonio Campioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611" start="7369" end="7373" title="1750" label="1750"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704730" start="7376" end="7410" title="Edward Law, 1st Baron Ellenborough" label="Edward Law, 1st Baron Ellenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621" start="7461" end="7465" title="1753" label="1753"/>
<link wikidata="Q266119" start="7468" end="7481" title="James McHenry" label="James McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639" start="7532" end="7536" title="1758" label="1758"/>
<link wikidata="Q925307" start="7539" end="7560" title="Peter Andreas Heiberg" label="Peter Andreas Heiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697" start="7603" end="7607" title="1774" label="1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q67147" start="7610" end="7627" title="Georg von Cancrin" label="Georg von Cancrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="7675" end="7679" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q709816" start="7682" end="7695" title="Francis Danby" label="Francis Danby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="7742" end="7746" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780869" start="7749" end="7772" title="Mary Tyler Peabody Mann" label="Mary Tyler Peabody Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909" start="7814" end="7818" title="1807" label="1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q559098" start="7821" end="7839" title="Jónas Hallgrímsson" label="Jónas Hallgrímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928" start="7890" end="7894" title="1811" label="1811"/>
<link wikidata="Q176524" start="7897" end="7908" title="John Bright" label="John Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="7953" end="7957" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q163080" start="7960" end="7968" title="Kalākaua" label="Kalākaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="7990" end="7994" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q580971" start="7997" end="8019" title="Louis-Honoré Fréchette" label="Louis-Honoré Fréchette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622" start="8070" end="8074" title="1841" label="1841"/>
<link wikidata="Q716352" start="8077" end="8089" title="Jules Violle" label="Jules Violle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644" start="8132" end="8136" title="1847" label="1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q648593" start="8139" end="8157" title="Edmund James Flynn" label="Edmund James Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656" start="8201" end="8205" title="1851" label="1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q538362" start="8208" end="8219" title="Minnie Hauk" label="Minnie Hauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676" start="8267" end="8271" title="1856" label="1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q75226" start="8274" end="8287" title="Jürgen Kröger" label="Jürgen Kröger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="8317" end="8321" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q431330" start="8324" end="8335" title="Luigi Facta" label="Luigi Facta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878069" start="8390" end="8413" title="Georgina Febres-Cordero" label="Georgina Febres-Cordero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="8441" end="8445" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083053" start="8448" end="8462" title="Charles Turner (Australian cricketer)" label="Charles Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="8496" end="8500" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q352967" start="8503" end="8514" title="W. C. Handy" label="W. C. Handy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="8564" end="8568" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q185718" start="8571" end="8588" title="Alexander Kolchak" label="Alexander Kolchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="8630" end="8634" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332371" start="8637" end="8653" title="Emil Breitkreutz" label="Emil Breitkreutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="8692" end="8696" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700442" start="8699" end="8718" title="Luis Cluzeau Mortet" label="Luis Cluzeau Mortet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="8762" end="8766" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q163662" start="8769" end="8786" title="George S. Kaufman" label="George S. Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q63197" start="8851" end="8865" title="Dietrich Kraiß" label="Dietrich Kraiß"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="8893" end="8897" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q319943" start="8900" end="8915" title="Elpidio Quirino" label="Elpidio Quirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="8961" end="8965" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q357821" start="8968" end="8977" title="Guo Moruo" label="Guo Moruo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174277" start="9034" end="9048" title="Tazio Nuvolari" label="Tazio Nuvolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="9106" end="9110" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934897" start="9113" end="9130" title="Bobby Cruickshank" label="Bobby Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q78525" start="9167" end="9197" title="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi" label="Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="9246" end="9250" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="9253" end="9267" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="9319" end="9323" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q453983" start="9326" end="9338" title="Joan Lindsay" label="Joan Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="9388" end="9401" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q940686" start="9460" end="9476" title="Lawrence Tibbett" label="Lawrence Tibbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="9515" end="9519" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q263795" start="9522" end="9541" title="Choudhry Rahmat Ali" label="Choudhry Rahmat Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="9580" end="9584" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757500" start="9587" end="9608" title="Mary Margaret McBride" label="Mary Margaret McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="9641" end="9645" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q434396" start="9648" end="9662" title="Eliška Junková" label="Eliška Junková"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="9726" end="9730" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q181782" start="9733" end="9747" title="Nnamdi Azikiwe" label="Nnamdi Azikiwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q500282" start="9773" end="9793" title="President of Nigeria" label="President of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="9805" end="9809" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282743" start="9812" end="9824" title="Eddie Condon" label="Eddie Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="9873" end="9877" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q343633" start="9880" end="9896" title="Burgess Meredith" label="Burgess Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="9970" end="9974" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q716839" start="9977" end="9994" title="Mirza Nasir Ahmad" label="Mirza Nasir Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="10041" end="10045" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508002" start="10048" end="10064" title="George O. Petrie" label="George O. Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214313" start="10113" end="10126" title="W. E. D. Ross" label="W. E. D. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="10178" end="10182" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q458512" start="10185" end="10204" title="Ellen Albertini Dow" label="Ellen Albertini Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="10234" end="10238" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q951385" start="10241" end="10254" title="Eddie Chapman" label="Eddie Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="10279" end="10283" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352331" start="10286" end="10296" title="Jean Fritz" label="Jean Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="10333" end="10337" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660005" start="10340" end="10354" title="Harold Baigent" label="Harold Baigent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412586" start="10406" end="10417" title="Daws Butler" label="Daws Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q305486" start="10470" end="10478" title="Al Lucas (musician)" label="Al Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="10517" end="10521" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q62890" start="10524" end="10535" title="Gene Amdahl" label="Gene Amdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q37060" start="10609" end="10622" title="José Saramago" label="José Saramago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="10688" end="10692" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992959" start="10695" end="10705" title="Sam Farber" label="Sam Farber"/>
<link wikidata="Q919830" start="10747" end="10757" title="Mel Patton" label="Mel Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="10798" end="10802" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236254" start="10805" end="10815" title="Dolo Coker" label="Dolo Coker"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="10858" end="10862" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q943390" start="10865" end="10876" title="Clu Gulager" label="Clu Gulager"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="10917" end="10921" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172877" start="10924" end="10936" title="Peter Boizot" label="Peter Boizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="10969" end="10973" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q155845" start="10976" end="10989" title="Chinua Achebe" label="Chinua Achebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150707" start="11046" end="11058" title="Paul Foytack" label="Paul Foytack"/>
<link wikidata="Q312308" start="11104" end="11119" title="Salvatore Riina" label="Salvatore Riina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="11149" end="11153" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384046" start="11156" end="11171" title="Luciano Bottaro" label="Luciano Bottaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q629761" start="11223" end="11236" title="Hubert Sumlin" label="Hubert Sumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="11279" end="11283" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494368" start="11286" end="11298" title="Garnet Mimms" label="Garnet Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="11325" end="11329" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462923" start="11332" end="11346" title="Elizabeth Drew" label="Elizabeth Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q328786" start="11388" end="11414" title="Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah" label="Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919015" start="11479" end="11491" title="Magdi Yacoub" label="Magdi Yacoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="11532" end="11536" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249252" start="11539" end="11549" title="John Moore (Australian politician)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="11590" end="11594" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706273" start="11597" end="11606" title="Alan Budd" label="Alan Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="11650" end="11654" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827520" start="11657" end="11671" title="Ahmed Bouanani" label="Ahmed Bouanani"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349564" start="11711" end="11727" title="Kang Ning-hsiang" label="Kang Ning-hsiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q946835" start="11759" end="11774" title="Walter Learning" label="Walter Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="11810" end="11823" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846947" start="11887" end="11897" title="Troy Seals" label="Troy Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="11941" end="11945" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488776" start="11948" end="11966" title="Michael Billington (critic)" label="Michael Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="11995" end="11999" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296418" start="12002" end="12017" title="Donna McKechnie" label="Donna McKechnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="12057" end="12061" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617030" start="12064" end="12080" title="Angelo Gilardino" label="Angelo Gilardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552866" start="12147" end="12161" title="Gerry Marshall" label="Gerry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214189" start="12206" end="12214" title="Dan Penn" label="Dan Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="12257" end="12261" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021419" start="12264" end="12277" title="Willie Carson" label="Willie Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q461097" start="12321" end="12334" title="Joanna Pettet" label="Joanna Pettet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="12362" end="12366" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087416" start="12369" end="12384" title="Oliver Braddick" label="Oliver Braddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="12431" end="12435" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694480" start="12438" end="12451" title="Teenie Hodges" label="Teenie Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613433" start="12506" end="12515" title="Lynn Hunt" label="Lynn Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q549961" start="12567" end="12582" title="Steve Railsback" label="Steve Railsback"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="12600" end="12604" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q555933" start="12607" end="12620" title="Colin Burgess (musician)" label="Colin Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q380558" start="12675" end="12690" title="Terence McKenna" label="Terence McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634688" start="12754" end="12767" title="Barbara Smith" label="Barbara Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899622" start="12794" end="12807" title="Beverly Smith" label="Beverly Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q598416" start="12834" end="12845" title="Jo Jo White" label="Jo Jo White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="12895" end="12899" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089819" start="12902" end="12921" title="Omar Ruiz Hernández" label="Omar Ruiz Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="12954" end="12958" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q877207" start="12961" end="12974" title="Horst Bertram" label="Horst Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q358995" start="13025" end="13037" title="Chi Coltrane" label="Chi Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942349" start="13087" end="13099" title="Bonnie Greer" label="Bonnie Greer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387864" start="13149" end="13158" title="Ken James (Australian actor)" label="Ken James"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="13178" end="13182" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q48695" start="13185" end="13198" title="Harvey Martin" label="Harvey Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752959" start="13244" end="13257" title="Manuel E. Zamora" label="Manuel Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="13291" end="13295" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849092" start="13298" end="13309" title="Andy Dalton (rugby union)" label="Andy Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q935122" start="13345" end="13360" title="Miguel Sandoval" label="Miguel Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="13378" end="13382" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q12382" start="13385" end="13401" title="Shigeru Miyamoto" label="Shigeru Miyamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="13433" end="13437" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546589" start="13440" end="13456" title="Griff Rhys Jones" label="Griff Rhys Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="13493" end="13497" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q49065" start="13500" end="13514" title="Andrea Barrett" label="Andrea Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272956" start="13566" end="13576" title="Dick Gross" label="Dick Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="13612" end="13616" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q314599" start="13619" end="13631" title="Héctor Cúper" label="Héctor Cúper"/>
<link wikidata="Q522669" start="13683" end="13698" title="Pierre Larouche" label="Pierre Larouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414537" start="13746" end="13761" title="Guillermo Lasso" label="Guillermo Lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q732562" start="13791" end="13811" title="President of Ecuador" label="President of Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422725" start="13821" end="13833" title="Jun Kunimura" label="Jun Kunimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q110515814" start="13859" end="13876" title="Esteban Trapiello" label="Esteban Trapiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="13902" end="13906" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q204845" start="13909" end="13922" title="Terry Labonte" label="Terry Labonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="13966" end="13970" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352534" start="13973" end="13988" title="Jacques Gamblin" label="Jacques Gamblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="14004" end="14008" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q229577" start="14011" end="14028" title="Marg Helgenberger" label="Marg Helgenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945305" start="14056" end="14072" title="Boris Krivokapić" label="Boris Krivokapić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="14103" end="14107" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108726" start="14110" end="14123" title="Glenda Bailey" label="Glenda Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981189" start="14153" end="14171" title="Francis M. Fesmire" label="Francis M. Fesmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="14220" end="14224" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q530220" start="14227" end="14238" title="Frank Bruno" label="Frank Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="14255" end="14259" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166960" start="14262" end="14274" title="Darwyn Cooke" label="Darwyn Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q118154" start="14322" end="14326" title="Mani (musician)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="14349" end="14353" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q247138" start="14356" end="14371" title="Steve Argüelles" label="Steve Argüelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18314" start="14411" end="14425" title="William Bonner (newscaster)" label="William Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q53546" start="14483" end="14496" title="Zina Garrison" label="Zina Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="14522" end="14526" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539282" start="14529" end="14552" title="Waheed Alli, Baron Alli" label="Waheed Alli, Baron Alli"/>
<link wikidata="Q232470" start="14598" end="14620" title="Valeria Bruni Tedeschi" label="Valeria Bruni Tedeschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076161" start="14682" end="14695" title="Dwight Gooden" label="Dwight Gooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q155879" start="14731" end="14742" title="Diana Krall" label="Diana Krall"/>
<link wikidata="Q608709" start="14792" end="14804" title="Harry Lennix" label="Harry Lennix"/>
<link wikidata="Q433284" start="14830" end="14843" title="Maeve Quinlan" label="Maeve Quinlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="14863" end="14867" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q34764" start="14870" end="14883" title="Mika Aaltonen" label="Mika Aaltonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="14905" end="14909" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349702" start="14912" end="14921" title="Joey Cape" label="Joey Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q725765" start="14984" end="14996" title="Dave Kushner" label="Dave Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q155687" start="15027" end="15043" title="Christian Lorenz" label="Christian Lorenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q715827" start="15078" end="15092" title="Dean McDermott" label="Dean McDermott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513911" start="15140" end="15150" title="Tahir Shah" label="Tahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="15194" end="15198" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180704" start="15201" end="15213" title="Craig Arnold" label="Craig Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q232414" start="15261" end="15271" title="Lisa Bonet" label="Lisa Bonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="15304" end="15308" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q433929" start="15311" end="15323" title="Tammy Lauren" label="Tammy Lauren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16619869" start="15351" end="15368" title="Shobha Nagi Reddy" label="Shobha Nagi Reddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385348" start="15407" end="15421" title="Melvin Stewart" label="Melvin Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="15441" end="15445" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368616" start="15448" end="15459" title="Logan Mader" label="Logan Mader"/>
<link wikidata="Q267383" start="15512" end="15527" title="Martha Plimpton" label="Martha Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="15548" end="15552" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q438487" start="15555" end="15568" title="Tanja Damaske" label="Tanja Damaske"/>
<link wikidata="Q311344" start="15618" end="15632" title="Mustapha Hadji" label="Mustapha Hadji"/>
<link wikidata="Q458013" start="15675" end="15687" title="Annely Peebo" label="Annely Peebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q294676" start="15727" end="15742" title="Alexander Popov (swimmer)" label="Alexander Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766640" start="15779" end="15791" title="Waqar Younis" label="Waqar Younis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="15824" end="15828" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q233786" start="15831" end="15841" title="Missi Pyle" label="Missi Pyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="15873" end="15877" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q173472" start="15880" end="15896" title="Christian Horner" label="Christian Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924428" start="15943" end="15956" title="Brendan Laney" label="Brendan Laney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="16010" end="16014" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q269681" start="16017" end="16031" title="Brooke Elliott" label="Brooke Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343704" start="16070" end="16088" title="Maurizio Margaglio" label="Maurizio Margaglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q45613" start="16128" end="16140" title="Paul Scholes" label="Paul Scholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="16179" end="16183" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048526" start="16186" end="16196" title="Julio Lugo" label="Julio Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155256" start="16243" end="16254" title="Yuki Uchida" label="Yuki Uchida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="16293" end="16297" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q523837" start="16300" end="16309" title="Dan Black" label="Dan Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705513" start="16347" end="16358" title="Juha Pasoja" label="Juha Pasoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132640" start="16388" end="16404" title="Martijn Zuijdweg" label="Martijn Zuijdweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="16421" end="16425" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q232995" start="16428" end="16440" title="Oksana Baiul" label="Oksana Baiul"/>
<link wikidata="Q275394" start="16484" end="16495" title="Gigi Edgley" label="Gigi Edgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202381" start="16547" end="16564" title="Maggie Gyllenhaal" label="Maggie Gyllenhaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q909859" start="16603" end="16619" title="Mauricio Ochmann" label="Mauricio Ochmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="16649" end="16653" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414563" start="16656" end="16669" title="Kip Bouknight" label="Kip Bouknight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396460" start="16705" end="16724" title="Mehtap Doğan-Sızmaz" label="Mehtap Doğan-Sızmaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545071" start="16750" end="16766" title="Takashi Nagayama" label="Takashi Nagayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q603933" start="16792" end="16805" title="Gary Naysmith" label="Gary Naysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416353" start="16848" end="16862" title="Carolina Parra" label="Carolina Parra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="16898" end="16902" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926433" start="16905" end="16916" title="Bruce Irons (surfer)" label="Bruce Irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="16935" end="16939" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606885" start="16942" end="16959" title="Moris Carrozzieri" label="Moris Carrozzieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q951908" start="16989" end="17006" title="Kayte Christensen" label="Kayte Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q257100" start="17044" end="17055" title="Nicole Gius" label="Nicole Gius"/>
<link wikidata="Q256421" start="17080" end="17091" title="Carol Huynh" label="Carol Huynh"/>
<link wikidata="Q630587" start="17120" end="17132" title="Hasan Üçüncü" label="Hasan Üçüncü"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="17154" end="17158" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q446303" start="17161" end="17177" title="Fernando Cabrera (baseball)" label="Fernando Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q452947" start="17217" end="17230" title="Allison Crowe" label="Allison Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017895" start="17269" end="17282" title="Caitlin Glass" label="Caitlin Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q285045" start="17338" end="17356" title="Kate Miller-Heidke" label="Kate Miller-Heidke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698914" start="17396" end="17409" title="Osi Umenyiora" label="Osi Umenyiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="17445" end="17449" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q731759" start="17452" end="17466" title="Nonito Donaire" label="Nonito Donaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q325033" start="17501" end="17518" title="Jannie du Plessis" label="Jannie du Plessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q947242" start="17556" end="17569" title="Ronald Pognon" label="Ronald Pognon"/>
<link wikidata="Q270981" start="17596" end="17618" title="Amar&amp;#x27;e Stoudemire" label="Amar&amp;#x27;e Stoudemire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="17656" end="17660" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926424" start="17663" end="17672" title="Kool A.D." label="Kool A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q585152" start="17700" end="17713" title="Kari Lehtonen" label="Kari Lehtonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57273" start="17750" end="17764" title="Britta Steffen" label="Britta Steffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="17782" end="17786" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q239187" start="17789" end="17803" title="Gemma Atkinson" label="Gemma Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q125447" start="17840" end="17857" title="Kimberly J. Brown" label="Kimberly J. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q949198" start="17885" end="17894" title="Mark Bunn (English footballer)" label="Mark Bunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875110" start="17924" end="17940" title="Tamawashi Ichiro" label="Tamawashi Ichiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="17967" end="17971" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683087" start="17974" end="17990" title="Aditya Roy Kapur" label="Aditya Roy Kapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986436" start="18014" end="18025" title="Sanna Marin" label="Sanna Marin"/>
<link wikidata="Q738695" start="18054" end="18079" title="Prime Minister of Finland" label="Prime Minister of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="18081" end="18085" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q24567454" start="18088" end="18099" title="Omar Mateen" label="Omar Mateen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24561572" start="18139" end="18165" title="Orlando nightclub shooting" label="Orlando nightclub shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182964" start="18185" end="18198" title="Maxime Médard" label="Maxime Médard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="18221" end="18225" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138198" start="18228" end="18238" title="Eitan Tibi" label="Eitan Tibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183724" start="18268" end="18281" title="Jordan Walden" label="Jordan Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="18309" end="18313" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232642" start="18316" end="18322" title="Iamsu!" label="Iamsu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="18355" end="18359" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149872" start="18362" end="18373" title="Arjo Atayde" label="Arjo Atayde"/>
<link wikidata="Q905023" start="18399" end="18411" title="Dénes Dibusz" label="Dénes Dibusz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="18440" end="18444" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q644989" start="18447" end="18461" title="Nemanja Gudelj" label="Nemanja Gudelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329748" start="18491" end="18503" title="Tomomi Kasai" label="Tomomi Kasai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="18535" end="18539" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536112" start="18542" end="18556" title="George Akpabio" label="George Akpabio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148059" start="18587" end="18602" title="Matthew Allwood" label="Matthew Allwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845710" start="18644" end="18660" title="Marcelo Brozović" label="Marcelo Brozović"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488238" start="18691" end="18703" title="Shane Prince" label="Shane Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="18744" end="18748" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003338" start="18751" end="18765" title="C. J. Beathard" label="C. J. Beathard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097962" start="18801" end="18814" title="Pete Davidson" label="Pete Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235823" start="18853" end="18866" title="Nélson Semedo" label="Nélson Semedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865640" start="18899" end="18915" title="Denzel Valentine" label="Denzel Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="18945" end="18949" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q29349693" start="18952" end="18971" title="Brandon Larracuente" label="Brandon Larracuente"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469265" start="18997" end="19013" title="Yoshiki Yamamoto" label="Yoshiki Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="19036" end="19040" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q349934" start="19043" end="19058" title="Noah Gray-Cabey" label="Noah Gray-Cabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21039587" start="19096" end="19122" title="André-Frank Zambo Anguissa" label="André-Frank Zambo Anguissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="19148" end="19152" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q57603663" start="19155" end="19166" title="Boulaye Dia" label="Boulaye Dia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="19191" end="19195" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q58323172" start="19198" end="19213" title="Bruno Guimarães" label="Bruno Guimarães"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="19237" end="19241" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q37486462" start="19244" end="19251" title="Bol Bol" label="Bol Bol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="19296" end="19300" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767078" start="19303" end="19315" title="Mats Wieffer" label="Mats Wieffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="19335" end="19339" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q55102402" start="19342" end="19352" title="Josh Green (basketball)" label="Josh Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="19384" end="19388" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q53567480" start="19391" end="19403" title="Mason Ramsey" label="Mason Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30468" start="19449" end="19452" title="897" label="897"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613145" start="19455" end="19464" title="Gu Yanhui" label="Gu Yanhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="19474" end="19481" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q23644" start="19484" end="19487" title="987" label="987"/>
<link wikidata="Q11137920" start="19490" end="19498" title="Shen Lun" label="Shen Lun"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="19508" end="19524" title="scholar-official" label="scholar-official"/>
<link wikidata="Q19231" start="19526" end="19530" title="1005" label="1005"/>
<link wikidata="Q19179" start="19533" end="19551" title="Ælfric of Abingdon" label="Ælfric of Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="19553" end="19577" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19474" start="19579" end="19583" title="1093" label="1093"/>
<link wikidata="Q230507" start="19586" end="19612" title="Saint Margaret of Scotland" label="Saint Margaret of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19579" start="19624" end="19628" title="1131" label="1131"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163672" start="19631" end="19648" title="Dobrodeia of Kiev" label="Dobrodeia of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="19692" end="19696" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235967" start="19699" end="19710" title="Edmund Rich" label="Edmund Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="19760" end="19769" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514" start="19810" end="19814" title="1264" label="1264"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497" start="19817" end="19831" title="Emperor Lizong" label="Emperor Lizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="19835" end="19845" title="Song dynasty" label="Song China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524" start="19857" end="19861" title="1272" label="1272"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="19864" end="19884" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770" start="19896" end="19900" title="1322" label="1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q321060" start="19903" end="19907" title="Nasr of Granada" label="Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="19919" end="19926" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802" start="19938" end="19942" title="1328" label="1328"/>
<link wikidata="Q715826" start="19945" end="19959" title="Prince Hisaaki" label="Prince Hisaaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552" start="19988" end="19992" title="1464" label="1464"/>
<link wikidata="Q524105" start="19995" end="20033" title="John, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach" label="John, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693" start="20045" end="20049" title="1494" label="1494"/>
<link wikidata="Q446947" start="20052" end="20063" title="Theda Ukena" label="Theda Ukena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712" start="20089" end="20093" title="1580" label="1580"/>
<link wikidata="Q68658" start="20096" end="20119" title="Marie of Baden-Sponheim" label="Marie of Baden-Sponheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725" start="20166" end="20170" title="1601" label="1601"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572973" start="20173" end="20213" title="Charles Neville, 6th Earl of Westmorland" label="Charles Neville, 6th Earl of Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735" start="20225" end="20229" title="1603" label="1603"/>
<link wikidata="Q463846" start="20232" end="20246" title="Pierre Charron" label="Pierre Charron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776" start="20302" end="20306" title="1613" label="1613"/>
<link wikidata="Q370031" start="20309" end="20326" title="Trajano Boccalini" label="Trajano Boccalini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826" start="20367" end="20371" title="1625" label="1625"/>
<link wikidata="Q236038" start="20374" end="20394" title="Sofonisba Anguissola" label="Sofonisba Anguissola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840" start="20426" end="20430" title="1628" label="1628"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931765" start="20433" end="20448" title="Paolo Quagliati" label="Paolo Quagliati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671" start="20491" end="20495" title="1688" label="1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q817220" start="20498" end="20523" title="Bengt Gottfried Forselius" label="Bengt Gottfried Forselius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="20572" end="20576" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q719942" start="20579" end="20592" title="Pierre Nicole" label="Pierre Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926" start="20635" end="20639" title="1724" label="1724"/>
<link wikidata="Q636214" start="20642" end="20655" title="Jack Sheppard" label="Jack Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586" start="20685" end="20689" title="1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q610327" start="20692" end="20725" title="James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde" label="James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="20757" end="20783" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692" start="20795" end="20799" title="1773" label="1773"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181710" start="20802" end="20818" title="John Hawkesworth (book editor)" label="John Hawkesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714" start="20861" end="20865" title="1779" label="1779"/>
<link wikidata="Q719204" start="20868" end="20877" title="Pehr Kalm" label="Pehr Kalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775" start="20920" end="20924" title="1790" label="1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q736536" start="20927" end="20955" title="Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer" label="Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="20988" end="20992" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q152229" start="20995" end="21026" title="Frederick William II of Prussia" label="Frederick William II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883" start="21038" end="21042" title="1802" label="1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q521848" start="21045" end="21058" title="André Michaux" label="André Michaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="21100" end="21104" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324749" start="21107" end="21123" title="Moses Cleaveland" label="Moses Cleaveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="21175" end="21190" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914" start="21202" end="21206" title="1808" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q199830" start="21209" end="21219" title="Mustafa IV" label="Mustafa IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="21247" end="21251" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q346451" start="21254" end="21280" title="Christiaan Hendrik Persoon" label="Christiaan Hendrik Persoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="21338" end="21342" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208045" start="21345" end="21381" title="Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine (1874–1878)" label="Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="21393" end="21397" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q84876" start="21400" end="21418" title="František Chvostek" label="František Chvostek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="21468" end="21472" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q313691" start="21475" end="21485" title="Louis Riel" label="Louis Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="21548" end="21552" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q70850" start="21555" end="21595" title="Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine (1895–1903)" label="Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="21607" end="21611" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q314577" start="21614" end="21637" title="Robert I, Duke of Parma" label="Robert I, Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="21649" end="21653" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q179925" start="21656" end="21688" title="Henri-Gustave Joly de Lotbinière" label="Henri-Gustave Joly de Lotbinière"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="21733" end="21750" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="21762" end="21766" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647455" start="21769" end="21779" title="A. A. Ames" label="A. A. Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627609" start="21820" end="21840" title="Mayor of Minneapolis" label="Mayor of Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q612861" start="21860" end="21878" title="Lawrence Feuerbach" label="Lawrence Feuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="21912" end="21916" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536711" start="21919" end="21932" title="George Barham" label="George Barham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421660" start="21963" end="21997" title="Express County Milk Supply Company" label="Express County Milk Supply Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="22009" end="22013" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q62271" start="22016" end="22027" title="Max Abraham" label="Max Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="22077" end="22081" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395635" start="22084" end="22097" title="Pierce Butler (justice)" label="Pierce Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="22137" end="22141" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288243" start="22144" end="22156" title="Eduard Eelma" label="Eduard Eelma"/>
<link wikidata="Q438792" start="22197" end="22208" title="Miina Härma" label="Miina Härma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="22264" end="22268" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362112" start="22271" end="22285" title="Giuseppe Volpi" label="Giuseppe Volpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="22335" end="22355" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="22368" end="22372" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346306" start="22375" end="22384" title="Bob Smith (doctor)" label="Bob Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18231" start="22429" end="22449" title="Alcoholics Anonymous" label="Alcoholics Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="22461" end="22465" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081773" start="22468" end="22482" title="Ōtori Tanigorō" label="Ōtori Tanigorō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22517" end="22525" title="Makuuchi#Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="22537" end="22541" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="22544" end="22555" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="22583" end="22587" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378052" start="22590" end="22601" title="Sam Rayburn" label="Sam Rayburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="22640" end="22693" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="22705" end="22709" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036007" start="22712" end="22729" title="Donald C. Peattie" label="Donald C. Peattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="22771" end="22775" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q232340" start="22778" end="22791" title="Edie Sedgwick" label="Edie Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="22831" end="22835" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974463" start="22838" end="22850" title="Vera Karalli" label="Vera Karalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="22893" end="22897" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q354867" start="22900" end="22910" title="Alan Watts" label="Alan Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="22974" end="22978" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q61686" start="22981" end="22997" title="Walther Meissner" label="Walther Meissner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="23040" end="23044" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072595" start="23047" end="23058" title="Jack Foster (cricketer)" label="Jack Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="23089" end="23093" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q325696" start="23096" end="23112" title="Pavel Alexandrov" label="Pavel Alexandrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="23160" end="23164" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q349129" start="23167" end="23180" title="Vic Dickenson" label="Vic Dickenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="23213" end="23217" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q444660" start="23220" end="23235" title="Siobhán McKenna" label="Siobhán McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q56638781" start="23270" end="23286" title="Panditrao Agashe" label="Panditrao Agashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="23318" end="23322" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193826" start="23325" end="23335" title="Jim Brewer (baseball)" label="Jim Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="23383" end="23387" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165096" start="23390" end="23410" title="Jean-Claude Malépart" label="Jean-Claude Malépart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="23454" end="23458" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347733" start="23461" end="23472" title="Ege Bagatur" label="Ege Bagatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="23504" end="23508" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q241014" start="23511" end="23521" title="Lucia Popp" label="Lucia Popp"/>
<link wikidata="Q340260" start="23564" end="23579" title="Achille Zavatta" label="Achille Zavatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="23618" end="23622" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028409" start="23625" end="23636" title="Chet Powers" label="Chet Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="23690" end="23694" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q295706" start="23697" end="23711" title="Daniel Nathans" label="Daniel Nathans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="23751" end="23762" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="23783" end="23787" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q743478" start="23790" end="23807" title="Robert Earl Davis" label="Robert Earl Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q401893" start="23852" end="23862" title="Ahmet Kaya" label="Ahmet Kaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="23908" end="23912" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q498723" start="23915" end="23929" title="Tommy Flanagan (musician)" label="Tommy Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="23972" end="23976" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q708784" start="23979" end="23992" title="Ralph Edwards" label="Ralph Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q235983" start="24061" end="24072" title="Henry Taube" label="Henry Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="24114" end="24125" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q178402" start="24154" end="24167" title="Donald Watson" label="Donald Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855049" start="24199" end="24212" title="Vegan Society" label="Vegan Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="24224" end="24228" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="24231" end="24246" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="24281" end="24292" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713877" start="24321" end="24332" title="Yuri Levada" label="Yuri Levada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="24389" end="24393" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531360" start="24396" end="24409" title="Harold Alfond" label="Harold Alfond"/>
<link wikidata="Q270447" start="24451" end="24466" title="Grethe Kausland" label="Grethe Kausland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099462" start="24516" end="24530" title="Trond Kirkvaag" label="Trond Kirkvaag"/>
<link wikidata="Q13132178" start="24584" end="24599" title="Vernon Scannell" label="Vernon Scannell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="24644" end="24648" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q122226" start="24651" end="24662" title="Jan Krugier" label="Jan Krugier"/>
<link wikidata="Q679983" start="24707" end="24717" title="Reg Varney" label="Reg Varney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="24761" end="24765" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q519030" start="24768" end="24785" title="Antonio de Nigris" label="Antonio de Nigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q247917" start="24825" end="24841" title="Sergei Magnitsky" label="Sergei Magnitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q712968" start="24902" end="24917" title="Edward Woodward" label="Edward Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="24944" end="24948" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q638558" start="24951" end="24965" title="Britton Chance" label="Britton Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365768" start="25016" end="25028" title="Ronni Chasen" label="Ronni Chasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040157" start="25068" end="25081" title="Wyngard Tracy" label="Wyngard Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="25125" end="25129" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659750" start="25132" end="25144" title="John Chapman (evangelist)" label="John Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631224" start="25200" end="25213" title="Subhash Dutta" label="Subhash Dutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q558254" start="25265" end="25281" title="Patrick Edlinger" label="Patrick Edlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374550" start="25321" end="25332" title="Aliu Mahama" label="Aliu Mahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151167" start="25372" end="25395" title="Vice President of Ghana" label="Vice President of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362062" start="25415" end="25427" title="Eliyahu Nawi" label="Eliyahu Nawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q724072" start="25492" end="25501" title="Bob Scott (rugby)" label="Bob Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="25539" end="25543" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343060" start="25546" end="25559" title="Robert Conley (reporter)" label="Robert Conley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912667" start="25600" end="25614" title="Billy Hardwick" label="Billy Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015383" start="25651" end="25674" title="William McDonough Kelly" label="William McDonough Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683945" start="25730" end="25747" title="Tanvir Ahmad Khan" label="Tanvir Ahmad Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468322" start="25781" end="25810" title="Foreign Secretary of Pakistan" label="Foreign Secretary of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q450589" start="25830" end="25843" title="Oscar Lanford" label="Oscar Lanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623573" start="25900" end="25913" title="Arne Pedersen" label="Arne Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993456" start="25967" end="25986" title="Louis D. Rubin, Jr." label="Louis D. Rubin, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5083382" start="26045" end="26063" title="Charles Waterhouse (artist)" label="Charles Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="26120" end="26124" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063922" start="26127" end="26143" title="Charles Champlin" label="Charles Champlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253475" start="26203" end="26216" title="Jovan Ćirilov" label="Jovan Ćirilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981297" start="26265" end="26274" title="Ian Craig" label="Ian Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231736" start="26316" end="26327" title="Juan Joseph" label="Juan Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11715950" start="26383" end="26400" title="Jadwiga Piłsudska" label="Jadwiga Piłsudska"/>
<link wikidata="Q888924" start="26458" end="26470" title="Carl Sanders" label="Carl Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q880198" start="26518" end="26537" title="Governor of Georgia" label="Governor of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="26549" end="26553" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856563" start="26556" end="26568" title="David Canary" label="David Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829024" start="26604" end="26620" title="Michael C. Gross" label="Michael C. Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q365718" start="26680" end="26693" title="Bert Olmstead" label="Bert Olmstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736880" start="26751" end="26764" title="Alton D. Slay" label="Alton D. Slay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="26794" end="26798" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q92763" start="26801" end="26821" title="Jay Wright Forrester" label="Jay Wright Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q499056" start="26869" end="26881" title="Melvin Laird" label="Melvin Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q265055" start="26933" end="26946" title="Daniel Prodan" label="Daniel Prodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="26984" end="26988" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311628" start="26991" end="27003" title="Hiromi Tsuru" label="Hiromi Tsuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766738" start="27041" end="27055" title="Ann Wedgeworth" label="Ann Wedgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="27085" end="27089" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q506885" start="27092" end="27107" title="William Goldman" label="William Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="27168" end="27172" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352981" start="27175" end="27194" title="John Campbell Brown" label="John Campbell Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405734" start="27235" end="27253" title="Terry O&amp;#x27;Neill (photographer)" label="Terry O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="27287" end="27291" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493117" start="27294" end="27307" title="Sheila Nelson" label="Sheila Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="27343" end="27347" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903411" start="27350" end="27361" title="Jyrki Kasvi" label="Jyrki Kasvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="27408" end="27412" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q316670" start="27415" end="27427" title="Robert Clary" label="Robert Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="27473" end="27477" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223956" start="27480" end="27498" title="Vladimir Shklyarov" label="Vladimir Shklyarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="27572" end="27581" title="calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q255054" start="27585" end="27592" title="Saint Africus" label="Africus"/>
<link wikidata="Q394693" start="27595" end="27610" title="Agnes of Assisi" label="Agnes of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235967" start="27613" end="27631" title="Edmund Rich" label="Edmund of Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19179" start="27634" end="27652" title="Ælfric of Abingdon" label="Elfric of Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q671419" start="27655" end="27672" title="Eucherius of Lyon" label="Eucherius of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61934" start="27675" end="27693" title="Gertrude the Great" label="Gertrude the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27695" end="27716" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q737786" start="27720" end="27736" title="Giuseppe Moscati" label="Giuseppe Moscati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575596" start="27739" end="27746" title="Gobrain" label="Gobrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q924107" start="27749" end="27764" title="Hugh of Lincoln" label="Hugh of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q230507" start="27767" end="27787" title="Saint Margaret of Scotland" label="Margaret of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43600" start="27790" end="27812" title="Matthew the Apostle" label="Matthew the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="27814" end="27834" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q115719" start="27838" end="27844" title="Saint Othmar" label="Othmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721080" start="27847" end="27875" title="Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn" label="Our Lady of the Gate of Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q245621" start="27878" end="27931" title="Roque González de Santa Cruz" label="Roch Gonzalez, Juan de Castillo, and Alonso Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="27933" end="27935" title="Society of Jesus" label="SJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064636" start="27939" end="27979" title="November 16 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="November 16 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q618439" start="27981" end="28014" title="Day of Declaration of Sovereignty" label="Day of Declaration of Sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="28016" end="28023" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28048" end="28076" title="Buß- und Bettag#Bu.C3.9F- und Bettag in Germany" label="Day of Repentance and Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q379881" start="28146" end="28159" title="Advent Sunday" label="Advent Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="28161" end="28169" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="28171" end="28191" title="Reformed Church" label="Reformed (Calvinist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="28196" end="28202" title="United and uniting churches" label="United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="28224" end="28230" title="Free State of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="28232" end="28239" title="Free State of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14371510" start="28272" end="28286" title="Volkstrauertag" label="Volkstrauertag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151912" start="28298" end="28320" title="Icelandic Language Day" label="Icelandic Language Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="28360" end="28367" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322208" start="28370" end="28401" title="International Day for Tolerance" label="International Day for Tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="28403" end="28417" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406459" start="28420" end="28430" title="Statia Day" label="Statia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="28434" end="28448" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q27561" start="28450" end="28471" title="Caribbean Netherlands" label="Caribbean Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123532628" start="28474" end="28504" title="Intergenerational Fairness Day" label="Intergenerational Fairness Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21728" wikidata="Q692417" url="?curid=21728" title="New York Mets">
<text>The New York Mets are an American professional baseball team based in the New York City borough of Queens. The Mets compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the National League (NL) East Division. They are one of two major league clubs based in New York City alongside the American League (AL)&#x27;s New York Yankees. One of baseball&#x27;s first expansion teams, the Mets were founded in 1962 to replace New York&#x27;s departed NL teams, the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants. The team&#x27;s colors evoke the blue of the Dodgers and the orange of the Giants.

For the 1962 and 1963 seasons, the Mets played home games at the Polo Grounds in Manhattan before moving to Queens. From 1964 to 2008, the Mets played their home games at Shea Stadium, named after William Shea, the founder of the Continental League, a proposed third major league, the announcement of which prompted their admission as an NL expansion team. Since 2009, the Mets have played their home games at Citi Field next to the site where Shea Stadium once stood.

In their inaugural season, the Mets posted a record of 40–120, the second most regular-season losses since MLB went to a 162-game schedule. The team never finished better than second-to-last in the 1960s until the &quot;Miracle Mets&quot; beat the Baltimore Orioles in the 1969 World Series, considered one of the biggest upsets in World Series history despite the Mets having won 100 games that season. The Mets have qualified for the postseason eleven times, winning the World Series twice (1969 and 1986) and winning five National League pennants (most recently in 2000 and 2015), and six National League East division titles.

Since 2020, the Mets have been owned by billionaire hedge fund manager Steve Cohen, who purchased the team for $2.4 billion. As of 2023, &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked the Mets as the sixth most valuable MLB team, valued at $2.9 billion.

As of the end of the 2024 regular season, the team&#x27;s overall win–loss record is ().

==History==

===1960s: Founding and first World Series===
After the 1957 season, the Brooklyn Dodgers and New York Giants relocated from New York to California to become the Los Angeles Dodgers and San Francisco Giants, leaving the largest city in the United States with no National League franchise and only one major league team, the New York Yankees of the American League (AL). With the threat of a New York team joining the new Continental League, the National League expanded by adding the New York Mets following a proposal from William Shea. In a symbolic reference to New York&#x27;s earlier National League teams, the new team took as its primary colors the blue of the Dodgers and the orange of the Giants, both of which are colors also featured on the flag of New York City. The nickname &quot;Mets&quot; was adopted: being a natural shorthand to the club&#x27;s corporate name, the &quot;New York Metropolitan Baseball Club, Inc.&quot;, which hearkened back to the &quot;Metropolitans&quot; (a New York team in the American Association from 1880 to 1887), and its brevity was advantageous for newspaper headlines.

The 1962 Mets posted a 40–120 record, the second most losses by a post-1900 MLB team behind the 2024 Chicago White Sox. During the 1963 season the team featured a pitcher, Carlton Willey, who was having a great year, pitching four shut-outs, when he incurred an injury and finished with a 9–14 win–loss record. The &#x27;63 squad also had Duke Snider, who hit his 2,000th hit and later his 400th home run and earned a berth to the 1963 All-Star Game. In 1964, the Mets hired Yogi Berra as a coach under Casey Stengel&#x27;s coaching staff.

In 1966, the Mets famously bypassed future Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson in the amateur draft, instead selecting Steve Chilcott, who never played in the majors. But the following year, they acquired future Hall of Famer Tom Seaver in a lottery. Seaver helped the 1969 &quot;Miracle Mets&quot; win the new National League East division title, then defeat the Atlanta Braves to win the National League pennant and the heavily favored Baltimore Orioles to win the 1969 World Series.

===1970s: Second pennant and the &quot;Midnight Massacre&quot;===
In 1973, the Mets rallied from 5th place to win the division, despite a record of only 82–79. They shocked the heavily favored Cincinnati Reds&#x27; &quot;Big Red Machine&quot; in the NLCS and pushed the defending World Series champion Oakland Athletics to a seventh game, but lost the series. Notably, 1973 was the only NL East title between 1970 and 1980 that was not won by either the Philadelphia Phillies or the Pittsburgh Pirates. Star pitcher Tom Seaver was traded in 1977, on a day remembered as &quot;the Midnight Massacre&quot;, and the Mets fell into last place for several years.

===1980s: Success, Wilpon takes over and second World Series championship===

In January 1980, the Payson heirs sold the Mets franchise to the Doubleday publishing company for $21.1 million, a record amount at that time. Nelson Doubleday, Jr. was named chairman of the board while minority shareholder Fred Wilpon took the role of club president. In February, Wilpon hired longtime Baltimore Orioles executive Frank Cashen as general manager who began the process of rebuilding the Mets much in the same way he developed the Orioles in the late 1960s and early 1970s.

The franchise turned around in the mid-1980s. During this time the Mets drafted slugger Darryl Strawberry (#1 in 1980) and 1985 Cy Young Award winner Dwight Gooden (#5 in 1982). Former National League MVP and perennial Gold Glove winner Keith Hernandez was obtained by the Mets in 1983 from the St. Louis Cardinals. This began a rivalry between the two teams that lasted throughout the rest of the 1980s, during which the teams would swap NL East titles between 1985 and 1988, Mets players openly trolled the Cardinals, and Cardinals fans nicknamed the Mets &quot;pond scum.&quot;

After finishing their first three campaigns of the 1980s decade in either 5th or 6th (last) place, in 1984, new manager Davey Johnson was promoted from the helm of the AAA Tidewater Tides. He led the Mets to a second-place, 90–72 record, their first winning season since 1976.

In 1985, they acquired Hall of Fame catcher Gary Carter from the Montreal Expos and won 98 games, but narrowly missed the playoffs. In 1986, they won the division with a record of 108–54, one of the best in National League history. They then won a dramatic NLCS in six games over the Houston Astros. The sixth game of the series lasted sixteen innings, the longest playoff game in history until 2005. The Mets came within one strike of losing the World Series against the Boston Red Sox before a series of hits and defensive miscues ultimately led to an error by Boston&#x27;s Bill Buckner which gave the Mets a Game 6 victory. The Mets won their second World Series title in seven games.

In 1987 the Mets declined to re-sign World Series MVP Ray Knight, who then signed with the Baltimore Orioles and also traded away the flexible Kevin Mitchell to the Padres for long-ball threat Kevin McReynolds. Weeks later Mets&#x27; ace Dwight Gooden was admitted to a drug clinic after testing positive for cocaine. Despite Gooden struggling in the first few months of the 1987 season, &quot;Dr. K&quot; rebounded, as did the team. It was during the tough times that the Mets made a great long-term deal, trading Ed Hearn to the Kansas City Royals for pitcher David Cone.

The rivalry with the Cardinals culminated in the 1987 season, when the Mets surged to challenge them for the NL East title but suffered two painful losses. The first came on Seat Cushion Night where Tom Herr hit a walk-off grand slam. A greater loss came on September 11 in a game against St. Louis, 3rd baseman Terry Pendleton hit a homer to give the Cardinals a lead, and eventually the NL East title. One highlight of the year was Darryl Strawberry and Howard Johnson becoming the first teammates&#x27; ever to hit 30 homers and steal 30 bases in the same season.

The Mets rebounded the following year to post a 100–60 overall record and win their division in 1988, but lost in the NLCS that year to the Los Angeles Dodgers and declined into the 1990s.

===1990s: Struggles and return to the postseason===

====1991–1993: &quot;The Worst Team Money Could Buy&quot;====

====1991–92====
During the 1991 season, the Mets were actually in contention for much of the season, closing to within 2.5 games of the front-running Pirates at one point. In the latter half, however, the bottom completely fell out and Harrelson was fired with a week left to go in the season, replaced by third base coach Mike Cubbage for the final games. Gregg Jefferies, once considered a promising young player, became a distraction as he released a controversial statement to be read on WFAN radio:When a pitcher is having trouble getting players out, when a hitter is having trouble hitting, or when a player makes an error, I try to support them in whatever way I can. I don&#x27;t run to the media to belittle them or to draw more attention to their difficult times. I can only hope that one day those teammates who have found it convenient to criticize me will realize that we are all in this together. If only we can concentrate more on the games, rather than complaining and bickering and pointing fingers, we would all be better off. This was seen as the end for Jefferies in New York as he would be traded to the Kansas City Royals in the offseason. The season ended on a high note, however, as David Cone pitched a one-hit shutout against the Phillies at Veterans Stadium, in which he struck out 19 batters, tying the National League regulation game record (first set by former Met Tom Seaver). With all of the personal problems swirling around the Mets after the 1986 championship, the Mets tried to rebuild using experienced superstars. They picked up Eddie Murray for over $3 million, Bobby Bonilla for over $6 million. They also traded McReynolds and Jefferies for one-time World Series hero Bret Saberhagen and his $3 million contract, along with signing veteran free agent pitcher Frank Tanana for $1.5 million. The rebuilding was supported by the slogan, &quot;Hardball Is Back&quot;.

The experiment of building a team via free agency quickly flopped as Saberhagen and Vince Coleman were soon injured and spent more time on the disabled list than on the field, and Bonilla exhibited unprofessional behavior towards members of the press, once threatening a reporter by saying, &quot;I&#x27;ll show you The Bronx&quot;. . At the beginning of the 1991 season, Coleman, Gooden and outfielder Daryl Boston were named in an alleged sexual abuse incident against a woman near the Mets&#x27; spring training facility; the charges were later dropped. Meanwhile, popular pitcher David Cone was dealt to the Toronto Blue Jays during the 1992 season for Ryan Thompson and Jeff Kent. While the move was widely criticized by fans of both teams, the Jays went on to win the 1992 World Series.Their descent was chronicled by the book &quot;The Worst Team Money Could Buy: The Collapse Of The New York Mets&quot; () by Mets beat writers Bob Klapisch and John Harper.

====1993====
The lowest point of the experiment was the 1993 season when the Mets lost 103 games. In April of that year, Coleman accidentally hit Gooden&#x27;s shoulder with a golf club while practicing his swing. In July, Saberhagen threw a firecracker under a table near reporters. Their young pitching prospect Anthony Young started the 1993 season at 0–13 and his overall streak of 27 straight losses over two years set a new record. After Young&#x27;s record-setting loss, Coleman threw a firecracker out of the team bus window and injured three people resulting in felony charges that effectively ended his Mets career; the Mets placed him on paid administrative leave for the remainder of the season, and announced less than a month before the end of the season that he would never play for them again. Only a few days later, Saberhagen was in trouble again, this time for spraying bleach at three reporters. The meltdown season resulted in the worst record for a Mets team since 1965. In addition, two of the three remaining links to the 1986 team, Howard Johnson and Sid Fernandez, departed after the season via free agency.

====1994 shortened season====

The following season saw some promise for the troubled Mets, as first baseman Rico Brogna and second baseman Jeff Kent became fan favorites with their solid glove work and potential 20–25 home run power, Bonilla started to become the player the Mets expected, and a healthy Saberhagen, along with promising young starter Bobby Jones and John Franco, helped the Mets pitching staff along. In the strike-shortened 1994 season the Mets were in 3rd place behind first-place Montreal and Atlanta when the season ended on August 12.

===1995–1997: Working Their Way Back===

====1995 season====
When the strike finally ended in 1995, the Mets finally showed some promise again, finishing in 2nd place (but still 6 games under .500) behind eventual World Series champion Atlanta.

The 1995 season marked the emergence of pitchers Bill Pulsipher, Jason Isringhausen, and Paul Wilson. The trio were dubbed Generation K, a group of talented young hurlers who were destined to bring the Mets into greatness, much like Tom Seaver, Jerry Koosman and Nolan Ryan did in the 1960s. However, all three players succumbed to injury, preventing them from reaching their full potential. Of the three of them, only Isringhausen would accomplish much of significance in the majors, but as a reliever, eventually reaching 300 career saves.

====1996 season====
The Mets dismal 1996 season was highlighted by the play of switch hitting catcher Todd Hundley breaking the Major League Baseball single season record for home runs hit by catcher with 41. Center fielder Lance Johnson set single-season franchise records in hits (227), triples (21), at bats (682), runs scored (117). Johnson&#x27;s 21 triples also led the National League, the highest amount by an NL player since 1930.

====1997====
In the off season, the Mets acquired first baseman John Olerud from the Toronto Blue Jays for pitcher Robert Person.

In 1997, the Mets finally bounced back with an 88–74 record, missing the playoffs by only four games, and the team improved by 17 wins from 1996. On June 16, the Mets beat the New York Yankees at Yankee Stadium in the first ever regular-season game played between the crosstown rivals 6–0. Mets starter Dave Mlicki pitched a complete game shutout to pick up the win. In 1997, Hundley&#x27;s great season was derailed by a devastating elbow injury and required Tommy John surgery.

====1998====

The Mets season in 1998 began with an unforgettable opening day game at Shea Stadium on March 31 against their division rival Philadelphia Phillies, marking the first time that a regular season baseball game was played in New York in March. Both of them were involved in the longest scoreless opening day game in the National League and the longest one in the MLB since 1926 when the Washington Senators beat the Philadelphia Athletics 1–0 in 15 innings. The Mets won the game 1–0 in 14 innings when backup catcher Alberto Castillo delivered a full-count, two-out, pinch-hit single to right with the bases loaded off Philadelphia closer Ricky Bottalico.

During the season, the Mets acquired Mike Piazza in a blockbuster trade that immediately brought star power and credibility to the Mets that had been lacking in recent years.

After the Piazza trade, the Mets played well, but missed the 1998 postseason by only one game. With five games left in the season, the Mets could not win a single game against both the Montreal Expos at home and the Atlanta Braves on the road.Following the 1998 season the Mets re-signed Mike Piazza to a seven-year, $91 million contract, the Mets traded Todd Hundley to the Los Angeles Dodgers. Trades netted the Mets Roger Cedeño, Armando Benítez, and the Mets signed free agents Robin Ventura, Rickey Henderson, and Bobby Bonilla.

====1999====
The Mets started the 1999 season well, going 17–9, but after an eight-game losing streak, including the last two to the New York Yankees, the Mets fired their entire coaching staff except for manager Bobby Valentine.The Mets, in front of a national audience on &quot;Sunday Night Baseball&quot;, beat the New York Yankees 7–2 in the turning point of the 1999 season. Both Mike Piazza and Robin Ventura had MVP-type seasons and Benny Agbayani emerged as an important role player. It was a breakout year for Mets second baseman Edgardo Alfonzo and Roger Cedeño, who broke the single season steals record for the Mets.

After the regular season ended, the Mets played a one-game playoff against the Cincinnati Reds, Al Leiter pitched the best game of his Met career as he hurled a two-hit complete-game shutout to advance the Mets to the playoffs. In the NLDS, the Mets defeated the Arizona Diamondbacks 3 games to 1. The series-clinching victory included a walk-off home run by backup catcher Todd Pratt. The Mets would lose however in the 1999 National League Championship Series to the Atlanta Braves, in six exciting games which included the famous Grand Slam Single by Robin Ventura to win game 5 for the Mets. The Mets were at one point down 3–0 in the series.

The Mets struggled for much of the 1990s, finishing with a losing record for six consecutive seasons between 1991 and 1996.

===2000s: The Subway World Series and new ballpark===
In 2000, the Mets finished the season with a 94–68 record andclinched a wild card spot in the playoffs. In the NLDS, the Mets defeated the San Francisco Giants 3–1 in the series and the St Louis Cardinals in the NLCS. After winning the National League pennant, the Mets earned a trip to the 2000 World Series against their crosstown rivals, the New York Yankees, for a &quot;Subway Series&quot;. The Mets were defeated by the Yankees in five games. The most memorable moment of the 2000 World Series occurred during the first inning of Game 2 at Yankee Stadium. Piazza fouled off a pitch which shattered his bat, sending a piece of the barrel toward the pitcher&#x27;s mound. Pitcher Roger Clemens seized the piece and hurled it in the direction of Piazza as the catcher trotted to first base. Benches briefly cleared before the game was resumed with no ejections.

During the 2001 season, the Mets finished with a record of 82–80 finishing third in the division. After the September 11 terrorist attacks Shea Stadium was used as a relief center and then saw the first sporting event in New York City since the attacks, in a game vs. the Atlanta Braves on September 21. In the bottom of the 8th inning the Mets were trailing 2–1 when Mike Piazza came to bat with a runner on first. Piazza dramatically sent Shea into a frenzy by crushing a home run to give the Mets a 3–2 lead and the eventual win. The game is considered to be one of the greatest moments in the history of the franchise.

In 2002, despite the off-season signings of Tom Glavine, Mo Vaughn, and Roberto Alomar, the Mets finished the 2002 season with a 75–86 overall record and last in the NL East. During that same season the Mets dealt with off field distractions when co-owners Wilpon and Doubleday were in a legal battle which was later settled with Wilpon becoming the sole owner on August 23 that year.

In the aftermath of the 2004 season, the Mets hired a new general manager, Omar Minaya, who immediately turned the franchise around by signing pitcher Pedro Martínez and hiring a new manager, Willie Randolph. The Mets finished 2005 four games over .500, and the franchise&#x27;s resurgence was complete by 2006 as they won 97 games and the NL East title behind new acquisitions Carlos Beltrán and Carlos Delgado, as well as young superstars José Reyes and David Wright. The Mets eventually succumbed to the St. Louis Cardinals in Game 7 of the National League Championship Series.

In 2007, the Mets entered the final 17 games in the season with a seven-game lead in the NL East. But the team went on an ill-timed losing streak, losing 11 of the next 15 games, resulting in the Philadelphia Phillies winning the division by one game.

The Mets held a more modest 3.5-game lead after 145 games of the 2008 season, their final season at Shea Stadium. On June 16, Omar Minaya fired Willie Randolph, Rick Peterson, and Tom Nieto. Jerry Manuel was named interim manager. While their 7–10 mark down the stretch was better than the previous season&#x27;s 5–12, it still allowed the Phillies to pass them once again for the division crown.

In 2009, the Mets moved into the newly constructed Citi Field. On April 17, Gary Sheffield, who just days earlier was signed by the Mets as a free agent, hit his 500th home run against the Milwaukee Brewers. Sheffield became the first pinch hitter to reach this milestone, as well as the first to do it in a Mets uniform. The season was mainly a tough one for the Mets which was marred by numerous injuries suffered by its players, with 20 of them having been on the disabled list at one point or another during the season and losing star (and also replacement) players like J. J. Putz, John Maine, Óliver Pérez, José Reyes, Carlos Beltrán, David Wright, Carlos Delgado, Johan Santana, and Gary Sheffield.

As a result, the Mets finished in fourth place, with a record of 70–92 and failed to qualify for the playoffs for the third straight season. Mets players spent more than 1,480 days in the disabled list in 2009, more than any other team in the majors. Second-half turnarounds of Jeff Francoeur and Daniel Murphy helped the Mets finish the season with the best batting average in the National League, tied with the Los Angeles Dodgers.

===2010s: Wilpon sells the team and Fifth trip to the World Series===
In 2012, Mets owners Fred Wilpon and Saul Katz settled a lawsuit brought against them on behalf of the victims of Bernard Madoff&#x27;s Ponzi scheme for $162 million. As a result of this agreement the liquidator, Irving Picard, agreed to drop the charges that Wilpon and Katz blindly went along with the scheme for their personal benefit. Picard had originally sought to recover $1 billion from the Wilpon family and Katz, but settled for $162 million along with the admission that neither the Wilpons nor Katz had any knowledge of the Ponzi scheme. In 2011–2012, Mets ownership sold twelve minority 4% shares (totaling 48%) of the franchise at $20 million apiece to provide a cash infusion of $240 million for the team.

Though the first half of the 2010s saw limited success for the Mets, who failed to finish with a winning record between 2009 and 2014, this period coincided with a number of milestones for the franchise, including the first no-hitter in franchise history by Johan Santana in 2012. R.A. Dickey won the NL Cy Young Award pitching for the Mets that same season.
On September 26, 2015, the Mets clinched the NL East division title, and thus their first postseason berth since 2006, by defeating the Cincinnati Reds 10–2. They defeated the Los Angeles Dodgers in the NLDS, three games to two, and swept the Chicago Cubs in the NLCS for their first pennant in 15 years. In the 2015 World Series, they were defeated by the Kansas City Royals in five games.

The Mets returned to the postseason in 2016, marking only the second time in franchise history that the team qualified for the postseason in consecutive years. With an 87–75 record, the team qualified for the wild-card game, only to lose 3–0 to the San Francisco Giants. The Mets failed to make the playoffs for the rest of the decade, finishing no higher than third place in 2019 when they finished with a winning record of 86–76 (the highest of any team not to qualify for the postseason).

The end of the decade also coincided with David Wright&#x27;s retirement, Jacob deGrom being awarded two consecutive Cy Young Awards (including for the 2018 season when the pitcher finished the year with a 1.70 ERA) and first-baseman Pete Alonso winning the 2019 Rookie of the Year Award and finishing the season with a major-league-leading 53 home runs, the most by any rookie in MLB history. On October 3, 2019, the Mets fired manager Mickey Callaway. On November 1, 2019, the Mets named Carlos Beltrán as the new manager replacing Callaway.

===2020s: Steve Cohen Era===

On January 16, 2020, Beltrán stepped down as manager before the start of the 2020 MLB season due to his involvement in the Houston Astros sign stealing scandal. Two days later, the Mets hired Luis Rojas as manager. The team finished the shortened 2020 season with a 26–34 record and a last-place finish in the NL East.

On October 30, 2020, Steve Cohen became the majority owner of the Mets, owning 95% of the team, making him the current richest owner in baseball. He bought the team from the Wilpon family for $2.4 billion, with the Wilpons keeping the remaining 5%. On January 7, 2021, the Mets acquired pitcher Carlos Carrasco and All-Star shortstop Francisco Lindor in a trade with the Cleveland Indians. On March 31, Lindor and the Mets agreed to a 10-year extension worth $341 million. At the trade deadline, the Mets acquired All-Star infielder &amp; World Series champion Javier Báez in trade with the Chicago Cubs. The Mets finished third place in the NL East with an overall record of 77–85.

On November 19, the Mets hired Billy Eppler as their new general manager. During the offseason, the Mets signed free agents Nick Plummer, Starling Marte, Eduardo Escobar, and Mark Canha. On December 1, the Mets signed three-time Cy Young Award winner Max Scherzer with a three-year, $130 million deal. On December 18, the Mets announced that they hired Buck Showalter as their new manager via owner Steve Cohen&#x27;s Twitter account.

On April 29, 2022, Tylor Megill, Drew Smith, Joely Rodríguez, Seth Lugo and Edwin Díaz pitched the second no-hitter in franchise history in a 3–0 win against the Philadelphia Phillies. On September 18, during a game against the Pittsburgh Pirates, Jacob deGrom set a new MLB record by allowing three or less earned runs in 40 consecutive games, breaking a record that was held by Jim Scott for over 100 years.

On the following day, the Mets clinched their first postseason berth since 2016, and their 10th in franchise history. On September 25, Pete Alonso broke the Mets single-season RBI record which was previously set by former franchise stars Mike Piazza and David Wright. Also during the season, the Mets called up three of their top prospects Brett Baty, Mark Vientos, and Francisco Álvarez. The Mets won 101 games and tied with the Atlanta Braves for the best record in the NL East; however, the Mets were designated as a Wild Card team due to them getting swept by the Braves. The Mets lost the 2022 National League Wild Card Series to the San Diego Padres. They also became the first team in MLB history to produce only one hit in a winner-take-all playoff game.

In the offseason, the Mets lost deGrom to the Texas Rangers via free agency, but quickly replaced him by signing Japanese ace Kodai Senga to a five-year, $75 million contract, and three-time Cy Young Award winner Justin Verlander to a two-year, $86.7 million contract. Despite this the Mets were unable to gain momentum from the previous season and missed the playoffs in the process. The team ended the 2023 season with a 75–87 record and finished fourth-place in the NL East.

On September 12, 2023, the Mets hired David Stearns as their new president of baseball operations. On October 1, after the final game of the season, the Mets fired manager Buck Showalter. They would then introduce their new president Stearns on the following day. On October 5, Billy Eppler resigned as general manager. On November 13, the Mets named former New York Yankees bench coach Carlos Mendoza as their new manager. During the offseason, the Mets signed free agents Luis Severino, Joey Wendle, Jorge López, Harrison Bader and Sean Manaea.

In the season, the Mets started off with a dismal 22–33 record. However, after a players-only meeting was held by shortstop Francisco Lindor on May 29, the Mets significantly improved the rest of the way, mainly from the McDonald&#x27;s character Grimace putting the Mets on a winning path, and the song &quot;OMG&quot; by infielder Jose Iglesias under the stage name Candelita, becoming a rallying cry for the whole team. The Mets finished with a record of 89–73 and qualified for the playoffs for the second time in three years. They reached as far as the 2024 National League Championship Series before losing to the eventual World Series champion Los Angeles Dodgers in six games.

On December 8, 2024, the Mets signed superstar outfielder Juan Soto to a 15-year, $765 million contract in the offseason, the largest contract in professional sports history. It is also said that the contract has ushered in a new era in Mets history and in all of New York baseball.

==World Series championships==
Throughout the 60-year history of the franchise, the Mets have won two World Series championships in total.
==Culture==

===Fan support===
In 1998, the Independent Budget Office of the city of New York published a study on the economic effect of the city&#x27;s two Major League Baseball teams. The study found that 43% of Mets fans lived in one of the five boroughs of New York, 39% in the tri-state area outside the city, and 12% elsewhere. Mets fans were more likely to be found in Queens, Brooklyn, and the Long Island counties of Nassau and Suffolk. Mets, Yankees, and Toronto Blue Jays fans are shared in Western New York. Notable fans of the Mets include Jerry Seinfeld, Kevin James, Julia Stiles, Ty Burrell, Bill Maher, Ben Stiller, Jimmy Kimmel, Hank Azaria, Jim Breuer, Jon Stewart, Chris Rock, Matthew Broderick, Dylan O&#x27;Brien, Glenn Close, Billy Joel, Ad-Rock, MCA, Nas, 50 Cent, Nicki Minaj, Chris Christie, Patrick Mahomes, and Donovan Mitchell.

===The 7 Line Army===
The &quot;7 Line Army&quot; are a group primarily consisting of passionate and die-hard Mets fans occupying the Big Apple Section of Citi Field during home games for the Mets. The group was founded in 2012 by Darren Meenan who owns The 7 Line, an apparel company that produces Mets-themed clothing.

===Mascots===

Mr. Met is the official mascot of the New York Mets. He was introduced on the cover of game programs in 1963, when the Mets were still playing at the Polo Grounds in northern Manhattan. When the Mets moved to Shea Stadium in 1964, fans were introduced to a live costumed version. Mr. Met is believed to have been the first mascot in Major League Baseball to exist in human (as opposed to artistically rendered) form.

Mrs. Met (formerly Lady Met) is the female counterpart to Mr. Met, and the couple sometimes appears with 2–3 smaller &quot;children&quot;.

The Mets have had two mascots other than Mr. and Mrs. Met at different points in its history. The franchise&#x27;s original official mascot was Homer, a beagle trained by Rudd Weatherwax that lived at the Waldorf-Astoria, was sponsored by Rheingold Beer and had his own platform behind home plate at the Polo Grounds. The dog was not included in the transition to Shea Stadium. The brainchild of team owner Lorinda de Roulet&#x27;s daughter Bebe, Mettle the mule represented the Mets for only the 1979 season. The name was the result of a contest won by Dolores Mapps of Mercerville, New Jersey whose explanation was that it typified the team&#x27;s &quot;spirit, ardor, stamina and courage, all of which the Mets have in abundance.&quot; Mettle was not retained after the franchise was sold to Nelson Doubleday Jr. and Fred Wilpon the following year.

===Theme song===
&quot;Meet the Mets&quot; is the Mets&#x27; signature song, written in 1961, one year before the first season, by Bill Katz and Ruth Roberts. It is played on the radio, during television broadcasts and at Mets&#x27; home games. Other songs traditionally sung at Mets home games include &quot;Take Me Out to the Ball Game&quot; and the Sicilian song &quot;Lazy Mary&quot; during the seventh-inning stretch and Billy Joel&#x27;s &quot;Piano Man&quot; in the middle of the eighth inning.

===&quot;Let&#x27;s go Mets&quot; meme===
In 2021, an internet meme involving the fan chant &quot;let&#x27;s go, Mets&quot; began spreading through social media, particularly Twitter and TikTok. The meme is largely based around fictional characters unexpectedly expressing support for the team, such as Kingpin from &quot;Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse&quot; and characters from the video game &quot;Genshin Impact&quot;.

==Uniform and logo symbolism==
The Mets&#x27; colors are blue and orange, originally chosen to honor the city&#x27;s history of National League baseball; blue for the Brooklyn Dodgers, and orange for the New York Giants. Blue and orange are also the colors of New York City, as seen on its flag.

In 1998, black was added to the color scheme. Beginning with 2012 the black elements in the uniform began to be phased out, and were eliminated in 2013. In 2021, the team reintroduced black in their alternate uniforms.

===Logo===

The primary logo, designed by sports cartoonist Ray Gotto, consists of &quot;Mets&quot; written in orange script trimmed in white across a blue representation of the New York City skyline with a white suspension bridge in the foreground, all contained in an orange circle with orange baseball stitching across the image. Each part of the skyline has special meaning—at the left is a church spire, symbolic of Brooklyn, the borough of churches; the second building from the left is the Williamsburgh Savings Bank Building, the tallest building in Brooklyn at the time of the team&#x27;s founding; next is the Woolworth Building; after a general skyline view of midtown comes the Empire State Building; at the far right is the headquarters of the United Nations. The suspension bridge in the center symbolizes that the Mets, by bringing National League baseball back to New York, represent all five boroughs; many of New York&#x27;s major bridges are suspension designs. In 1999, the logo received a slight alteration; a small &quot;NY&quot; originally placed to the left of the team script was removed.

With the introduction of black as an official color, an alternate team logo was created in 1999. It is identical to the original logo, but the skyline is black instead of blue and the &quot;Mets&quot; script is blue trimmed in orange and white instead of orange trimmed in white (the alternate black jerseys displayed the primary blue and orange logo on the left sleeves in 1998; in 1999 this was changed to the alternate black and blue logo). The logo fell into disuse after the Mets dropped the alternate black jerseys and caps in 2012. When the team brought back the black jerseys in 2021, they feature the blue and orange logo patch instead of the black and blue logo.

Toward the end of the 2014 season, the Mets made a slight alteration to their logo on their Facebook and Twitter accounts. The roof of the building to the far right was tilted, changing it from the United Nations building to the Citigroup Center. Negative fan reaction to this change resulted in the building being immediately reverted to the UN building. No other notable changes have been made to the logo since.

The cap logo consists of an orange, interlocking &quot;NY&quot; identical to the logo used by the New York Giants in their final years, and is on a blue cap reminiscent of the caps worn by the Brooklyn Dodgers.

===Uniform color and design===

Currently, the Mets wear an assortment of uniforms.

The home uniforms are white with blue pinstripes and feature &quot;Mets&quot; in blue script with an orange outline across the chest, and block letter player names and numbers also in blue with an orange outline. The uniforms are paired with a blue cap featuring an &quot;NY&quot; logo in orange, plus blue undersleeves, belts and socks.

The road uniforms, to be introduced in its current form in 2025, are gray and feature a radially-arched &quot;NEW YORK&quot; in Tiffany-style letters across the chest, block letter player numerals and names in blue outlined in orange, and blue, orange and blue stripes on the collar, sleeves and pants. Like the home uniforms, the road grays are worn with the same blue caps, undersleeves, belts and socks.

The black alternate home jersey, introduced in its current form in 2024, is a modified version of the one worn from 1998 to 2012 and reintroduced for Friday home games in 2021. The lettering is blue with orange and has the primary logo on the left sleeve. The set is worn with an alternate black cap featuring the &quot;NY&quot; logo in blue trimmed in orange. Belts and socks worn with it are also black. The black alternate home jerseys are worn with plain white pants with blue piping.

The blue alternate road jersey, to be introduced in 2025, features a pullover jersey with &quot;New York&quot; in script across the chest and block letter player names and numbers in blue with orange outline, and blue, orange and blue stripes on the collar and sleeves. The blue alternate road jerseys are worn with the same road gray pants with blue, orange and blue stripes and with the blue caps, undersleeves, belts and socks.

The dark gray City Connect jersey with black and purple accents was introduced in 2024. The uniform contains the &quot;NYC&quot; wordmark in black patterned after the team&#x27;s road uniform, along with black pinstripes and a black subway token patch containing the purple &quot;NY&quot; logo. The dark gray cap features the &quot;NY&quot; logo in black trimmed in white, along with a silhouette of the Queensboro Bridge. The purple color was inspired by the 7 Line that runs to Citi Field.

The Mets&#x27; standard blue batting helmet, with the &quot;NY&quot; in metallic orange, is currently used for games worn with the primary home, road and blue alternate jerseys. A black alternate helmet is used in games with the black jerseys, and a dark gray alternate helmet is paired with the City Connect jerseys.
==Players of note==

===Team captains===

Four players have been team captains for the Mets:
* Keith Hernandez, 1987–1989 (co-captain with Gary Carter)
* Gary Carter, 1988–1989 (co-captain with Keith Hernandez)
* John Franco, 2001–2004
* David Wright, 2013–2018

===Hall of Famers===


===Retired numbers===

The Mets have retired nine numbers in the history of the franchise.
Major League Baseball retired Jackie Robinson&#x27;s number 42 on April 15, 1997, when the Mets played the Dodgers at Shea Stadium. Butch Huskey wore the number throughout the rest of his Mets career because of a grandfather clause placed on the retired number by MLB. Mo Vaughn also wore 42 during his stint with the Mets, because of the same clause.

On the final opening day at Shea Stadium, April 8, 2008, the Mets unveiled a sign bearing the name &quot;Shea&quot; next to the team&#x27;s retired numbers honoring William Shea and his contributions to the franchise.

In 2014, a special memorial logo honoring broadcaster Ralph Kiner, depicting a microphone along with his name and the years 1922–2014, was displayed on the left-field wall adjacent to, but not as a part of, the Mets&#x27; retired numbers, from 2014 to 2016. In the 2016 Mets yearbook, a sidebar in an article on Mike Piazza&#x27;s upcoming number retirement implies that Kiner has been &quot;retired&quot; next to William Shea. This was confirmed when the Mets&#x27; retired numbers were moved to the roof facade during the 2016 season to accommodate Mike Piazza&#x27;s number 31; the Kiner logo was placed next to the Shea and Jackie Robinson numbers, no longer separated from the others. On August 28, 2021, Jerry Koosman&#x27;s number 36 was retired by the Mets. On July 9, 2022, the Mets retired Keith Hernandez&#x27;s number 17. They retired number 24 worn by Willie Mays on August 27. On April 5, 2023, the Mets honored broadcaster Bob Murphy with a microphone logo alongside Kiner. Dwight Gooden&#x27;s number 16 was retired on April 14, 2024. The Mets also retired Darryl Strawberry&#x27;s number 18 on June 1. On December 13, it was announced that they will retire David Wright&#x27;s number 5 on July 19, 2025.

====Out of circulation but not retired====
* 8: Not issued since Gary Carter was elected to the Hall of Fame in 2003 (as an Expo after requesting to go in as a Met). When the Mets honored Carter, they did not retire number 8, but instead gave him a replica of his Hall of Fame plaque depicting him as a Met instead of an Expo. Desi Relaford was the last Mets player to wear No. 8; Matt Galante, a coach, later wore the number. After Carter&#x27;s death, the Mets honored him in a ceremony on Opening Day 2012, where they unveiled the &quot;Kid 8&quot; memorial logo (also worn on the uniform sleeve) on the outfield fence. However, the number 8 is still not officially retired.

===Mets Hall of Fame===


==Rivalries==
The Mets have notable rivalries with the Atlanta Braves, the New York Yankees, and the Philadelphia Phillies. The Braves rivalry is due to division realignment that put both teams in the National League East in . Their rivalry with the Yankees has its roots in the histories of the New York Giants, Brooklyn Dodgers, and the Yankees and the fierce Subway Series matchups between the two teams. The rivalry with the Phillies stems from the geographic New York-Philadelphia rivalry, which is also seen in other sports.

===Subway Series===
The Mets – New York Yankees rivalry is the latest incarnation of the Subway Series, the competition between New York City&#x27;s teams, the American League New York Yankees and the National League Mets. Until Interleague play started, the two teams had only met in exhibition games. Since the inception of interleague play the two teams have met every regular season since 1997, and since 1999 they have met six times each season, playing two three-game series, one in each team&#x27;s ballpark. From the 2013 season however the number of games was reduced to four, two at each ballpark with the Mets winning six of the last eight games in that span. They have made the postseason in the same year six times: 1999, 2000, 2006, 2015, 2022, and 2024, and faced off in the 2000 World Series.

===Atlanta Braves===
The Braves–Mets rivalry is a rivalry between two teams in the National League East, featuring the Atlanta Braves and the Mets.

Although their first major confrontation occurred when the Mets swept the Braves in the 1969 NLCS, en route to their first World Series championship, the first playoff series won by an expansion team (also the first playoff appearance by an expansion team), the rivalry did not become especially heated until the 1990s, when a division realignment in 1994 put the Mets and the Braves in the NL East together (from 1969 to 1993, the Braves were in the NL West). The two teams faced each other again in the 1999 NLCS, and the Braves won the series four games to two. However, they would go on to lose to the Yankees in the 1999 World Series.

===Philadelphia Phillies===
The rivalry between the Mets and the Philadelphia Phillies from 2006 to 2008 was said to be among the &quot;hottest&quot; rivalries in the National League.

Aside from several brawls in the 1980s, the rivalry remained low-key before the 2006 season, as the teams had seldom been equally good at the same time. Since 2006, the teams have battled for playoff position. The Mets won the division in 2006 and contended in 2007 and 2008, while the Phillies won five consecutive division titles from 2007 to 2011. The Phillies&#x27; 2007 Eastern Division Title was won on the last day of the season as the Mets lost a seven-game lead with 17 games remaining while losing 12 of 18 games that season to the Phillies, including being swept at home in the first 3 games of the remaining 17, dropping their lead from 7 games to 3.5.

There is a long-standing rivalry between the sports fans from New York City and Philadelphia, which are approximately two hours apart by car, which is also seen between New York Giants and the Philadelphia Eagles in the National Football League, and the New York Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers in National Hockey League. Games between the two teams at Citi Field and Citizens Bank Park are often very intense, hard-hitting affairs, as each home crowd does its best to create an unfriendly, sometimes volatile atmosphere for any visiting-team fans.

===St. Louis Cardinals===
The rivalry between the St. Louis Cardinals and the Mets peaked during the 1980s when both teams contended for National League East supremacy. The rivalry began with the 1983 trade that brought Keith Hernandez from the Cardinals to the Mets, essentially turning the latter into contenders. Between 1985 and 1988, the division was dominated by either of the two teams, and in three of those years, the NL East winner went on to the World Series. In 1994, the Cardinals were moved to the National League Central, and the rivalry faded soon after. The two teams would meet in the and National League Championship Series, briefly rekindling the rivalry.

==Personnel==
==New York Mets Foundation==
A registered 501(c)(3) charity, the New York Mets Foundation is the philanthropic organization of the New York Mets. Founded in 1963, it funds and promotes charitable causes in the Mets community. One of these causes is Tuesday&#x27;s Children, is a non-profit family service organization that &quot;has made a long term commitment to meet the needs of every family who lost a loved one in the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001&quot;. The Mets host the annual Welcome Home Dinner, which raised over $550,000 for the Mets Foundation in 2012. All proceeds were distributed to Katz Institute for Women&#x27;s Health and Katz Women&#x27;s Hospitals of North Shore-LIJ Health System and The Leukemia &amp; Lymphoma Society.

==Owners and executives==

*Owners: Steven A. Cohen and Alex Cohen

*President of Baseball Operations: David Stearns
*Special Assistant to the President of Baseball Operations: Carlos Beltran
*Vice President: Eduardo Brizuela
*Vice President, Player Development: Andy Green

==New York Mets broadcasters==
===Television===

Most Mets games are carried by SportsNet New York (SNY), a joint venture of the Mets and NBC Sports Regional Networks. The team&#x27;s over-the-air home is WPIX, where the team has broadcast games since 1999. Games on WPIX are syndicated across New York and Connecticut to WCCT-TV (Hartford, CT), WCWN/WRGB (Albany, NY), WYCI (Saranac Lake, NY), WSYT-MY43 (Syracuse, NY), WPNY-LD (Utica, NY), WICZ-DT2 (Binghamton, NY), WQMY (Williamsport, PA), WOLF-DT3 (Scranton, PA) and WHAM-DT2 (Rochester, NY).

Longtime Mets radio announcer Gary Cohen does the play-by-play, having moved to television with the launch of SNY in 2006. Former Mets Keith Hernandez and Ron Darling are the color commentators with Steve Gelbs being the on-the-field reporter.

In early January 2016, Keith Hernandez re-signed with SNY. Reports indicate that Hernandez received a raise and three-year contract.

===Radio===
As of late August 2024, Mets radio broadcasts are produced by Audacy, Inc.. Games air on WHSQ-AM, an affiliate of ESPN Radio, locally and over Audacy&#x27;s streaming service nationwide under the branding Audacy Mets Radio. The Mets have aired games at WHSQ&#x27;s 880 AM frequency since 2019, when the station was still known as all-news WCBS-AM.

Howie Rose is the main play-by-play announcer; Wayne Randazzo, who previously hosted the pre- and post-game shows, is Rose&#x27;s partner. Longtime Mets beat reporter Ed Coleman took over the pre- and post-game role for most games. Starting in the 2023 Season, Randazzo will be replaced by Keith Raad as Randazzo will be doing the television broadcasts for the Los Angeles Angels.

The Mets&#x27; previous radio flagship was WOR from 2014 to 2018. The Mets were previously carried by WFAN, which inherited the team&#x27;s broadcast rights from WHN when it took over its frequency in 1987, and in later years by WFAN-FM which simulcasts the AM signal.

Spanish-language broadcasts are aired on WINS-FM-HD2 featuring Max Perez-Jimenez and Nestor Rosario, along with MLB.tv and SNY&#x27;s second audio program channels. They had previously been on WEPN 1050. It was formerly broadcast on WQBU-FM 92.7, Que Buena from 2020 to 2021. Both English and Spanish broadcasts are also aired on the Audacy internet radio service.

Rose, who has spent much of his career covering the Mets, replaced Bob Murphy as Gary Cohen&#x27;s broadcast partner in 2004 following Murphy&#x27;s retirement. Cohen then left the radio booth for the SNY television booth in 2006 and was replaced by Tom McCarthy, who departed after two seasons and was replaced by Wayne Hagin. Josh Lewin joined the broadcast after the team parted ways with Hagin following the 2011 season; he departed when broadcasts moved to WCBS.

Coinciding with the move to WCBS, the Mets, abruptly and without public announcement (other than a brief e-mail to its affiliates days before the season began), stopped syndicating its games to other stations outside the New York City area, shutting down the New York Mets Radio Network.

==Minor league affiliations==
The New York Mets farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.

==See also==
*List of New York Mets managers
*List of New York Mets owners and executives
*List of New York Mets seasons
*List of World Series champions
*New York Mets award winners and league leaders

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 

==External links==
* History of the New York Mets
* New York Mets Team Index
* Ultimate Mets Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="4" end="17" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="47" end="55" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="74" end="95" title="Boroughs of New York City" label="New York City borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="99" end="105" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="127" end="148" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="179" end="194" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="200" end="213" title="National League East" label="East Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="263" end="276" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="291" end="306" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="319" end="335" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="366" end="380" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="463" end="479" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="488" end="503" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q856862" start="538" end="557" title="Dodger blue" label="blue of the Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="654" end="666" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="760" end="772" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580540" start="786" end="798" title="William Shea" label="William Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128779" start="819" end="837" title="Continental League" label="Continental League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="999" end="1009" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570805" start="1068" end="1084" title="1962 New York Mets season" label="inaugural season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573619" start="1273" end="1297" title="1969 New York Mets season" label="&amp;quot;Miracle Mets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="1307" end="1324" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144500" start="1332" end="1349" title="1969 World Series" label="1969 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="1391" end="1403" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068609" start="1436" end="1449" title="List of Major League Baseball 100 win seasons" label="won 100 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583138" start="1561" end="1565" title="1986 New York Mets season" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591467" start="1584" end="1608" title="National League pennant" label="National League pennants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597703" start="1627" end="1631" title="2000 New York Mets season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148730" start="1636" end="1640" title="2015 New York Mets season" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q590212" start="1761" end="1772" title="Steve Cohen (businessman)" label="Steve Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="1833" end="1839" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="2099" end="2115" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="2120" end="2135" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311469" start="2136" end="2145" title="relocation of professional sports teams" label="relocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="2188" end="2207" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="2212" end="2232" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2350" end="2366" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="2374" end="2389" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128779" start="2447" end="2465" title="Continental League" label="Continental League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20880535" start="2487" end="2495" title="1962 Major League Baseball expansion" label="expanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580540" start="2550" end="2562" title="William Shea" label="William Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414813" start="2778" end="2799" title="Flags of New York City" label="flag of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252365" start="2998" end="3011" title="New York Metropolitans" label="Metropolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="3042" end="3062" title="American Association (1882–1891)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570805" start="3146" end="3155" title="1962 New York Mets season" label="1962 Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898140" start="3238" end="3260" title="2024 Chicago White Sox season" label="2024 Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571169" start="3273" end="3284" title="1963 New York Mets season" label="1963 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204653" start="3481" end="3492" title="Duke Snider" label="Duke Snider"/>
<link wikidata="Q367566" start="3617" end="3627" title="Yogi Berra" label="Yogi Berra"/>
<link wikidata="Q959112" start="3740" end="3754" title="Reggie Jackson" label="Reggie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739221" start="3762" end="3775" title="1966 Major League Baseball draft" label="amateur draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16120459" start="3795" end="3809" title="Steve Chilcott" label="Steve Chilcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="3902" end="3912" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573619" start="3945" end="3974" title="1969 New York Mets season" label="1969 &amp;quot;Miracle Mets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="3987" end="4007" title="National League East" label="National League East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573473" start="4040" end="4054" title="1969 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573490" start="4114" end="4131" title="1969 Baltimore Orioles season" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144500" start="4143" end="4160" title="1969 World Series" label="1969 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575648" start="4232" end="4236" title="1973 New York Mets season" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575517" start="4356" end="4371" title="1973 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717762" start="4384" end="4399" title="The Big Red Machine" label="Big Red Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511223" start="4413" end="4417" title="1973 National League Championship Series" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575657" start="4465" end="4482" title="1973 Oakland Athletics season" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185592" start="4617" end="4664" title="Phillies–Pirates rivalry" label="Philadelphia Phillies or the Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577738" start="4704" end="4708" title="1977 New York Mets season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="4965" end="4974" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976971" start="5043" end="5064" title="Nelson Doubleday, Jr." label="Nelson Doubleday, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5496569" start="5124" end="5135" title="Fred Wilpon" label="Fred Wilpon"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="5204" end="5221" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485714" start="5232" end="5244" title="Frank Cashen" label="Frank Cashen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166727" start="5479" end="5496" title="Darryl Strawberry" label="Darryl Strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="5519" end="5533" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076161" start="5541" end="5554" title="Dwight Gooden" label="Dwight Gooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q120649" start="5610" end="5620" title="Gold Glove" label="Gold Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="5628" end="5643" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="5686" end="5705" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="5830" end="5837" title="NL East" label="NL East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038597" start="6093" end="6106" title="Davey Johnson" label="Davey Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779406" start="6145" end="6160" title="Norfolk Tides" label="Tidewater Tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582437" start="6254" end="6258" title="1985 New York Mets season" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056011" start="6295" end="6306" title="Gary Carter" label="Gary Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="6316" end="6330" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583138" start="6386" end="6390" title="1986 New York Mets season" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511238" start="6508" end="6512" title="1986 National League Championship Series" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583040" start="6535" end="6549" title="1986 Houston Astros season" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="6698" end="6710" title="1986 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582879" start="6723" end="6737" title="1986 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903144" start="6828" end="6840" title="Bill Buckner" label="Bill Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583813" start="6944" end="6948" title="1987 New York Mets season" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420530" start="6995" end="7005" title="Ray Knight" label="Ray Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="7032" end="7049" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11301188" start="7084" end="7098" title="Kevin Mitchell (baseball)" label="Kevin Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396983" start="7134" end="7150" title="Kevin McReynolds" label="Kevin McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334927" start="7456" end="7464" title="Ed Hearn (catcher)" label="Ed Hearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="7472" end="7490" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136890" start="7503" end="7513" title="David Cone" label="David Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816173" start="7715" end="7723" title="Tom Herr" label="Tom Herr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518920" start="7828" end="7843" title="Terry Pendleton" label="Terry Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166727" start="7950" end="7967" title="Darryl Strawberry" label="Darryl Strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920011" start="7972" end="7986" title="Howard Johnson (baseball)" label="Howard Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584586" start="8180" end="8184" title="1988 New York Mets season" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511240" start="8195" end="8206" title="1988 NLCS" label="in the NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="8224" end="8243" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586997" start="8434" end="8438" title="1991 New York Mets season" label="Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587053" start="8540" end="8547" title="1991 Pittsburgh Pirates season" label="Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846452" start="8713" end="8725" title="Mike Cubbage" label="Mike Cubbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606552" start="8747" end="8762" title="Gregg Jefferies" label="Gregg Jefferies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106511" start="8882" end="8886" title="WFAN (AM)" label="WFAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="9516" end="9534" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136890" start="9598" end="9608" title="David Cone" label="David Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587045" start="9647" end="9655" title="1991 Philadelphia Phillies season" label="Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545870" start="9659" end="9675" title="Veterans Stadium" label="Veterans Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="9786" end="9796" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q326992" start="9958" end="9970" title="Eddie Murray" label="Eddie Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246427" start="9992" end="10005" title="Bobby Bonilla" label="Bobby Bonilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924542" start="10100" end="10115" title="Bret Saberhagen" label="Bret Saberhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489892" start="10191" end="10203" title="Frank Tanana" label="Frank Tanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559410" start="10381" end="10394" title="Vince Coleman (baseball)" label="Vince Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226138" start="10700" end="10712" title="Daryl Boston" label="Daryl Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136890" start="10881" end="10891" title="David Cone" label="David Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="10909" end="10926" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416955" start="10954" end="10967" title="Ryan Thompson (outfielder)" label="Ryan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106533" start="10972" end="10981" title="Jeff Kent" label="Jeff Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092944" start="11071" end="11088" title="1992 World Series" label="1992 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933044" start="11232" end="11244" title="Bob Klapisch" label="Bob Klapisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773756" start="11577" end="11590" title="Anthony Young (baseball)" label="Anthony Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587" start="12152" end="12158" title="bleach" label="bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920011" start="12320" end="12334" title="Howard Johnson (baseball)" label="Howard Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144547" start="12339" end="12352" title="Sid Fernandez" label="Sid Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392480" start="12433" end="12449" title="1994 Major League Baseball season" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332249" start="12507" end="12518" title="Rico Brogna" label="Rico Brogna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106533" start="12538" end="12547" title="Jeff Kent" label="Jeff Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306900" start="12750" end="12761" title="Bobby Jones (right-handed pitcher)" label="Bobby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="12824" end="12840" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="strike-shortened"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589577" start="12899" end="12907" title="1994 Montreal Expos season" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589229" start="12912" end="12919" title="1994 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910557" start="13252" end="13266" title="Bill Pulsipher" label="Bill Pulsipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315641" start="13268" end="13286" title="Jason Isringhausen" label="Jason Isringhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154417" start="13292" end="13303" title="Paul Wilson (baseball)" label="Paul Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532572" start="13326" end="13338" title="Generation K (baseball)" label="Generation K"/>
<link wikidata="Q721948" start="13466" end="13476" title="Nolan Ryan" label="Nolan Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q871529" start="13825" end="13839" title="switch hitter" label="switch hitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050571" start="13840" end="13847" title="catcher" label="catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812445" start="13848" end="13860" title="Todd Hundley" label="Todd Hundley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059480" start="13955" end="13969" title="Center fielder" label="Center fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483432" start="13970" end="13983" title="Lance Johnson" label="Lance Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="14023" end="14027" title="Hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q581390" start="14035" end="14042" title="Triple (baseball)" label="triples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="14049" end="14055" title="at bat" label="at bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="14064" end="14075" title="Run (baseball)" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251217" start="14251" end="14262" title="John Olerud" label="John Olerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348847" start="14302" end="14315" title="Robert Person" label="Robert Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328324" start="14494" end="14510" title="1997 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="14514" end="14528" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229398" start="14621" end="14632" title="Dave Mlicki" label="Dave Mlicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q948562" start="14778" end="14796" title="Tommy John surgery" label="Tommy John surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="14885" end="14897" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825445" start="14924" end="14938" title="Mets–Phillies rivalry" label="division rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="14939" end="14960" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="15197" end="15216" title="Washington Senators (1901–1960)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870201" start="15226" end="15248" title="Philadelphia Athletics" label="Philadelphia Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711970" start="15328" end="15344" title="Alberto Castillo (catcher)" label="Alberto Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332045" start="15450" end="15465" title="Ricky Bottalico" label="Ricky Bottalico"/>
<link wikidata="Q613319" start="15505" end="15516" title="Mike Piazza" label="Mike Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649712" start="15767" end="15773" title="1998 Major League Baseball season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593810" start="15829" end="15843" title="1998 Montreal Expos season" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593360" start="15860" end="15874" title="1998 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038277" start="16126" end="16139" title="Robin Ventura" label="Robin Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q601521" start="16141" end="16157" title="Rickey Henderson" label="Rickey Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246427" start="16163" end="16176" title="Bobby Bonilla" label="Bobby Bonilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594966" start="16312" end="16328" title="1999 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101104" start="16392" end="16407" title="Bobby Valentine" label="Bobby Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839707" start="16453" end="16486" title="ESPN Sunday Night Baseball" label="&amp;quot;Sunday Night Baseball&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594966" start="16497" end="16513" title="1999 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q492432" start="16619" end="16633" title="Benny Agbayani" label="Benny Agbayani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337563" start="16718" end="16733" title="Edgardo Alfonzo" label="Edgardo Alfonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357960" start="16738" end="16750" title="Roger Cedeño" label="Roger Cedeño"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594953" start="16857" end="16875" title="1999 National League Wild-Card tie-breaker game" label="a one-game playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594586" start="16888" end="16903" title="1999 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q179028" start="16905" end="16914" title="Al Leiter" label="Al Leiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594960" start="17044" end="17048" title="1999 National League Division Series" label="NLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594481" start="17072" end="17092" title="1999 Arizona Diamondbacks season" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812575" start="17183" end="17193" title="Todd Pratt" label="Todd Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001848" start="17230" end="17270" title="1999 National League Championship Series" label="1999 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594494" start="17278" end="17292" title="1999 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595101" start="17342" end="17359" title="Grand Slam Single" label="Grand Slam Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597703" start="17639" end="17643" title="2000 New York Mets season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597697" start="17747" end="17751" title="2000 National League Division Series" label="NLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="17775" end="17795" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="17822" end="17840" title="St Louis Cardinals" label="St Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001855" start="17848" end="17852" title="2000 National League Championship Series" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="17927" end="17944" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q181448" start="18011" end="18024" title="Subway Series" label="Subway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="18320" end="18333" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598966" start="18513" end="18524" title="2001 New York Mets season" label="2001 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="18610" end="18640" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="18641" end="18653" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598469" start="18774" end="18788" title="2001 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q943668" start="19170" end="19181" title="Tom Glavine" label="Tom Glavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030993" start="19183" end="19192" title="Mo Vaughn" label="Mo Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134401" start="19198" end="19212" title="Roberto Alomar" label="Roberto Alomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600339" start="19236" end="19247" title="2002 New York Mets season" label="2002 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959048" start="19587" end="19598" title="Omar Minaya" label="Omar Minaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q726918" start="19663" end="19677" title="Pedro Martínez" label="Pedro Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569102" start="19704" end="19719" title="Willie Randolph" label="Willie Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042743" start="19890" end="19904" title="Carlos Beltrán" label="Carlos Beltrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072788" start="19909" end="19923" title="Carlos Delgado" label="Carlos Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q220096" start="19953" end="19963" title="José Reyes (shortstop)" label="José Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q684849" start="19968" end="19980" title="David Wright" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="20019" end="20038" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511260" start="20056" end="20091" title="2006 National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466326" start="20412" end="20423" title="2008 New York Mets season" label="2008 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="20447" end="20459" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959048" start="20473" end="20484" title="Omar Minaya" label="Omar Minaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569102" start="20491" end="20506" title="Willie Randolph" label="Willie Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331640" start="20508" end="20521" title="Rick Peterson" label="Rick Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530820" start="20527" end="20536" title="Tom Nieto" label="Tom Nieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177485" start="20538" end="20550" title="Jerry Manuel" label="Jerry Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="20796" end="20806" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098626" start="20821" end="20835" title="Gary Sheffield" label="Gary Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851515" start="20907" end="20921" title="500 home run club" label="500th home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466475" start="20934" end="20951" title="2009 Milwaukee Brewers season" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466486" start="21071" end="21077" title="2009 New York Mets season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="21212" end="21225" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156810" start="21320" end="21330" title="J. J. Putz" label="J. J. Putz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181989" start="21332" end="21342" title="John Maine" label="John Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q848275" start="21344" end="21356" title="Óliver Pérez" label="Óliver Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q220096" start="21358" end="21368" title="José Reyes (shortstop)" label="José Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042743" start="21370" end="21384" title="Carlos Beltrán" label="Carlos Beltrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q684849" start="21386" end="21398" title="David Wright" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072788" start="21400" end="21414" title="Carlos Delgado" label="Carlos Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q919620" start="21416" end="21429" title="Johan Santana" label="Johan Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098626" start="21435" end="21449" title="Gary Sheffield" label="Gary Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q861996" start="21730" end="21744" title="Jeff Francoeur" label="Jeff Francoeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014492" start="21749" end="21762" title="Daniel Murphy (baseball)" label="Daniel Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466480" start="21865" end="21884" title="2009 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496569" start="21978" end="21989" title="Fred Wilpon" label="Fred Wilpon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427310" start="21994" end="22003" title="Saul Katz" label="Saul Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="22071" end="22085" title="Bernard Madoff" label="Bernard Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q219407" start="22093" end="22105" title="Ponzi scheme" label="Ponzi scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q522622" start="22170" end="22183" title="Irving Picard" label="Irving Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="22903" end="22912" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q919620" start="22937" end="22950" title="Johan Santana" label="Johan Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320688" start="22960" end="22971" title="R.A. Dickey" label="R.A. Dickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20908974" start="23241" end="23245" title="2015 NLDS" label="NLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20908975" start="23301" end="23305" title="2015 NLCS" label="NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648402" start="23350" end="23367" title="2015 World Series" label="2015 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="23395" end="23413" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23469" end="23473" title="2016 Major League Baseball season#Postseason" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q27122779" start="23639" end="23653" title="2016 National League Wild Card Game" label="wild-card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="23679" end="23699" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q684849" start="23965" end="23977" title="David Wright" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q16566940" start="23997" end="24009" title="Jacob deGrom" label="Jacob deGrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27926052" start="24157" end="24168" title="Pete Alonso" label="Pete Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="24186" end="24210" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q625178" start="24360" end="24375" title="Mickey Callaway" label="Mickey Callaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042743" start="24413" end="24427" title="Carlos Beltrán" label="Carlos Beltrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q67515766" start="24575" end="24590" title="2020 MLB season" label="2020 MLB season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81934426" start="24621" end="24657" title="Houston Astros sign stealing scandal" label="Houston Astros sign stealing scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60735795" start="24690" end="24700" title="Luis Rojas (baseball)" label="Luis Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q73928107" start="24745" end="24756" title="2020 New York Mets season" label="2020 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q590212" start="24839" end="24850" title="Steve Cohen (businessman)" label="Steve Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939315" start="25113" end="25128" title="Carlos Carrasco (baseball)" label="Carlos Carrasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483582" start="25152" end="25168" title="Francisco Lindor" label="Francisco Lindor"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="25189" end="25206" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16163541" start="25379" end="25390" title="Javier Báez" label="Javier Báez"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="25409" end="25421" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912529" start="25533" end="25545" title="Billy Eppler" label="Billy Eppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842917" start="25626" end="25638" title="Nick Plummer" label="Nick Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154810" start="25640" end="25654" title="Starling Marte" label="Starling Marte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048331" start="25656" end="25671" title="Eduardo Escobar" label="Eduardo Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19795173" start="25677" end="25687" title="Mark Canha" label="Mark Canha"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="25731" end="25745" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028907" start="25753" end="25765" title="Max Scherzer" label="Max Scherzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q921030" start="25855" end="25869" title="Buck Showalter" label="Buck Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q107337876" start="25957" end="25969" title="Tylor Megill" label="Tylor Megill"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610006" start="25971" end="25981" title="Drew Smith (baseball)" label="Drew Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923059" start="25983" end="25998" title="Joely Rodríguez" label="Joely Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16605329" start="26000" end="26009" title="Seth Lugo" label="Seth Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24663923" start="26014" end="26024" title="Edwin Díaz" label="Edwin Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="26100" end="26121" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="26166" end="26184" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16566940" start="26186" end="26198" title="Jacob deGrom" label="Jacob deGrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198012" start="26318" end="26327" title="Jim Scott (pitcher)" label="Jim Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q27926052" start="26484" end="26495" title="Pete Alonso" label="Pete Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="26525" end="26528" title="Run batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q613319" start="26587" end="26598" title="Mike Piazza" label="Mike Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q684849" start="26603" end="26615" title="David Wright" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q64736744" start="26689" end="26699" title="Brett Baty" label="Brett Baty"/>
<link wikidata="Q110624919" start="26701" end="26713" title="Mark Vientos" label="Mark Vientos"/>
<link wikidata="Q111942898" start="26719" end="26736" title="Francisco Álvarez (baseball)" label="Francisco Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q109311700" start="26779" end="26793" title="2022 Atlanta Braves season" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q113648874" start="26943" end="26980" title="2022 National League Wild Card Series" label="2022 National League Wild Card Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919700" start="26988" end="27004" title="2022 San Diego Padres season" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="27159" end="27172" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406818" start="27239" end="27250" title="Kodai Senga" label="Kodai Senga"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="27304" end="27318" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q981788" start="27326" end="27342" title="Justin Verlander" label="Justin Verlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q115152733" start="27517" end="27528" title="2023 New York Mets season" label="2023 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20995722" start="27630" end="27643" title="David Stearns" label="David Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q921030" start="27764" end="27778" title="Buck Showalter" label="Buck Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912529" start="27870" end="27882" title="Billy Eppler" label="Billy Eppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="27950" end="27966" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q55375337" start="27979" end="27993" title="Carlos Mendoza (baseball manager)" label="Carlos Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403435" start="28066" end="28079" title="Luis Severino" label="Luis Severino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233657" start="28081" end="28092" title="Joey Wendle" label="Joey Wendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062598" start="28094" end="28105" title="Jorge Lopez (baseball)" label="Jorge López"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090195" start="28107" end="28121" title="Harrison Bader" label="Harrison Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234779" start="28126" end="28137" title="Sean Manaea" label="Sean Manaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483582" start="28264" end="28280" title="Francisco Lindor" label="Francisco Lindor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="28361" end="28376" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309036" start="28387" end="28394" title="McDonaldland" label="Grimace"/>
<link wikidata="Q130425972" start="28450" end="28453" title="OMG (Candelita song)" label="OMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186330" start="28473" end="28486" title="Jose Iglesias (baseball)" label="Jose Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q130284545" start="28698" end="28738" title="2024 National League Championship Series" label="2024 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="28791" end="28810" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q52717515" start="28884" end="28893" title="Juan Soto" label="Juan Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253263" start="28952" end="28999" title="List of largest sports contracts" label="largest contract in professional sports history"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="29212" end="29224" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="29626" end="29632" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="29634" end="29642" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="29652" end="29663" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="29676" end="29682" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="29687" end="29694" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="29715" end="29732" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988104" start="29752" end="29768" title="Western New York" label="Western New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q215506" start="29803" end="29817" title="Jerry Seinfeld" label="Jerry Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q44561" start="29819" end="29830" title="Kevin James" label="Kevin James"/>
<link wikidata="Q210120" start="29832" end="29844" title="Julia Stiles" label="Julia Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q248179" start="29846" end="29856" title="Ty Burrell" label="Ty Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q489" start="29858" end="29868" title="Bill Maher" label="Bill Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="29870" end="29881" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914" start="29883" end="29895" title="Jimmy Kimmel" label="Jimmy Kimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q202056" start="29897" end="29908" title="Hank Azaria" label="Hank Azaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586189" start="29910" end="29920" title="Jim Breuer" label="Jim Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="29922" end="29933" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109" start="29935" end="29945" title="Chris Rock" label="Chris Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28755" start="29947" end="29964" title="Matthew Broderick" label="Matthew Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="Q714458" start="29966" end="29984" title="Dylan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Dylan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q372311" start="29986" end="29997" title="Glenn Close" label="Glenn Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="29999" end="30009" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q349799" start="30011" end="30018" title="Ad-Rock" label="Ad-Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q344784" start="30020" end="30023" title="Adam Yauch" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q194220" start="30025" end="30028" title="Nas" label="Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="30030" end="30037" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q162202" start="30039" end="30050" title="Nicki Minaj" label="Nicki Minaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="30052" end="30066" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667998" start="30068" end="30083" title="Patrick Mahomes" label="Patrick Mahomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122104" start="30089" end="30105" title="Donovan Mitchell" label="Donovan Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="30263" end="30273" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928919" start="30445" end="30452" title="Mr. Met" label="Mr. Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="30595" end="30607" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="30654" end="30666" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020146" start="30863" end="30871" title="Mrs. Met" label="Mrs. Met"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="31156" end="31162" title="beagle" label="beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376834" start="31174" end="31189" title="Rudd Weatherwax" label="Rudd Weatherwax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="31208" end="31223" title="Waldorf Astoria New York" label="Waldorf-Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320356" start="31242" end="31256" title="Rheingold Beer" label="Rheingold Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="31307" end="31319" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="31367" end="31379" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681240" start="31410" end="31427" title="Lorinda de Roulet" label="Lorinda de Roulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="31461" end="31465" title="mule" label="mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578787" start="31500" end="31511" title="1979 New York Mets season" label="1979 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818334" start="31574" end="31597" title="Mercerville, New Jersey" label="Mercerville, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976971" start="31798" end="31818" title="Nelson Doubleday Jr." label="Nelson Doubleday Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5496569" start="31823" end="31834" title="Fred Wilpon" label="Fred Wilpon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175379" start="31879" end="31892" title="Meet the Mets" label="Meet the Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383186" start="32001" end="32013" title="Ruth Roberts" label="Ruth Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363603" start="32165" end="32193" title="Take Me Out to the Ball Game" label="Take Me Out to the Ball Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="32208" end="32216" title="Sicily" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043564" start="32228" end="32237" title="C&amp;#x27;è la luna mezzo mare" label="Lazy Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372869" start="32255" end="32277" title="seventh-inning stretch" label="seventh-inning stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813850" start="32306" end="32315" title="Piano Man (song)" label="Piano Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="32413" end="32426" title="internet meme" label="internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="32534" end="32541" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="32546" end="32552" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753322" start="32662" end="32669" title="Kingpin (character)" label="Kingpin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32681" end="32714" title="Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse" label="Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059474" start="32762" end="32776" title="Genshin Impact" label="Genshin Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="32913" end="32928" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="32952" end="32968" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="32989" end="33004" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414813" start="33075" end="33079" title="Flag of New York City" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021187" start="33799" end="33834" title="Williamsburgh Savings Bank Building" label="Williamsburgh Savings Bank Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="33922" end="33940" title="Woolworth Building" label="Woolworth Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="33992" end="34013" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="34039" end="34073" title="headquarters of the United Nations" label="headquarters of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="35183" end="35191" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="35196" end="35203" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q391243" start="35320" end="35336" title="Citigroup Center" label="Citigroup Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q113642003" start="37487" end="37499" title="City Connect" label="City Connect"/>
<link wikidata="Q125157" start="37877" end="37894" title="Queensboro Bridge" label="Queensboro Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q126203" start="37933" end="37939" title="7 (New York City Subway service)" label="7 Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="38379" end="38394" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056011" start="38438" end="38449" title="Gary Carter" label="Gary Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8836325" start="38497" end="38508" title="John Franco" label="John Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q684849" start="38522" end="38534" title="David Wright" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="38691" end="38706" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4267105" start="38768" end="38775" title="1997 Los Angeles Dodgers season" label="Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="38779" end="38791" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002397" start="38793" end="38805" title="Butch Huskey" label="Butch Huskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q830408" start="38874" end="38892" title="grandfather clause" label="grandfather clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030993" start="38930" end="38939" title="Mo Vaughn" label="Mo Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580540" start="39113" end="39129" title="William Shea" label="&amp;quot;Shea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108486" start="39287" end="39298" title="Ralph Kiner" label="Ralph Kiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299104" start="39943" end="39956" title="Jerry Koosman" label="Jerry Koosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="40033" end="40048" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="40098" end="40109" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933477" start="40171" end="40181" title="Bob Murphy (sportscaster)" label="Bob Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076161" start="40222" end="40235" title="Dwight Gooden" label="Dwight Gooden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166727" start="40306" end="40323" title="Darryl Strawberry" label="Darryl Strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q684849" start="40407" end="40419" title="David Wright" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056011" start="40520" end="40531" title="Gary Carter" label="Gary Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264202" start="40782" end="40795" title="Desi Relaford" label="Desi Relaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788683" start="40836" end="40848" title="Matt Galante" label="Matt Galante"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="41215" end="41229" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="41235" end="41251" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="41261" end="41282" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="41361" end="41381" title="National League East" label="National League East"/>
<link wikidata="Q903253" start="41624" end="41632" title="Sports in the New York metropolitan area" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152477" start="41633" end="41645" title="Sports in Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181448" start="41781" end="41794" title="Subway Series" label="Subway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="41852" end="41867" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="41868" end="41884" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="41893" end="41908" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362020" start="41921" end="41937" title="Interleague play" label="Interleague play"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="42482" end="42499" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738187" start="42539" end="42546" title="Major League Baseball rivalries" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="42585" end="42605" title="National League East" label="National League East"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="42621" end="42635" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511218" start="42739" end="42748" title="1969 National League Championship Series" label="1969 NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="42774" end="42786" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001848" start="43156" end="43165" title="1999 National League Championship Series" label="1999 NLCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594494" start="43175" end="43181" title="1999 Atlanta Braves season" label="Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594966" start="43257" end="43264" title="1999 New York Yankees season" label="Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316770" start="43272" end="43289" title="1999 World Series" label="1999 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="43357" end="43378" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="43459" end="43474" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q903253" start="44205" end="44218" title="Sports in the New York metropolitan area" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152477" start="44223" end="44235" title="Sports in Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325392" start="44312" end="44355" title="Eagles–Giants rivalry" label="New York Giants and the Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="44363" end="44387" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463307" start="44397" end="44441" title="Flyers–Rangers rivalry" label="New York Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="44445" end="44467" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072882" start="44500" end="44510" title="Citi Field" label="Citi Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q912770" start="44515" end="44533" title="Citizens Bank Park" label="Citizens Bank Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="44747" end="44766" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="44834" end="44854" title="National League East" label="National League East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="44917" end="44932" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209816" start="45209" end="45232" title="National League Central" label="National League Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363275" start="45304" end="45339" title="National League Championship Series" label="National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851415" start="45637" end="45660" title="Tuesday&amp;#x27;s Children" label="Tuesday&amp;#x27;s Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q590212" start="46179" end="46194" title="Steve Cohen (businessman)" label="Steven A. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20995722" start="46246" end="46259" title="David Stearns" label="David Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042743" start="46320" end="46334" title="Carlos Beltran" label="Carlos Beltran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849118" start="46406" end="46416" title="Andy Green (baseball)" label="Andy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q426638" start="46498" end="46516" title="SportsNet New York" label="SportsNet New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151006" start="46556" end="46584" title="NBC Sports Regional Networks" label="NBC Sports Regional Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="46602" end="46614" title="terrestrial television" label="over-the-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068955" start="46623" end="46627" title="WPIX" label="WPIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947677" start="46740" end="46747" title="WCCT-TV" label="WCCT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948202" start="46764" end="46768" title="WCWN" label="WCWN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955018" start="46769" end="46773" title="WRGB" label="WRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953504" start="46788" end="46792" title="WYCI" label="WYCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956033" start="46813" end="46822" title="WSYT" label="WSYT-MY43"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954404" start="46839" end="46846" title="WPNY-LD" label="WPNY-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950612" start="46860" end="46868" title="WICZ-TV" label="WICZ-DT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954724" start="46887" end="46891" title="WQMY" label="WQMY"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564757" start="46912" end="46920" title="WOLF-TV" label="WOLF-DT3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950046" start="46940" end="46948" title="WHAM-TV" label="WHAM-DT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524863" start="46997" end="47007" title="Gary Cohen" label="Gary Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="47102" end="47117" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026363" start="47122" end="47133" title="Ron Darling" label="Ron Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324835" start="47166" end="47177" title="Steve Gelbs" label="Steve Gelbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380195" start="47420" end="47432" title="Audacy, Inc." label="Audacy, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1450606" start="47447" end="47454" title="WHSQ" label="WHSQ-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046168" start="47472" end="47482" title="ESPN Radio" label="ESPN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922105" start="47707" end="47717" title="Howie Rose" label="Howie Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q114834659" start="47754" end="47768" title="Wayne Randazzo" label="Wayne Randazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334668" start="47874" end="47884" title="Ed Coleman (sportscaster)" label="Ed Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="48068" end="48086" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564763" start="48132" end="48135" title="WOR (AM)" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106511" start="48191" end="48195" title="WFAN (AM)" label="WFAN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48251" end="48254" title="WEPN (AM)#WHN" label="WHN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949166" start="48318" end="48325" title="WFAN-FM" label="WFAN-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431439" start="48400" end="48411" title="WINS-FM" label="WINS-FM-HD2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406949" start="48493" end="48513" title="second audio program" label="second audio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564667" start="48552" end="48561" title="WEPN (AM)" label="WEPN 1050"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954618" start="48592" end="48604" title="WFME-FM" label="WQBU-FM 92.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397258" start="48693" end="48699" title="Audacy" label="Audacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933477" start="48792" end="48802" title="Bob Murphy (broadcaster)" label="Bob Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q426638" start="48926" end="48929" title="SportsNet New York" label="SNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816767" start="48975" end="48987" title="Tom McCarthy (broadcaster)" label="Tom McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662196" start="49040" end="49051" title="Wayne Hagin" label="Wayne Hagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289103" start="49053" end="49063" title="Josh Lewin" label="Josh Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013759" start="49453" end="49480" title="New York Mets Radio Network" label="New York Mets Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="49531" end="49542" title="farm team" label="farm system"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="49561" end="49573" title="Minor League Baseball" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591962" start="49601" end="49631" title="List of New York Mets managers" label="List of New York Mets managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591960" start="49633" end="49676" title="List of New York Mets owners and executives" label="List of New York Mets owners and executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902813" start="49678" end="49707" title="List of New York Mets seasons" label="List of New York Mets seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q862958" start="49709" end="49739" title="List of World Series champions" label="List of World Series champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956393" start="49741" end="49787" title="New York Mets award winners and league leaders" label="New York Mets award winners and league leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="21731" wikidata="Q1123037" url="?curid=21731" title="Nursery rhyme">
<text>A nursery rhyme is a traditional poem or song for children in Britain and other European countries, but usage of the term dates only from the late 18th/early 19th century. The term [[Mother Goose]] rhymes is interchangeable with nursery rhymes.

From the mid-16th century nursery rhymes began to be recorded in English plays, and most popular rhymes date from the 17th and 18th centuries. The first English collections, &quot;Tommy Thumb&#x27;s Song Book&quot; and a sequel, &quot;Tommy Thumb&#x27;s Pretty Song Book&quot;, were published by Mary Cooper in 1744. Publisher John Newbery&#x27;s stepson, Thomas Carnan, was the first to use the term Mother Goose for nursery rhymes when he published a compilation of English rhymes, &quot;Mother Goose&#x27;s Melody, or Sonnets for the Cradle&quot; (London, 1780).

==History==
===Lullabies===

The oldest children&#x27;s songs for which records exist are lullabies, intended to help a child fall asleep. Lullabies can be found in every human culture. The English term lullaby is thought to come from &quot;lu, lu&quot; or &quot;la la&quot; sounds made by mothers or nurses to calm children, and &quot;&quot; or &quot;bye bye&quot;, either another lulling sound or a term for a good night. Until the modern era, lullabies were usually recorded only incidentally in written sources. The Roman nurses&#x27; lullaby, &quot;Lalla, Lalla, Lalla, aut dormi, aut lacta&quot;, is recorded in a scholium on Persius and may be the oldest to survive.

Many medieval English verses associated with the birth of Jesus take the form of a lullaby, including &quot;Lullay, my liking, my dere son, my sweting&quot; and may be versions of contemporary lullabies. However, most of those used today date from the 17th century. For example, a well-known lullaby such as &quot;Rock-a-bye Baby&quot;, could not be found in records until the late-18th century when it was printed by John Newbery (c. 1765).

===Early nursery rhymes===

A French poem, similar to &quot;Thirty days hath September&quot;, numbering the days of the month, was recorded in the 13th century. From the later Middle Ages, there are records of short children&#x27;s rhyming songs, often as marginalia. From the mid-16th century, they began to be recorded in English plays. &quot;Pat-a-cake&quot; is one of the oldest surviving English nursery rhymes. The earliest recorded version of the rhyme appears in Thomas d&#x27;Urfey&#x27;s play &quot;The Campaigners&quot; from 1698. Most nursery rhymes were not written down until the 18th century when the publishing of children&#x27;s books began to move from polemic and education towards entertainment, but there is evidence for many rhymes existing before this, including &quot;To market, to market&quot; and &quot;Cock a doodle doo&quot;, which date from at least the late 16th century. Nursery rhymes with 17th-century origins include, &quot;Jack Sprat&quot; (1639), &quot;The Grand Old Duke of York&quot; (1642), &quot;Lavender&#x27;s Blue&quot; (1672) and &quot;Rain Rain Go Away&quot; (1687).
The first English collection, &quot;Tommy Thumb&#x27;s Song Book&quot; and a sequel, &quot;Tommy Thumb&#x27;s Pretty Song Book&quot;, were published by Mary Cooper in London in 1744, with such songs becoming known as &quot;Tommy Thumb&#x27;s songs&quot;. A copy of the latter is held in the British Library. John Newbery&#x27;s stepson, Thomas Carnan, was the first to use the term Mother Goose for nursery rhymes when he published a compilation of English rhymes, &quot;Mother Goose&#x27;s Melody, or, Sonnets for the Cradle&quot; (London, 1780). These rhymes seem to have come from a variety of sources, including traditional riddles, proverbs, ballads, lines of Mummers&#x27; plays, drinking songs, historical events, and, it has been suggested, ancient pagan rituals. One example of a nursery rhyme in the form of a riddle is &quot;As I was going to St Ives&quot;, which dates to 1730. About half of the currently recognised &quot;traditional&quot; English rhymes were known by the mid-18th century. More English rhymes were collected by Joseph Ritson in &quot;Gammer Gurton&#x27;s Garland or The Nursery Parnassus&quot; (1784), published in London by Joseph Johnson.

===19th century===
In the early 19th century, printed collections of rhymes began to spread to other countries, including Robert Chambers&#x27; &quot;Popular Rhymes of Scotland&quot; (1826) and in the United States, &quot;Mother Goose&#x27;s Melodies&quot; (1833). From this period, the origins and authors of rhymes are sometimes known—for instance, in &quot;Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star&quot; which combines the melody of an 18th-century French tune &quot;Ah vous dirai-je, Maman&quot; with a 19th-century English poem by Jane Taylor entitled &quot;The Star&quot; used as lyrics.

Early folk song collectors also often collected (what is now known as) nursery rhymes, including in Scotland Sir Walter Scott and in Germany Clemens Brentano and Achim von Arnim in &quot;Des Knaben Wunderhorn&quot; (1806–1808). The first, and possibly the most important academic collection to focus in this area was James Halliwell-Phillipps&#x27; &quot;The Nursery Rhymes of England&quot; (1842) and &quot;Popular Rhymes and Tales&quot; in 1849, in which he divided rhymes into antiquities (historical), fireside stories, game-rhymes, alphabet-rhymes, riddles, nature-rhymes, places and families, proverbs, superstitions, customs, and nursery songs (lullabies). By the time of Sabine Baring-Gould&#x27;s &quot;A Book of Nursery Songs&quot; (1895), folklore was an academic study full of comments and footnotes. A professional anthropologist, Andrew Lang (1844–1912) produced &quot;The Nursery Rhyme Book&quot; in 1897.

===20th century===
The early years of the 20th century are notable for the illustrations of children&#x27;s books, including Randolph Caldecott&#x27;s &quot;Hey Diddle Diddle Picture Book&quot; (1909) and Arthur Rackham&#x27;s &quot;Mother Goose&quot; (1913). The definitive study of English rhymes remains the work of Iona and Peter Opie.

==Meanings of nursery rhymes==
Many nursery rhymes have been argued to have hidden meanings and origins. John Bellenden Ker Gawler (1764–1842), for example, wrote four volumes arguing that English nursery rhymes were written in &quot;Low Saxon&quot;, a hypothetical early form of Dutch. He then &quot;translated&quot; them back into English, revealing in particular a strong tendency to anti-clericalism. Many of the ideas about the links between rhymes and historical persons, or events, can be traced back to Katherine Elwes&#x27; book &quot;The Real Personages of Mother Goose&quot; (1930), in which she linked famous nursery rhyme characters with real people, on little or no evidence. She posited that children&#x27;s songs were a peculiar form of coded historical narrative, propaganda or covert protest, and did not believe that they were written simply for entertainment.

==Nursery rhyme revisionism==
There have been several attempts across the world to revise nursery rhymes (along with fairy tales and popular songs). As recently as the late 18th century, rhymes like &quot;Little Robin Redbreast&quot; were occasionally cleaned up for a young audience. In the late 19th century, the major concern seems to have been violence and crime, which led some children&#x27;s publishers in the United States like Jacob Abbot and Samuel Goodrich to change Mother Goose rhymes.

In the early and mid-20th centuries, this was a form of bowdlerisation, concerned with some of the more violent elements of nursery rhymes and led to the formation of organisations like the British &quot;Society for Nursery Rhyme Reform&quot;. Psychoanalysts such as Bruno Bettelheim strongly criticised this revisionism, because it weakened their usefulness to both children and adults as ways of symbolically resolving issues and it has been argued that revised versions may not perform the functions of catharsis for children, or allow them to imaginatively deal with violence and danger.

In the late 20th century, revisionism of nursery rhymes became associated with the idea of political correctness. Most attempts to reform nursery rhymes on this basis appear to be either very small scale, light-hearted updating, like Felix Dennis&#x27;s &quot;When Jack Sued Jill – Nursery Rhymes for Modern Times&quot; (2006), or satires written as if from the point of view of political correctness to condemn reform. The controversy in Britain in 1986 over changing the language of &quot;Baa, Baa, Black Sheep&quot; because it was alleged in the popular press, that it was seen as racially dubious, was based only on a rewriting of the rhyme in one private nursery, as an exercise for the children.

==Nursery rhymes and education==
It has been argued that nursery rhymes set to music aid in a child&#x27;s development. In the German &quot;Kniereitvers&quot;, the child is put in mock peril, but the experience is a pleasurable one of care and support, which over time the child comes to command for itself. Research also supports the assertion that music and rhyme increase a child&#x27;s ability in spatial reasoning, which aids mathematics skills.
==See also==
* Children&#x27;s music
* Children&#x27;s song
* Counting-out game
* Fingerplay
* Folklore
* Limerick (poetry)
* List of nursery rhymes
* Oral tradition
==Notes==
==Citations==
Sources
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1123037" start="2" end="15" title="Nursery rhyme" label="nursery rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123037" start="181" end="204" title="Nursery rhyme" label="[[Mother Goose]] rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819933" start="426" end="454" title="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Song Book" label="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Song Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q918651" start="481" end="516" title="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Pretty Song Book" label="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Pretty Song Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197947" start="542" end="553" title="Mary Cooper (publisher)" label="Mary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="573" end="585" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="1433" end="1441" title="scholium" label="scholium"/>
<link wikidata="Q332785" start="1445" end="1452" title="Persius" label="Persius"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1546" end="1551" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354162" start="1802" end="1817" title="Rock-a-bye Baby" label="Rock-a-bye Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="1906" end="1918" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572441" start="2187" end="2197" title="marginalia" label="marginalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143180" start="2276" end="2286" title="Pat-a-cake, pat-a-cake, baker&amp;#x27;s man" label="Pat-a-cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145838" start="2402" end="2421" title="Thomas d&amp;#x27;Urfey" label="Thomas d&amp;#x27;Urfey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811220" start="2723" end="2743" title="To market, to market" label="To market, to market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139508" start="2760" end="2777" title="Cock a doodle doo" label="Cock a doodle doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115303" start="2889" end="2899" title="Jack Sprat" label="Jack Sprat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737488" start="2920" end="2946" title="The Grand Old Duke of York" label="The Grand Old Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445529" start="2967" end="2987" title="Lavender&amp;#x27;s Blue" label="Lavender&amp;#x27;s Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184716" start="3011" end="3028" title="Rain Rain Go Away" label="Rain Rain Go Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819933" start="3079" end="3107" title="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Song Book" label="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Song Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q918651" start="3134" end="3169" title="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Pretty Song Book" label="Tommy Thumb&amp;#x27;s Pretty Song Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197947" start="3195" end="3206" title="Mary Cooper (publisher)" label="Mary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="3334" end="3349" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="3351" end="3363" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="3514" end="3526" title="Mother Goose" label="Mother Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="3671" end="3678" title="riddles" label="riddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="3680" end="3687" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="3690" end="3697" title="ballads" label="ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q350800" start="3708" end="3715" title="Mummers&amp;#x27; play" label="Mummers"/>
<link wikidata="Q719944" start="3879" end="3904" title="As I was going to St Ives" label="As I was going to St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286581" start="4085" end="4098" title="Joseph Ritson" label="Joseph Ritson"/>
<link wikidata="Q63258116" start="4108" end="4136" title="Gammer Gurton&amp;#x27;s Garland" label="Gammer Gurton&amp;#x27;s Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047162" start="4199" end="4213" title="Joseph Johnson (publisher)" label="Joseph Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q515008" start="4338" end="4353" title="Robert Chambers (publisher, born 1802)" label="Robert Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058356" start="4576" end="4605" title="Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star" label="Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4675" end="4698" title="Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star#French &amp;quot;nursery rhyme&amp;quot; version" label="Ah vous dirai-je, Maman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259798" start="4741" end="4752" title="Jane Taylor (poet)" label="Jane Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4909" end="4925" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q57235" start="4941" end="4957" title="Clemens Brentano" label="Clemens Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q70988" start="4962" end="4977" title="Achim von Arnim" label="Achim von Arnim"/>
<link wikidata="Q140453" start="4987" end="5008" title="Des Knaben Wunderhorn" label="Des Knaben Wunderhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q321691" start="5117" end="5142" title="James Halliwell-Phillipps" label="James Halliwell-Phillipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242472" start="5479" end="5498" title="Sabine Baring-Gould" label="Sabine Baring-Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q505827" start="5644" end="5655" title="Andrew Lang" label="Andrew Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364488" start="5847" end="5865" title="Randolph Caldecott" label="Randolph Caldecott"/>
<link wikidata="Q314938" start="5927" end="5941" title="Arthur Rackham" label="Arthur Rackham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154114" start="6041" end="6060" title="Iona and Peter Opie" label="Iona and Peter Opie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699308" start="6168" end="6193" title="John Bellenden Ker Gawler" label="John Bellenden Ker Gawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="6450" end="6466" title="anti-clericalism" label="anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651731" start="7149" end="7171" title="Little Robin Redbreast" label="Little Robin Redbreast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421766" start="7500" end="7514" title="Expurgation" label="bowdlerisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="7688" end="7702" title="Psychoanalysis" label="Psychoanalysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q84386" start="7711" end="7727" title="Bruno Bettelheim" label="Bruno Bettelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q156296" start="7950" end="7959" title="catharsis" label="catharsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="8128" end="8149" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q552300" start="8528" end="8549" title="Baa, Baa, Black Sheep" label="Baa, Baa, Black Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236145" start="8880" end="8892" title="Kniereitvers" label="Kniereitvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478222" start="9141" end="9158" title="spatial visualization ability" label="spatial reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389651" start="9206" end="9227" title="Children&amp;#x27;s music" label="Children&amp;#x27;s music"/>
<link wikidata="Q493169" start="9230" end="9250" title="Children&amp;#x27;s song" label="Children&amp;#x27;s song"/>
<link wikidata="Q336822" start="9253" end="9270" title="Counting-out game" label="Counting-out game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417167" start="9273" end="9283" title="Fingerplay" label="Fingerplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="9286" end="9294" title="Folklore" label="Folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q204698" start="9297" end="9314" title="Limerick (poetry)" label="Limerick (poetry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631527" start="9317" end="9339" title="List of nursery rhymes" label="List of nursery rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="9342" end="9356" title="Oral tradition" label="Oral tradition"/>
</links>
</doc>
