<doc id="19978" wikidata="Q1212" url="?curid=19978" title="Montana">
<text>Montana ( ) is a landlocked state in the Mountain West subregion of the Western United States. It borders Idaho to the west, North Dakota to the east, South Dakota to the southeast, Wyoming to the south, and the Canadian provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan to the north. It is the fourth-largest state by area, but the eighth-least populous state and the third-least densely populated state. Its capital is Helena, while the most populous city is Billings. The western half of the state contains numerous mountain ranges, while the eastern half is characterized by western prairie terrain and badlands, with smaller mountain ranges found throughout the state.

Most of Montana first came under American sovereignty with the Louisiana Purchase from France in 1803 and was explored by the Lewis and Clark Expedition shortly thereafter. Fur trappers followed and were the main economic activity in the area until gold was discovered in 1852. The ensuing gold rush, along with the passage of the Homestead Acts in 1862, brought large numbers of American settlers to Montana. Rapid population growth and development culminated in statehood on November 8, 1889. Mining, particularly around Butte and Helena, would remain the state&#x27;s main economic engine through the mid-20th century.

Montana has no official nickname but several unofficial ones, most notably &quot;Big Sky Country&quot;, &quot;The Treasure State&quot;, &quot;Land of the Shining Mountains&quot;, and &quot;The Last Best Place&quot;. Its economy is primarily based on agriculture, including ranching and cereal grain farming. Other significant economic resources include oil, gas, coal, mining, and lumber. The health care, service, defense, and government sectors are also significant to the state&#x27;s economy. Montana&#x27;s fastest-growing sector is tourism, with 12.6 million tourists (as of 2019) visiting the state each year.

==Etymology==
The name Montana comes from the Spanish word , which in turn comes from the Latin word , meaning &quot;mountain&quot; or more broadly &quot;mountainous country&quot;. (&#x27;Northern Mountain&#x27;) was the name given by early Spanish explorers to the entire mountainous region of the west. The name Montana was added in 1863 to a bill by the United States House Committee on Territories (chaired at the time by James Ashley of Ohio) for the territory that would become Idaho Territory.

The name was changed by representatives Henry Wilson (Massachusetts) and Benjamin F. Harding (Oregon), who complained that Montana had &quot;no meaning&quot;. Alternative names included Jefferson. When Ashley presented a bill to establish a temporary government in 1864 for a new territory to be carved out of Idaho, he again chose Montana Territory. This time, representative Samuel Cox, also of Ohio, objected to the name. Cox complained that the name was a misnomer given that most of the territory was not mountainous, and thought a Native American name would be more appropriate than a Spanish one. Other names, such as Shoshone, were suggested, but the Committee on Territories decided that they had discretion to choose the name, so the original name of Montana was adopted.

==History==
For thousands of years, various indigenous peoples have inhabited the land that is now Montana. Historic tribes encountered by Europeans and settlers from the United States included the Crow in the south-central area, the Cheyenne and Lakota in the southeast, the Blackfeet, Assiniboine, and Gros Ventres in the central and north-central area, and the Kootenai and Salish the (Séliš or &quot;Flathead&quot;) in the west. The (Ql̓ispé or Pend d&#x27;Oreilles) and Kalispel tribes lived near Flathead Lake and the western mountains, respectively. A part of southeastern Montana was used as a corridor between the Crows and the related Hidatsas in North Dakota.

As part of the Missouri River watershed, all of the land in Montana east of the Continental Divide was part of the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, except for a tiny portion in the northeast that is part of the Hudson Bay drainage. Subsequent to and particularly in the decades following the Lewis and Clark Expedition, European, Canadian and American traders operated a fur trade, trading with indigenous peoples in both western and eastern portions of the area. Though the increased interaction between fur traders and indigenous peoples frequently proved to be a profitable partnership, conflicts broke out when indigenous interests were threatened, such as the conflict between American trappers and the Blackfeet. Indigenous peoples in the region were also decimated by diseases introduced by fur traders to which they had no immunity. The trading post Fort Raymond (1807–1811) was constructed in Crow Indian country in 1807. Until the Oregon Treaty of 1846, land west of the continental divide was disputed between the British and U.S. governments and was known as the Oregon Country. The first permanent settlement by Euro-Americans in what today is Montana was St. Mary&#x27;s, established in 1841 near present-day Stevensville. In 1847, Fort Benton was built as the uppermost fur-trading post on the Missouri River. In the 1850s, settlers began moving into the Beaverhead and Big Hole valleys from the Oregon Trail and into the Clark&#x27;s Fork valley.

The first gold discovered in Montana was at Gold Creek near present-day Garrison in 1852. The Gold rush in the region commenced in earnest starting in 1862. A series of major mineral discoveries in the western part of the state found gold, silver, copper, lead, and coal (and later oil) which attracted tens of thousands of miners to the area. The richest of all gold placer diggings was discovered at Alder Gulch, where the town of Virginia City was established. Other rich placer deposits were found at Last Chance Gulch, where the city of Helena now stands, Confederate Gulch, Silver Bow, Emigrant Gulch, and Cooke City. Gold output between 1862 and 1876 reached $144 million, after which silver became even more important. The largest mining operations were at Butte, with important silver deposits and expansive copper deposits.

===Montana territory===

Before the creation of Montana Territory (1864–1889), areas within present-day Montana were part of the Oregon Territory (1848–1859), Washington Territory (1853–1863), Idaho Territory (1863–1864), and Dakota Territory (1861–1864). Montana Territory became a territory of the United States on May26, 1864. The first territorial capital was located at Bannack. Sidney Edgerton served as the first territorial governor. The capital moved to Virginia City in 1865 and to Helena in 1875. In 1870, the non-Indian population of the Montana Territory was 20,595. The Montana Historical Society, founded on February2, 1865, in Virginia City, is the oldest such institution west of the Mississippi (excluding Louisiana). In 1869 and 1870 respectively, the Cook–Folsom–Peterson and the Washburn–Langford–Doane Expeditions were launched from Helena into the Upper Yellowstone region. The extraordinary discoveries and reports from these expeditions led to the creation of Yellowstone National Park in 1872.

===Conflicts===
As settlers began populating Montana from the 1850s through the 1870s, disputes with Native Americans ensued, primarily over land ownership and control. In 1855, Washington Territorial Governor Isaac Stevens negotiated the Hellgate Treaty between the United States government and the Salish, Pend d&#x27;Oreille, and Kootenai people of western Montana, which established boundaries for the tribal nations. The treaty was ratified in 1859. While the treaty established what later became the Flathead Indian Reservation, trouble with interpreters and confusion over the terms of the treaty led settlers to believe the Bitterroot Valley was opened to settlement, but the tribal nations disputed those provisions. The Salish remained in the Bitterroot Valley until 1891.

The first U.S. Army post established in Montana was Camp Cooke in 1866, on the Missouri River, to protect steamboat traffic to Fort Benton. More than a dozen additional military outposts were established in the state. Pressure over land ownership and control increased due to discoveries of gold in various parts of Montana and surrounding states. Major battles occurred in Montana during Red Cloud&#x27;s War, the Great Sioux War of 1876, and the Nez Perce War and in conflicts with Piegan Blackfeet. The most notable were the Marias Massacre (1870), Battle of the Little Bighorn (1876), Battle of the Big Hole (1877), and Battle of Bear Paw (1877). The last recorded conflict in Montana between the U.S. Army and Native Americans occurred in 1887 during the Battle of Crow Agency in the Big Horn country. Native survivors who had signed treaties were generally required to move onto reservations.
Simultaneously with these conflicts, bison, a keystone species and the primary protein source that Native people had survived on for many centuries, were being destroyed. Experts estimate that around 13 million bison roamed Montana in 1870. In 1875, General Philip Sheridan pleaded to a joint session of Congress to authorize the slaughtering of bison herds to deprive Native people of their source of food. By 1884, commercial hunting had brought bison to the verge of extinction; only about 325 bison remained in the entire United States.

===Cattle ranching===
Cattle ranching has been central to Montana&#x27;s history and economy since Johnny Grant began wintering cattle in the Deer Lodge Valley in the 1850s and traded cattle fattened in fertile Montana valleys with emigrants on the Oregon Trail. Nelson Story brought the first Texas Longhorn cattle into the territory in 1866. Granville Stuart, Samuel Hauser, and Andrew J. Davis started a major open-range cattle operation in Fergus County in 1879. The Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site in Deer Lodge is maintained today as a link to the ranching style of the late 19th century. Operated by the National Park Service, it is a working ranch.

===Railroads===
Tracks of the Northern Pacific Railroad (NPR) reached Montana from the west in 1882 and from the east in 1883. However, the railroad played a major role in sparking tensions with Native American tribes in the 1870s. Jay Cooke, the NPR president, launched major surveys into the Yellowstone valley in 1871, 1872, and 1873, which were challenged forcefully by the Sioux under chief Sitting Bull. These clashes, in part, contributed to the Panic of 1873, a financial crisis that delayed the construction of the railroad into Montana. Surveys in 1874, 1875, and 1876 helped spark the Great Sioux War of 1876. The transcontinental NPR was completed on September 8, 1883, at Gold Creek.

In 1881, the Utah and Northern Railway, a branch line of the Union Pacific, completed a narrow-gauge line from northern Utah to Butte. A number of smaller spur lines operated in Montana from 1881 into the 20th century, including the Oregon Short Line, Montana Railroad, and Milwaukee Road.

Tracks of the Great Northern Railroad (GNR) reached eastern Montana in 1887 and when they reached the northern Rocky Mountains in 1890, the GNR became a significant promoter of tourism to Glacier National Park region. The transcontinental GNR was completed on January 6, 1893, at Scenic, Washington and is known as the Hi Line, being the northernmost transcontinental rail line in the United States.

===Statehood===
Under Territorial Governor Thomas Meagher, Montanans held a constitutional convention in 1866 in a failed bid for statehood. A second constitutional convention held in Helena in 1884 produced a constitution ratified 3:1 by Montana citizens in November 1884. For political reasons, Congress did not approve Montana statehood until February 1889 and President Grover Cleveland signed an omnibus bill granting statehood to Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Washington once the appropriate state constitutions were crafted. In July 1889, Montanans convened their third constitutional convention and produced a constitution accepted by the people and the federal government. On November 8, 1889, President Benjamin Harrison proclaimed Montana the union&#x27;s 41st state. The first state governor was Joseph K. Toole. In the 1880s, Helena (the state capital) had more millionaires per capita than any other United States city.

===Homesteading===
The Homestead Act of 1862 provided free land to settlers who could claim and &quot;prove-up&quot; of federal land in the Midwest and western United States. Montana did not see a large influx of immigrants from this act because 160 acres were usually insufficient to support a family in the arid territory. The first homestead claim under the act in Montana was made by David Carpenter near Helena in 1868. The first claim by a woman was made near Warm Springs Creek by Gwenllian Evans, the daughter of Deer Lodge Montana pioneer, Morgan Evans. By 1880, farms were in the more verdant valleys of central and western Montana, but few were on the eastern plains.

The Desert Land Act of 1877 was passed to allow settlement of arid lands in the west and allotted to settlers for a fee of $.25 per acre and a promise to irrigate the land. After three years, a fee of one dollar per acre would be paid and the settler would own the land. This act brought mostly cattle and sheep ranchers into Montana, many of whom grazed their herds on the Montana prairie for three years, did little to irrigate the land and then abandoned it without paying the final fees. Some farmers came with the arrival of the Great Northern and Northern Pacific Railroads throughout the 1880s and 1890s, though in relatively small numbers.

In the early 1900s, James J. Hill of the Great Northern began to promote settlement in the Montana prairie to fill his trains with settlers and goods. Other railroads followed suit. In 1902, the Reclamation Act was passed, allowing irrigation projects to be built in Montana&#x27;s eastern river valleys. In 1909, Congress passed the Enlarged Homestead Act that expanded the amount of free land from per family and in 1912 reduced the time to &quot;prove up&quot; on a claim to three years. In 1916, the Stock-Raising Homestead Act allowed homesteads of 640 acres in areas unsuitable for irrigation. This combination of advertising and changes in the Homestead Act drew tens of thousands of homesteaders, lured by free land, with World War I bringing particularly high wheat prices. In addition, Montana was going through a temporary period of higher-than-average precipitation. Homesteaders arriving in this period were known as &quot;honyockers&quot;, or &quot;scissorbills&quot;. The word &quot;honyocker&quot; possibly derived from the ethnic slur &quot;hunyak&quot; and was applied in a derisive manner at homesteaders, who were perceived as being &quot;greenhorns&quot;, &quot;new at his business&quot;, or &quot;unprepared&quot;. However, most of these new settlers had farming experience, though many did not.

However, farmers faced a number of problems. Massive debt was one. Also, most settlers were from wetter regions, unprepared for the dry climate, lack of trees, and scarce water resources. In addition, small homesteads of fewer than were unsuited to the environment. Weather and agricultural conditions are much harsher and drier west of the 100th meridian. Then, the droughts of 1917–1921 proved devastating. Many people left, and half the banks in the state went bankrupt as a result of providing mortgages that could not be repaid. As a result, farm sizes increased while the number of farms decreased.

By 1910, homesteaders filed claims on over five million acres, and by 1923, over 93 million acres were farmed. In 1910, the Great Falls land office alone had more than a thousand homestead filings per month, and at the peak of 1917–1918 it had 14,000 new homesteads each year. Significant drops occurred following the drought in 1919.

===Montana and World War I===
As World War I broke out, Jeannette Rankin, representative of Montana and the first woman in the United States to be a member of Congress, voted against the United States&#x27; declaration of war. Her actions were widely criticized in Montana, where support for the war and patriotism was strong. In 1917–1918, due to a miscalculation of Montana&#x27;s population, about 40,000 Montanans, 10% of the state&#x27;s population, volunteered or were drafted into the armed forces. This represented a manpower contribution to the war that was 25% higher than any other state on a per capita basis. Around 1,500 Montanans died as a result of the war and 2,437 were wounded, also higher than any other state on a per capita basis. Montana&#x27;s Remount station in Miles City provided 10,000 cavalry horses for the war, more than any other Army post in the country. The war created a boom for Montana mining, lumber, and farming interests, as demand for war materials and food increased.

In June 1917, the U.S. Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917, which was extended by the Sedition Act of 1918. In February 1918, the Montana legislature had passed the Montana Sedition Act, which was a model for the federal version. In combination, these laws criminalized criticism of the U.S. government, military, or symbols through speech or other means. The Montana Act led to the arrest of more than 200 individuals and the conviction of 78, mostly of German or Austrian descent. More than 40 spent time in prison. In May 2006, then-Governor Brian Schweitzer posthumously issued full pardons for all those convicted of violating the Montana Sedition Act.

The Montanans who opposed U.S. entry into the war included immigrant groups of German and Irish heritage, as well as pacifist Anabaptist people such as the Hutterites and Mennonites, many of whom were also of Germanic heritage. In turn, pro-War groups formed, such as the Montana Council of Defense, created by Governor Samuel V. Stewart and local &quot;loyalty committees&quot;.

War sentiment was complicated by labor issues. The Anaconda Copper Company, which was at its historic peak of copper production, was an extremely powerful force in Montana, but it also faced criticism and opposition from socialist newspapers and unions struggling to make gains for their members. In Butte, a multiethnic community with a significant European immigrant population, labor unions, particularly the newly formed Metal Mine Workers&#x27; Union, opposed the war on grounds it mostly profited large lumber and mining interests. In the wake of ramped-up mine production and the Speculator Mine disaster in June 1917, Industrial Workers of the World organizer Frank Little arrived in Butte to organize miners. He gave some speeches with inflammatory antiwar rhetoric. On August 1, 1917, he was dragged from his boarding house by masked vigilantes, and hanged from a railroad trestle, considered a lynching. Little&#x27;s murder and the strikes that followed resulted in the National Guard being sent to Butte to restore order. Overall, anti-German and antilabor sentiment increased and created a movement that led to the passage of the Montana Sedition Act the following February. In addition, the Council of Defense was made a state agency with the power to prosecute and punish individuals deemed in violation of the Act. The council also passed rules limiting public gatherings and prohibiting the speaking of German in public.

In the wake of the legislative action in 1918, emotions rose. U.S. Attorney Burton K. Wheeler and several district court judges who hesitated to prosecute or convict people brought up on charges were strongly criticized. Wheeler was brought before the Council of Defense, though he avoided formal proceedings, and a district court judge from Forsyth was impeached. Burnings of German-language books and several near-hangings occurred. The prohibition on speaking German remained in effect into the early 1920s. Complicating the wartime struggles, the 1918 influenza epidemic claimed the lives of more than 5,000 Montanans. The suppression of civil liberties that occurred led some historians to dub this period &quot;Montana&#x27;s Agony&quot;.

===Depression era===
An economic depression began in Montana after World War I and lasted through the Great Depression until the beginning of World War II. This caused great hardship for farmers, ranchers, and miners.

===Montana and World War II===


By the time the U.S. entered World War II on December 8, 1941, many Montanans had enlisted in the military to escape the poor national economy of the previous decade. Another 40,000-plus Montanans entered the armed forces in the first year following the declaration of war, and more than 57,000 joined up before the war ended. These numbers constituted about ten percent of the state&#x27;s population, and Montana again contributed one of the highest numbers of soldiers per capita of any state. Many Native Americans were among those who served, including soldiers from the Crow Nation who became Code Talkers. At least 1,500 Montanans died in the war. Montana also was the training ground for the First Special Service Force or &quot;Devil&#x27;s Brigade&quot;, a joint U.S.-Canadian commando-style force that trained at Fort William Henry Harrison for experience in mountainous and winter conditions before deployment. Air bases were built in Great Falls, Lewistown, Cut Bank, and Glasgow, some of which were used as staging areas to prepare planes to be sent to allied forces in the Soviet Union. During the war, about 30 Japanese Fu-Go balloon bombs were documented to have landed in Montana, though no casualties nor major forest fires were attributed to them.

In 1940, Jeannette Rankin was again elected to Congress. In 1941, as she had in 1917, she voted against the United States&#x27; declaration of war after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Hers was the only vote against the war, and in the wake of public outcry over her vote, Rankin required police protection for a time. Other pacifists tended to be those from &quot;peace churches&quot; who generally opposed war. Many individuals claiming conscientious objector status from throughout the U.S. were sent to Montana during the war as smokejumpers and for other forest fire-fighting duties.

In 1942, the U.S. Army established Camp Rimini near Helena for the purpose of training sled dogs in winter weather.

===Other military===
During World War II, the planned battleship USS &quot;Montana&quot; was named in honor of the state but it was never completed. Montana is the only one of the first 48 states lacking a completed battleship being named for it. Alaska and Hawaii have both had nuclear submarines named after them. Montana is the only state in the union without a modern naval ship named in its honor. However, in August 2007, Senator Jon Tester asked that a submarine be christened USS &quot;Montana&quot;. Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus announced on September 3, 2015, that &quot;Virginia&quot; Class attack submarine SSN-794 will become the second commissioned warship to bear the name.

===Cold War Montana===
In the post-World War II Cold War era, Montana became host to U.S. Air Force Military Air Transport Service (1947) for airlift training in C-54 Skymasters and eventually, in 1953 Strategic Air Command air and missile forces were based at Malmstrom Air Force Base in Great Falls. The base also hosted the 29th Fighter Interceptor Squadron, Air Defense Command from 1953 to 1968. In December 1959, Malmstrom AFB was selected as the home of the new Minuteman I intercontinental ballistic missile. The first operational missiles were in place and ready in early 1962. In late 1962, missiles assigned to the 341st Strategic Missile Wing played a major role in the Cuban Missile Crisis. When the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba, President John F. Kennedy said the Soviets backed down because they knew he had an &quot;ace in the hole&quot;, referring directly to the Minuteman missiles in Montana. Montana eventually became home to the largest ICBM field in the U.S. covering .

==Geography==


Montana is one of the eight Mountain States, located in the north of the region known as the Western United States. It borders North Dakota and South Dakota to the east. Wyoming is to the south, Idaho is to the west and southwest, and the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan are to the north, making it the only state to border three Canadian provinces.

With an area of , Montana is slightly larger than Japan or Germany. It is the fourth-largest state in the United States after Alaska, Texas, and California, and the largest landlocked state.

===Topography===
The state&#x27;s topography is roughly defined by the Continental Divide, which splits much of the state into distinct eastern and western regions. Most of Montana&#x27;s hundred or more named mountain ranges are in the state&#x27;s western half, most of which is geologically and geographically part of the northern Rocky Mountains. The Absaroka and Beartooth ranges in the state&#x27;s south-central part are technically part of the Central Rocky Mountains. The Rocky Mountain Front is a significant feature in the state&#x27;s north-central portion, and isolated island ranges that interrupt the prairie landscape common in the central and eastern parts of the state. About 60 percent of the state is prairie, part of the northern Great Plains.

The Bitterroot Mountains—one of the longest continuous ranges in the Rocky Mountain chain from Alaska to Mexico—along with smaller ranges, including the Coeur d&#x27;Alene Mountains and the Cabinet Mountains, divide the state from Idaho. The southern third of the Bitterroot range blends into the Continental Divide. Other major mountain ranges west of the divide include the Cabinet Mountains, the Anaconda Range, the Missions, the Garnet Range, the Sapphire Mountains, and the Flint Creek Range.

The divide&#x27;s northern section, where the mountains rapidly give way to prairie, is part of the Rocky Mountain Front. The front is most pronounced in the Lewis Range, located primarily in Glacier National Park. Due to the configuration of mountain ranges in Glacier National Park, the Northern Divide (which begins in Alaska&#x27;s Seward Peninsula) crosses this region and turns east in Montana at Triple Divide Peak. It causes the Waterton River, Belly, and Saint Mary rivers to flow north into Alberta, Canada. There they join the Saskatchewan River, which ultimately empties into Hudson Bay.

East of the divide, several roughly parallel ranges cover the state&#x27;s southern part, including the Gravelly Range, Madison Range, Gallatin Range, Absaroka Mountains, and Beartooth Mountains. The Beartooth Plateau is the largest continuous land mass over high in the continental United States. It contains the state&#x27;s highest point, Granite Peak, high. North of these ranges are the Big Belt Mountains, Bridger Mountains, Tobacco Roots, and several island ranges, including the Crazy Mountains and Little Belt Mountains.

Between many mountain ranges are several rich river valleys. The Big Hole, Bitterroot, Gallatin, Flathead, and Paradise Valleys have extensive agricultural resources and multiple opportunities for tourism and recreation.

East and north of this transition zone are the expansive and sparsely populated Northern Plains, with tableland prairies, smaller island mountain ranges, and badlands. The isolated island ranges east of the Divide include the Bear Paw Mountains, Bull Mountains, Castle Mountains, Crazy Mountains, Highwood Mountains, Judith Mountains, Little Belt Mountains, Little Rocky Mountains, the Pryor Mountains, Little Snowy Mountains, Big Snowy Mountains, Sweet Grass Hills, and—in the state&#x27;s southeastern corner near Ekalaka—the Long Pines. Many of these isolated eastern ranges were created about 120 to 66 million years ago when magma welling up from the interior cracked and bowed the earth&#x27;s surface here.

The area east of the divide in the state&#x27;s north-central portion is known for the Missouri Breaks and other significant rock formations. Three buttes south of Great Falls are major landmarks: Cascade, Crown, Square, Shaw, and Buttes. Known as laccoliths, they formed when igneous rock protruded through cracks in the sedimentary rock. The underlying surface consists of sandstone and shale. Surface soils in the area are highly diverse, and greatly affected by the local geology, whether glaciated plain, intermountain basin, mountain foothills, or tableland. Foothill regions are often covered in weathered stone or broken slate, or consist of uncovered bare rock (usually igneous, quartzite, sandstone, or shale). The soil of intermountain basins usually consists of clay, gravel, sand, silt, and volcanic ash, much of it laid down by lakes which covered the region during the Oligocene 33 to 23 million years ago. Tablelands are often topped with argillite gravel and weathered quartzite, occasionally underlain by shale. The glaciated plains are generally covered in clay, gravel, sand, and silt left by the proglacial Lake Great Falls or by moraines or gravel-covered former lake basins left by the Wisconsin glaciation 85,000 to 11,000 years ago. Farther east, areas such as Makoshika State Park near Glendive and Medicine Rocks State Park near Ekalaka contain some of the most scenic badlands regions in the state.

The Hell Creek Formation in Northeast Montana is a major source of dinosaur fossils. Paleontologist Jack Horner of the Museum of the Rockies in Bozeman brought this formation to the world&#x27;s attention with several major finds.

====Rivers, lakes and reservoirs====
Montana has thousands of named rivers and creeks, of which are known for &quot;blue-ribbon&quot; trout fishing. Montana&#x27;s water resources provide for recreation, hydropower, crop and forage irrigation, mining, and water for human consumption.

Montana is one of few geographic areas in the world whose rivers form parts of three major watersheds (i.e. where two continental divides intersect). Its rivers feed the Pacific Ocean, the Gulf of Mexico, and Hudson Bay. The watersheds divide at Triple Divide Peak in Glacier National Park. If Hudson Bay is considered part of the Arctic Ocean, Triple Divide Peak is the only place on Earth with drainage to three different oceans.

=====Pacific Ocean drainage basin=====
All waters in Montana west of the divide flow into the Columbia River. The Clark Fork of the Columbia (not to be confused with the Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone River) rises near Butte and flows northwest to Missoula, where it is joined by the Blackfoot River and Bitterroot River. Farther downstream, it is joined by the Flathead River before entering Idaho near Lake Pend Oreille. The Pend Oreille River forms the outflow of Lake Pend Oreille. The Pend Oreille River joined the Columbia River, which flows to the Pacific Ocean—making the long Clark Fork/Pend Oreille (considered a single river system) the longest river in the Rocky Mountains. The Clark Fork discharges the greatest volume of water of any river exiting the state. The Kootenai River in northwest Montana is another major tributary of the Columbia.

=====Gulf of Mexico drainage basin=====
East of the divide the Missouri River, which is formed by the confluence of the Jefferson, Madison, and Gallatin Rivers near Three Forks, flows due north through the west-central part of the state to Great Falls. From this point, it then flows generally east through fairly flat agricultural land and the Missouri Breaks to Fort Peck reservoir. The stretch of river between Fort Benton and the Fred Robinson Bridge at the western boundary of Fort Peck Reservoir was designated a National Wild and Scenic River in 1976. The Missouri enters North Dakota near Fort Union, having drained more than half the land area of Montana (). Nearly one-third of the Missouri River in Montana lies behind 10 dams: Toston, Canyon Ferry, Hauser, Holter, Black Eagle, Rainbow, Cochrane, Ryan, Morony, and Fort Peck. Other major Montana tributaries of the Missouri include the Smith, Milk, Marias, Judith, and Musselshell Rivers. Montana also claims the disputed title of possessing the world&#x27;s shortest river, the Roe River, just outside Great Falls. Through the Missouri, these rivers ultimately join the Mississippi River and flow into the Gulf of Mexico.

Hell Roaring Creek begins in southern Montana, and when combined with the Red Rock, Beaverhead, Jefferson, Missouri, and Mississippi River, is the longest river in North America and the fourth longest river in the world.

The Yellowstone River rises on the Continental Divide near Younts Peak in Wyoming&#x27;s Teton Wilderness. It flows north through Yellowstone National Park, enters Montana near Gardiner, and passes through the Paradise Valley to Livingston. It then flows northeasterly across the state through Billings, Miles City, Glendive, and Sidney. The Yellowstone joins the Missouri in North Dakota just east of Fort Union. It is the longest undammed, free-flowing river in the contiguous United States, and drains about a quarter of Montana (). Major tributaries of the Yellowstone include the Boulder, Stillwater, Clarks Fork, Bighorn, Tongue, and Powder Rivers.

=====Hudson Bay drainage basin=====
The Northern Divide turns east in Montana at Triple Divide Peak, causing the Waterton, Belly, and Saint Mary Rivers to flow north into Alberta. There they join the Saskatchewan River, which ultimately empties into Hudson Bay.

=====Lakes and reservoirs=====
Montana has some 3,000 named lakes and reservoirs, including Flathead Lake, the largest natural freshwater lake in the western United States. Other major lakes include Whitefish Lake in the Flathead Valley and Lake McDonald and St. Mary Lake in Glacier National Park. The largest reservoir in the state is Fort Peck Reservoir on the Missouri river, which is contained by the second largest earthen dam and largest hydraulically filled dam in the world. Other major reservoirs include Hungry Horse on the Flathead River; Lake Koocanusa on the Kootenai River; Lake Elwell on the Marias River; Clark Canyon on the Beaverhead River; Yellowtail on the Bighorn River, Canyon Ferry, Hauser, Holter, Rainbow; and Black Eagle on the Missouri River.

===Flora and fauna===

Vegetation of the state includes lodgepole pine, ponderosa pine, Douglas fir, larch, spruce, aspen, birch, red cedar, hemlock, ash, alder, rocky mountain maple and cottonwood trees. Forests cover about 25% of the state. Flowers native to Montana include asters, bitterroots, daisies, lupins, poppies, primroses, columbine, lilies, orchids, and dryads. Several species of sagebrush and cactus and many species of grasses are common. Many species of mushrooms and lichens are also found in the state.

Montana is home to diverse fauna including 14 amphibian, 90 fish, 117 mammal, 20 reptile, and 427 bird species. Additionally, more than 10,000 invertebrate species are present, including 180 mollusks and 30 crustaceans. Montana has the largest grizzly bear population in the lower 48 states. Montana hosts five federally endangered species–black-footed ferret, whooping crane, least tern, pallid sturgeon, and white sturgeon and seven threatened species including the grizzly bear, Canadian lynx, and bull trout. Since re-introduction the gray wolf population has stabilized at about 900 animals, and they have been delisted as endangered. The Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks manages fishing and hunting seasons for at least 17 species of game fish, including seven species of trout, walleye, and smallmouth bass and at least 29 species of game birds and animals including ring-neck pheasant, grey partridge, elk, pronghorn antelope, mule deer, whitetail deer, gray wolf, and bighorn sheep.

===Protected lands===

Montana contains Glacier National Park, &quot;The Crown of the Continent&quot;, and parts of Yellowstone National Park, including three of the park&#x27;s five entrances. Other federally recognized sites include the Little Bighorn National Monument, Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area, and Big Hole National Battlefield. The CSKT Bison Range is managed by the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes and the American Prairie is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization.

Federal and state agencies administer approximately , or 35 percent of Montana&#x27;s land. The U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service administers of forest land in ten National Forests. There are approximately of wilderness in 12 separate wilderness areas that are part of the National Wilderness Preservation System established by the Wilderness Act of 1964. The U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Land Management controls of federal land. The U.S. Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service administers of 1.1 million acres of National Wildlife Refuges and waterfowl production areas in Montana. The U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Reclamation administers approximately of land and water surface in the state. The Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks operate approximately of state parks and access points on the state&#x27;s rivers and lakes. The Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation manages of School Trust Land ceded by the federal government under the Land Ordinance of 1785 to the state in 1889 when Montana was granted statehood. These lands are managed by the state for the benefit of public schools and institutions in the state.
Areas managed by the National Park Service include:
* Big Hole National Battlefield near Wisdom
* Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area near Fort Smith
* Glacier National Park
* Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site at Deer Lodge
* Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail
* Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument near Crow Agency
* Nez Perce National Historical Park
* Yellowstone National Park

===Climate===
Montana is a large state with considerable variation in geography, topography and elevation, and the climate is equally varied. The state spans from below the 45th parallel (the line equidistant between the equator and North Pole) to the 49th parallel, and elevations range from under to nearly above sea level. The western half is mountainous, interrupted by numerous large valleys. Eastern Montana comprises plains and badlands, broken by hills and isolated mountain ranges, and has a semi-arid, continental climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;BSk&quot;). The Continental Divide has a considerable effect on the climate, as it restricts the flow of warmer air from the Pacific from moving east, and drier continental air from moving west. The area west of the divide has a modified northern Pacific Coast climate, with milder winters, cooler summers, less wind, and a longer growing season. Low clouds and fog often form in the valleys west of the divide in winter, but this is rarely seen in the east.

Average daytime temperatures vary from in January to in July. The variation in geography leads to great variation in temperature. The highest observed summer temperature was at Glendive on July 20, 1893, and Medicine Lake on July 5, 1937. Throughout the state, summer nights are generally cool and pleasant. Extreme hot weather is less common above . Snowfall has been recorded in all months of the year in the more mountainous areas of central and western Montana, though it is rare in July and August.

The coldest temperature on record for Montana is also the coldest temperature for the contiguous United States. On January 20, 1954, was recorded at a gold mining camp near Rogers Pass. Temperatures vary greatly on cold nights, and Helena, to the southeast had a low of only on the same date, and an all-time record low of . Winter cold spells are usually the result of cold continental air coming south from Canada. The front is often well defined, causing a large temperature drop in a 24-hour period. Conversely, air flow from the southwest results in &quot;chinooks&quot;. These steady (or more) winds can suddenly warm parts of Montana, especially areas just to the east of the mountains, where temperatures sometimes rise up to for 10 days or longer.

Loma is the site of the most extreme recorded temperature change in a 24-hour period in the United States. On January 15, 1972, a chinook wind blew in and the temperature rose from ; a 103 °F (49.4 °C) degree difference.

Average annual precipitation is , but great variations are seen. The mountain ranges block the moist Pacific air, holding moisture in the western valleys, and creating rain shadows to the east. Heron, in the west, receives the most precipitation, . On the eastern (leeward) side of a mountain range, the valleys are much drier; Lonepine averages , and Deer Lodge of precipitation. The mountains can receive over , for example the Grinnell Glacier in Glacier National Park gets . An area southwest of Belfry averaged only over a 16-year period. Most of the larger cities get of snow each year. Mountain ranges can accumulate of snow during a winter. Heavy snowstorms may occur from September through May, though most snow falls from November to March.

The climate has become warmer in Montana, with the average temperature rising almost 2.5 °F (1.3 °C) since 1900 at a rate higher than the continental U.S. average, and continues to do so. The glaciers in Glacier National Park have receded and are predicted to melt away completely in a few decades. Many Montana cities set heat records during July 2007, the hottest month ever recorded in Montana. Winters are warmer, too, and have fewer cold spells. Previously, these cold spells had killed off bark beetles, but these are now attacking the forests of western Montana. The warmer winters in the region have allowed various species to expand their ranges and proliferate. The combination of warmer weather, attack by beetles, and mismanagement has led to a substantial increase in the severity of forest fires in Montana. According to a study done for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency by the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Science, parts of Montana will experience a 200% increase in area burned by wildfires and an 80% increase in related air pollution.

The table below lists average temperatures for the warmest and coldest month for Montana&#x27;s seven largest cities. The coldest month varies between December and January depending on location, although figures are similar throughout.

===Antipodes===
Montana is one of only two contiguous states (along with Colorado) that are antipodal to land. The Kerguelen Islands are antipodal to the Montana–Saskatchewan–Alberta border. No towns are precisely antipodal to Kerguelen, though Chester and Rudyard are close.

===Cities and towns===

Montana has 56 counties and a total of 364 &quot;places&quot; as defined by the United States Census Bureau; the latter comprising 129 incorporated places and 235 census-designated places. The incorporated places are made up of 52 cities, 75 towns, and two consolidated city-counties.

Montana has one city, Billings, with a population over 100,000; and three cities with populations over 50,000: Missoula, Great Falls and Bozeman. The state also has five Micropolitan Statistical Areas, centered on Bozeman, Butte, Helena, Kalispell and Havre.

Collectively all of these areas (excluding Havre) are known informally as the &quot;big seven&quot;, as they are consistently the seven largest communities in the state (their rank order in terms of population is Billings, Missoula, Great Falls, Bozeman, Butte, Helena and Kalispell, according to the 2010 U.S. census). Based on 2013 census numbers, they contain 35 percent of Montana&#x27;s population, and the counties in which they are located are home to 62 percent of the state&#x27;s population.

The geographic center of population of Montana is in sparsely populated Meagher County, in the town of White Sulphur Springs.

==Demographics==

The United States Census Bureau states that the population of Montana was 1,132,812 on July 1, 2023, a 4.5% increase since the 2020 census. The 2020 census put Montana&#x27;s population at 1,084,225. During the first decade of the new century, growth was mainly concentrated in Montana&#x27;s seven largest counties, with the highest percentage growth in Gallatin County, which had a 32.9% increase in its population from 2010 to 2020. The city having the largest percentage growth was Kalispell, with 40.1%, and the city with the largest increase in actual residents was Billings, with an increase in population of 12,946 from 2010 to 2020.

On January 3, 2012, the Census and Economic Information Center (CEIC) at the Montana Department of Commerce estimated Montana had hit the one million population mark sometime between November and December 2011.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 1,585 homeless people in Montana.

In 2018, the top countries of origin for Montana&#x27;s immigrants were Canada, Mexico, Germany, China, and Vietnam.

According to the 2020 census, 88.9% of the population was White (87.8% non-Hispanic White), 6.7% American Indian and Alaska Native, 4.1% Hispanics and Latinos of any race, 0.9% Asian, 0.6% Black or African American, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, and 2.8% from two or more races. The largest European ancestry groups in Montana as of 2010 were: German (27.0%), Irish (14.8%), English (12.6%), Norwegian (10.9%), French (4.7%), and Italian (3.4%).

===Intrastate demographics===
Montana has a larger Native American population, both numerically and as a percentage, than most U.S. states. Ranked 45th in population (by the 2010 census) it is 19th in native people, who are 6.5% of the state&#x27;s population—the sixth-highest percentage of all fifty states. Of Montana&#x27;s 56 counties, Native Americans constitute a majority in three: Big Horn, Glacier, and Roosevelt. Other counties with large Native American populations include Blaine, Cascade, Hill, Missoula, and Yellowstone Counties. The state&#x27;s Native American population grew by 27.9% between 1980 and 1990 (at a time when Montana&#x27;s entire population rose 1.6%), and by 18.5 percent between 2000 and 2010.

As of 2009, almost two-thirds of Native Americans in the state live in urban areas. Of Montana&#x27;s 20 largest cities, Polson (15.7%), Havre (13.0%), Great Falls (5.0%), Billings (4.4%), and Anaconda (3.1%) had the greatest percentages of Native American residents in 2010. Billings (4,619), Great Falls (2,942), Missoula (1,838), Havre (1,210), and Polson (706) have the most Native Americans living there. The state&#x27;s seven reservations include more than 12 distinct Native American ethnolinguistic groups.

While the largest European American population in Montana is German (which may also include Austrian and Swiss, among other groups), pockets of significant Scandinavian ancestry are prevalent in some of the farming-dominated northern and eastern prairie regions, parallel to nearby regions of North Dakota and Minnesota. Farmers of Irish, Scots, and English roots also settled in Montana. The historically mining-oriented communities of western Montana such as Butte have a wider range of European American ethnicity; Finns, Eastern Europeans and especially Irish settlers left an indelible mark on the area, as well as people originally from British mining regions such as Cornwall, Devon, and Wales. The nearby city of Helena, also founded as a mining camp, had a similar mix in addition to a small Chinatown. 

The Hutterites, an Anabaptist sect originally from Switzerland, settled in Montana, and today is second only to South Dakota in U.S. Hutterite population, with several colonies across the state. Beginning in the mid-1990s, the state also had an influx of Amish, who moved to Montana from increasingly urbanized areas of Ohio and Pennsylvania.

Montana&#x27;s Hispanic population is concentrated in the Billings area in south-central Montana, where many of Montana&#x27;s Mexican Americans have been in the state for generations. Great Falls has the highest percentage of African Americans in its population, although Billings has more African American residents than Great Falls.

The Chinese in Montana, while a low percentage today, have been a historically important presence. About 2,000–3,000 Chinese miners were in the mining areas of Montana by 1870, and 2,500 in 1890. However, public opinion grew increasingly negative towards them in the 1890s, and nearly half of the state&#x27;s Asian population left by 1900. Today, the Missoula area has a large Hmong population and the nearly 3,000 Montanans who claim Filipino ancestry are the largest Asian American group in the state.

In the 2015 United States census estimates, Montana had the second-highest percentage of U.S. military veterans living there. Only the state of Alaska had a higher percentage, with roughly 14 percent of Alaska&#x27;s population over 18 being veterans, with Montana having roughly 12 percent of its population over 18 being veterans.

===Native Americans===

In 2020, 67,612 people in Montana self-identified as Native American, while 100,578 did in combination with one or more other races. Many treaties and federal legislation, including the Indian Appropriations Act (1851), the Dawes Act (1887), and the Indian Reorganization Act (1934), enabled the creation of seven Indian reservations, encompassing 11 federally recognized tribal nations, in Montana. A 12th nation, the Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Great Falls, was recognized by the federal government in December, 2019. The Blackfeet nation is headquartered on the Blackfeet Indian Reservation (1851) in Browning, Crow on the Crow Indian Reservation (1868) in Crow Agency, Confederated Salish and Kootenai and Pend d&#x27;Oreille on the Flathead Indian Reservation (1855) in Pablo, Northern Cheyenne on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation (1884) at Lame Deer, Assiniboine and Gros Ventre on the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation (1888) in Fort Belknap Agency, Assiniboine and Sioux on the Fort Peck Indian Reservation (1888) at Poplar, and Chippewa-Cree on the Rocky Boy&#x27;s Indian Reservation (1916) near Box Elder. Approximately 63% of all Native people live off the reservations, concentrated in the larger Montana cities, with the largest concentration of urban Indians in Great Falls. The state also has a small Métis population and 1990 census data indicated that people from as many as 275 different tribes lived in Montana.

Montana&#x27;s Constitution specifically reads, &quot;the state recognizes the distinct and unique cultural heritage of the American Indians and is committed in its educational goals to the preservation of their cultural integrity.&quot; It is the only state in the U.S. with such a constitutional mandate. The Indian Education for All Act was passed in 1999 to provide funding for this mandate and ensure implementation. It mandates that all schools teach American Indian history, culture, and heritage from preschool through college. For kindergarten through 12th-grade students, an &quot;Indian Education for All&quot; curriculum from the Montana Office of Public Instruction is available free to all schools. The state was sued in 2004 because of lack of funding, and the state has increased its support of the program. South Dakota passed similar legislation in 2007, and Wisconsin was working to strengthen its own program based on this model—and the current practices of Montana&#x27;s schools. Each Indian reservation in the state has a fully accredited tribal college. The University of Montana &quot;was the first to establish dual admission agreements with all of the tribal colleges and as such it was the first institution in the nation to actively facilitate student transfer from the tribal colleges.&quot;

What is now Montana was at various times inhabited by tribes such as the Crow, the Blackfeet, the Assiniboine, the Gros Ventre, the Kootenai, the Flathead Salish and Kalispel, the Kiowa, the Sioux, the Arapaho, the Arikara, the Bannock, the Cheyenne, the Ojibwe, the Hidatsa, the Cree, the Nez Perce, the Mandan, the Shoshone and the Spokane. Many Montanans also reported belonging to various Native American tribes in 2010 census, the largest of which were the Blackfeet (12,831 people), the Crow (8,680 people), the Cheyenne (5,912), the Assiniboine Sioux (5,828), the Chippewa Cree (5,495), the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (4,809), the Ojibwe (4,284), the Sioux (2,698), the Assiniboine (2,673), the Gros Ventre (2,484) and the Salish tribal grouping (1,915). Other tribes included the Cree, the MHA Nation, the Kootenai, the Fort Belknap Indian Community, the Arapaho and more.

===Birth data===
&quot;Note: Births in table do not add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.&quot;
* Since 2016, data for births of White Hispanic origin are not collected, but included in one &quot;Hispanic&quot; group; persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.

=== Languages ===
English is the official language in the state of Montana. According to the 2000 census, 94.8% of the population aged five and older speak English at home. Spanish is the language next most commonly spoken at home, with about 13,040 Spanish-language speakers in the state (1.4% of the population) in 2011. Also, 15,438 (1.7% of the state population) were speakers of Indo-European languages other than English or Spanish, 10,154 (1.1%) were speakers of a Native American language, and 4,052 (0.4%) were speakers of an Asian or Pacific Islander language.

Other languages spoken in Montana (as of 2013) include Assiniboine (about 150 speakers in Montana and Canada), Blackfoot (about 100 speakers), Cheyenne (about 1,700 speakers), Plains Cree (about 100 speakers), Crow (about 3,000 speakers), Dakota (about 17,800 speakers with 700 in Montana in 2010), German Hutterite (about 5,600 speakers), Gros Ventre (about 10 speakers), Kalispel-Pend d&#x27;Oreille (about 64 speakers), Kutenai (about six speakers), and Lakota (6,000 speakers in Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota).

The United States Department of Education estimated in 2009 that 5,274 students in Montana spoke a language at home other than English. These included a Native American language (64%), German (4%), Spanish (3%), Russian (1%), and Chinese (less than 0.5%).

===Religion===
According to the Pew Research Center in 2014, the religious affiliations of the people of Montana were predominantly Christian; in the state, Christianity was 65% of the total adult population. At the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute&#x27;s (PRRI) study, 57% of the adult population were Christian. While Catholicism was the largest single Christian group in the state, mainline and evangelical Protestantism dominated the Christian landscape collectively. By the Public Religion Research Institute&#x27;s 2022 survey, Christianity grew to 62% of the population altogether, with 43% Protestant, 17% Catholic, and 2% Restorationist through Mormonism.

The largest Christian denominations in Montana as of 2010 were the Catholic Church with 127,612 adherents, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 46,484 adherents, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 38,665 adherents, and non-denominational evangelical Protestants with 27,370 adherents. In 2020, the largest Christian denominations by adherents were the following: the Catholic Church (112,389), non-denominational Protestantism (54,540), and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (50,552).

In 2014, 30% of the population was irreligious, and in 2020&#x27;s separate study, 34% of the population were irreligious. Among its non-Christian population in 2022&#x27;s PRRI study, the unaffiliated made up 32% of the population. New Age spirituality was 2% of the population, Judaism 1%, and Buddhism 1%. Other faiths accounted for 2% of the state&#x27;s population.

==Economy==


, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated Montana&#x27;s Gross Domestic Product was $67.072 billion (47th in the nation) and per capita personal income was $60,984 (28th in the nation).
* Total employment: 371,239 ()
* Total employer establishments: 38,720 ()

Montana is a relative hub of beer microbrewing, ranking third in the nation in number of craft breweries per capita in 2011. Significant industries exist for lumber and mineral extraction; the state&#x27;s resources include gold, coal, silver, talc, and vermiculite. Ecotaxes on resource extraction are numerous. A 1974 state severance tax on coal (which varied from 20 to 30%) was upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in &quot;Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana&quot;, 453 U.S. 609 (1981).

Tourism is also important to the economy, with more than ten million visitors a year to Glacier National Park, Flathead Lake, the Missouri River headwaters, the site of the Battle of Little Bighorn, and three of the five entrances to Yellowstone National Park.

Montana&#x27;s personal income tax contains seven brackets, with rates ranging from 1.0 to 6.9 percent. Montana has no sales tax, and household goods are exempt from property taxes. However, property taxes are assessed on livestock, farm machinery, heavy equipment, automobiles, trucks, and business equipment. The amount of property tax owed is not determined solely by the property&#x27;s value. The property&#x27;s value is multiplied by a tax rate, set by the Montana Legislature, to determine its taxable value. The taxable value is then multiplied by the mill levy established by various taxing jurisdictions—city and county government, school districts, and others.

In the 1980s the absence of a sales tax became economically deleterious to communities bound to the state&#x27;s tourism industry, as the revenue from income and property taxes provided by residents was grossly insignificant in regards to paying for the impact of non-residential travel—especially road repair. In 1985, the Montana Legislature passed a law allowing towns with fewer than 5,500 residents and unincorporated communities with fewer than 2,500 to levy a resort tax if more than half the community&#x27;s income came from tourism. The resort tax is a sales tax that applies to hotels, motels and other lodging and camping facilities; restaurants, fast-food stores, and other food service establishments; taverns, bars, night clubs, lounges, or other public establishments that serve alcohol; as well as destination ski resorts or other destination recreational facilities.

It also applies to &quot;luxuries&quot;- defined by law as any item normally sold to the public or to transient visitors or tourists that does not include food purchased unprepared or unserved, medicine, medical supplies and services, appliances, hardware supplies and tools, or any necessities of life. Approximately 12.2 million non-residents visited Montana in 2018, and the population was estimated to be 1.06 million. This extremely disproportionate ratio of residents paying taxes vs. non-residents using state-funded services and infrastructure makes Montana&#x27;s resort tax crucial in order to safely maintain heavily used roads and highways, as well as protect and preserve state parks.

, the state&#x27;s unemployment rate is 3.2%. The lowest rate was 2.5% in March 2023 and the highest was 12.0% in April 2020.

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===

The Montana University System consists of:

* Dawson Community College
* Flathead Valley Community College
* Miles Community College
* Montana State University Bozeman
** Gallatin College Montana State University Bozeman
** Montana State University Billings
** City College at Montana State University Billings Billings
** Montana State University-Northern Havre
** Great Falls College Montana State University Great Falls
* University of Montana Missoula
** Missoula College University of Montana Missoula
** Montana Tech of the University of Montana Butte
** Highlands College of Montana Tech Butte
** University of Montana Western Dillon
** Helena College University of Montana Helena
** Bitterroot College University of Montana Hamilton
Tribal colleges in Montana include:

* Aaniiih Nakoda College Harlem
* Blackfeet Community College Browning
* Chief Dull Knife College Lame Deer
* Fort Peck Community College Poplar
* Little Big Horn College Crow Agency
* Salish Kootenai College Pablo
* Stone Child College Box Elder
Four private colleges are in Montana:
* Carroll College
* Rocky Mountain College
* University of Providence
* Apollos University
===Schools===
The Montana Territory was formed on April 26, 1864, when the U.S. passed the Organic Act. Schools started forming in the area before it was officially a territory as families started settling into the area. The first schools were subscription schools that typically met in the teacher&#x27;s home. The first formal school on record was at Fort Owen in Bitterroot valley in 1862. The students were Indian children and the children of Fort Owen employees. The first school term started in early winter and lasted only until February 28. Classes were taught by Mr. Robinson. Another early subscription school was started by Thomas Dimsdale in Virginia City in 1863. In this school students were charged $1.75 per week. The Montana Territorial Legislative Assembly had its inaugural meeting in 1864. The first legislature authorized counties to levy taxes for schools, which set the foundations for public schooling. Madison County was the first to take advantage of the newly authorized taxes and it formed the first public school in Virginia City in 1886. The first school year was scheduled to begin in January 1866, but severe weather postponed its opening until March. The first school year ran through the summer and did not end until August 17. One of the first teachers at the school was Sarah Raymond. She was a 25-year-old woman who had traveled to Virginia City via wagon train in 1865. To become a certified teacher, Raymond took a test in her home and paid a $6 fee in gold dust to obtain a teaching certificate. With the help of an assistant teacher, Mrs. Farley, Raymond was responsible for teaching 50 to 60 students each day out of the 81 students enrolled at the school. Sarah Raymond was paid $125 per month, and Mrs. Farley was paid $75 per month. No textbooks were used in the school. In their place was an assortment of books brought by various emigrants. Raymond quit teaching the following year, but she later became the Madison County superintendent of schools.

==Culture==
Many well-known artists, photographers and authors have documented the land, culture and people of Montana in the last 130 years. Painter and sculptor Charles Marion Russell, known as &quot;the cowboy artist&quot;, created more than 2,000 paintings of cowboys, Native Americans, and landscapes set in the Western United States and in Alberta, Canada. The C. M. Russell Museum Complex in Great Falls, Montana, houses more than 2,000 Russell artworks, personal objects, and artifacts.

Pioneering feminist author, film-maker, and media personality Mary MacLane attained international fame in 1902 with her memoir of three months in her life in Butte, &quot;The Story of Mary MacLane&quot;. She referred to Butte throughout the rest of her career and remains a controversial figure there for her mixture of criticism and love for Butte and its people.

Evelyn Cameron, a naturalist and photographer from Terry documented early 20th-century life on the Montana prairie, taking startlingly clear pictures of everything around her: cowboys, sheepherders, weddings, river crossings, freight wagons, people working, badlands, eagles, coyotes and wolves.

Many notable Montana authors have documented or been inspired by life in Montana in both fiction and non-fiction works. Pulitzer Prize winner Wallace Earle Stegner from Great Falls was often called &quot;The Dean of Western Writers&quot;. James Willard Schultz (&quot;Apikuni&quot;) from Browning is most noted for his prolific stories about Blackfeet life and his contributions to the naming of prominent features in Glacier National Park.

===Major cultural events===
Montana hosts numerous arts and cultural festivals and events every year. Major events include:
* Bozeman was once known as the &quot;Sweet Pea capital of the nation&quot; referencing the prolific edible pea crop. To promote the area and celebrate its prosperity, local business owners began a &quot;Sweet Pea Carnival&quot; that included a parade and queen contest. The annual event lasted from 1906 to 1916. Promoters used the inedible but fragrant and colorful sweet pea flower as an emblem of the celebration. In 1977 the &quot;Sweet Pea&quot; concept was revived as an arts festival rather than a harvest celebration, growing into a three-day event that is one of the largest festivals in Montana.
* Montana Shakespeare in the Parks has been performing free, live theatrical productions of Shakespeare and other classics throughout Montana and the Northwest region since 1973. The organization is an outreach endeavor that is part of the College of Arts &amp; Architecture at Montana State University, Bozeman. The Montana Shakespeare Company is based in Helena.
* Since 1909, the Crow Fair and Rodeo, near Hardin, has been an annual event every August in Crow Agency and is the largest Northern Native American gathering, attracting nearly 45,000 spectators and participants. Since 1952, North American Indian Days has been held every July in Browning.
* Lame Deer hosts the annual Northern Cheyenne Powwow.




===Sports===

====Professional sports====
There are no major league sports franchises in Montana due to the state&#x27;s relatively small and dispersed population, but a number of minor league teams play in the state. Baseball is the minor-league sport with the longest heritage in the state and Montana is home to four independent teams, all members of the Pioneer League: the Billings Mustangs, Great Falls Voyagers, Missoula PaddleHeads and the Glacier Range Riders.

====College sports====
All of Montana&#x27;s four-year colleges and universities field intercollegiate sports teams. The two largest schools, the University of Montana and Montana State University, are members of the Big Sky Conference and have enjoyed a strong athletic rivalry since the early twentieth century. Six of Montana&#x27;s smaller four-year schools are members of the Frontier Conference. One is a member of the Great Northwest Athletic Conference.

====Other sports====
A variety of sports are offered at Montana high schools. Montana allows the smallest—&quot;Class C&quot;—high schools to utilize six-man football teams, dramatized in the independent 2002 film &quot;The Slaughter Rule&quot;.

There are junior ice hockey teams in Montana, three of which are affiliated with the North American 3 Hockey League: the Bozeman Icedogs, Great Falls Americans, and Helena Bighorns.

====Olympic competitors====
* Ski jumping champion and United States Skiing Hall of Fame inductee Casper Oimoen was captain of the U.S. Olympic team at the 1936 Winter Olympics while he was a resident of Anaconda. He placed thirteenth that year, and had previously finished fifth at the 1932 Winter Olympics.
* Montana has produced two U.S. champions and Olympic competitors in men&#x27;s figure skating, both from Great Falls: John Misha Petkevich, lived and trained in Montana before entering college, competed in the 1968 and 1972 Winter Olympics. Scott Davis, also from Great Falls, competed at the 1994 Winter Olympics.
* Missoulian Tommy Moe won Olympic gold and silver medals at the 1994 Winter Olympics in downhill skiing and super G, the first American skier to win two medals at any Winter Olympics.
* Eric Bergoust, also of Missoula, won an Olympic gold medal in freestyle aerial skiing at the 1998 Winter Olympics, also competing in 1994, 2002 and 2006 Olympics plus winning 13 World Cup titles.
* Maggie Voisin, of Whitefish, competed in the 2018 and 2022 Winter Olympics as a skier. She also qualified for the 2014 Winter Olympics but was unable to play as she broke her ankle during training.

====Sporting achievements====
Montanans have been a part of several major sporting achievements:
* In 1889, Spokane became the first and only Montana horse to win the Kentucky Derby. For this accomplishment, the horse was admitted to the Montana Cowboy Hall of Fame in 2008.
* In 1904 a basketball team of young Native American women from Fort Shaw, after playing undefeated during their previous season, went to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition held in St. Louis in 1904, defeated all challenging teams and were declared to be world champions.
* In 1923, the controversial Jack Dempsey vs. Tommy Gibbons fight for the heavyweight boxing championship, won by Dempsey, took place in Shelby.
===Outdoor recreation===
Montana provides year-round outdoor recreation opportunities for residents and visitors. Hiking, fishing, hunting, watercraft recreation, camping, golf, cycling, horseback riding, and skiing are popular activities.

====Fishing and hunting====
Montana has been a destination for its world-class trout fisheries since the 1930s. Fly fishing for several species of native and introduced trout in rivers and lakes is popular for both residents and tourists throughout the state. Montana is the home of the Federation of Fly Fishers and hosts many of the organization&#x27;s annual conclaves. The state has robust recreational lake trout and kokanee salmon fisheries in the west, walleye can be found in many parts of the state, while northern pike, smallmouth and largemouth bass fisheries as well as catfish and paddlefish can be found in the waters of eastern Montana. Robert Redford&#x27;s 1992 film of Norman Mclean&#x27;s novel, &quot;A River Runs Through It&quot;, was filmed in Montana and brought national attention to fly fishing and the state. Fishing makes up a sizeable component of Montana&#x27;s total tourism economic output: in 2017, nonresidents generated $4.7 billion in economic output, of which, $1.3 billion was generated by visitor groups participating in guided fishing experiences. 

There are fall bow and general hunting seasons for elk, pronghorn antelope, whitetail deer and mule deer. A random draw grants a limited number of permits for moose, mountain goats and bighorn sheep. There is a spring hunting season for black bear and limited hunting of bison that leave Yellowstone National Park has been allowed. Current law allows both hunters and trappers specified numbers (&quot;limits&quot;) of wolves and mountain lions. Trapping of assorted fur-bearing animals is allowed in certain seasons and many opportunities exist for migratory waterfowl and upland bird hunting. The Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, which protects wildlife habitat and promotes hunting heritage, was founded in Montana.

====Winter sports====


Both downhill skiing and cross-country skiing are popular in Montana, and there are 15 developed downhill ski areas open to the public, including:
* Bear Paw Ski Bowl near Havre
* Big Sky Resort in Big Sky
* Blacktail Mountain Ski Area near Lakeside
* Bridger Bowl Ski Area near Bozeman
* Discovery Ski Area near Philipsburg
* Great Divide Ski Area near Helena
* Lookout Pass Ski and Recreation Area off Interstate 90 at the Montana-Idaho border
* Lost Trail Powder Mountain near Darby
* Maverick Mountain Ski Area near Dillon
* Montana Snowbowl near Missoula
* Red Lodge Mountain Resort near Red Lodge
* Showdown Ski Area near White Sulphur Springs
* Teton Pass Ski Area near Choteau
* Turner Mountain Ski Resort near Libby
* Whitefish Mountain Resort near Whitefish

Big Sky Resort and Whitefish Mountain Resort are destination resorts, while the remaining areas do not have overnight lodging at the ski area, though several host restaurants and other amenities.

Montana also has millions of acres open to cross-country skiing on nine of its national forests and in Glacier National Park. In addition to cross-country trails at most of the downhill ski areas, there are also 13 private cross-country skiing resorts. Yellowstone National Park also allows cross-country skiing.

Snowmobiling is popular in Montana, which boasts over 4,000 miles of trails and frozen lakes available in winter. There are 24 areas where snowmobile trails are maintained, most also offering ungroomed trails. West Yellowstone offers a large selection of trails and is the primary starting point for snowmobile trips into Yellowstone National Park, where &quot;oversnow&quot; vehicle use is strictly limited, usually to guided tours, and regulations are in considerable flux.

Snow coach tours are offered at Big Sky, Whitefish, West Yellowstone and into Yellowstone National Park. Equestrian skijoring has a niche in Montana, which hosts the World Skijoring Championships in Whitefish as part of the annual Whitefish Winter Carnival.

==Health==
Montana has two Trauma I hospitals, both in Billings. The Billings Clinic hospital became the first in Montana and neighboring Wyoming. In 2024, Intermountain Health&#x27;s St. Vincent Regional Hospital also received verification. There are Trauma II hospitals in Missoula and Great Falls. In 2013, &quot;AARP The Magazine&quot; named the Billings Clinic one of the safest hospitals in the United States.

Montana is ranked as the least obese state in the U.S., at 19.6%, according to the 2014 Gallup Poll.

Montana had a suicide rate of 26.1 per 100,000 in 2020, which is the 3rd-highest among U.S. states; high suicide rates are common among sparsely-populated states in the United States.

==Media==
As of 2010, Missoula is the 166th largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research, while Billings is 170th, Great Falls is 190th, the Butte/Bozeman area 191st, and Helena is 206th. There are 25 television stations in Montana, representing each major U.S. network. As of August 2013, there are 527 FCC-licensed FM radio stations broadcast in Montana, with 114 such AM stations.

During the age of the Copper Kings, each Montana copper company had its own newspaper. This changed in 1959 when Lee Enterprises bought several Montana newspapers. Montana&#x27;s largest circulating daily city newspapers are the &quot;Billings Gazette&quot; (circulation 39,405), &quot;Great Falls Tribune&quot; (26,733), and &quot;Missoulian&quot; (25,439).

In May 2023, Montana became the first US state to ban the social media app TikTok and online marketplace Temu.

==Transportation==


Railroads have been an important method of transportation in Montana since the 1880s. Historically, the state was traversed by the main lines of three east–west transcontinental routes: the Milwaukee Road, the Great Northern, and the Northern Pacific. Today, the BNSF Railway is the state&#x27;s largest railroad, its main transcontinental route incorporating the former Great Northern main line across the state. Montana RailLink, a privately held Class II railroad, operated former Northern Pacific trackage in western Montana before being bought out by BNSF.

In addition, Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Empire Builder&quot; train runs through the north of the state, stopping in Libby, Whitefish, West Glacier, Essex, East Glacier Park, Browning, Cut Bank, Shelby, Havre, Malta, Glasgow, and Wolf Point.

Intercity bus service in Montana is provided by Jefferson Lines and Express Arrow.

Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport is the busiest airport in the state of Montana, surpassing Billings Logan International Airport in the spring of 2013. Montana&#x27;s other major airports include Missoula International Airport, Great Falls International Airport, Glacier Park International Airport, Helena Regional Airport, Bert Mooney Airport, and Yellowstone Airport. Eight smaller communities have airports designated for commercial service under the Essential Air Service program.

Historically, U.S. Route 10 was the primary east–west highway route across Montana, connecting the major cities in the southern half of the state. Still, the state&#x27;s most important east–west travel corridor, the route is today served by Interstate 90 and Interstate 94 which roughly follow the same route as the Northern Pacific. U.S. Routes 2 and 12 and Montana Highway 200 also traverse the entire state from east to west.

Montana&#x27;s only north–south Interstate Highway is Interstate 15. Other major north–south highways include U.S. Routes 87, 89, 93, and 191.

Montana and South Dakota are the only states to share a land border that is not traversed by a paved road. Highway 212, the primary paved route between the two, passes through the northeast corner of Wyoming between Montana and South Dakota.

==Law and government==
===Constitution===
Montana is governed by a constitution. The first constitution was drafted by a constitutional convention in 1889, in preparation for statehood. Ninety percent of its language came from an 1884 constitution which was never acted upon by Congress for national political reasons. The 1889 constitution mimicked the structure of the United States Constitution, as well as outlining almost the same civil and political rights for citizens. However, the 1889 Montana constitution significantly restricted the power of state government, the legislature was much more powerful than the executive branch, and the jurisdiction of the District Courts very specifically described. Montana voters amended the 1889 constitution 37 times between 1889 and 1972. In 1914, Montana granted women the vote. In 1916, Montana became the first state to elect a woman, Progressive Republican Jeannette Rankin, to Congress.

In 1971, Montana voters approved the call for a state constitutional convention. A new constitution was drafted, which made the legislative and executive branches much more equal in power and which was much less prescriptive in outlining powers, duties, and jurisdictions. The draft included an expanded, more progressive list of civil and political rights, extended these rights to children for the first time, transferred administration of property taxes to the counties from the state, implemented new water rights, eliminated sovereign immunity, and gave the legislature greater power to spend tax revenues. The constitution was narrowly approved, 116,415 to 113,883, and declared ratified on June 20, 1972. Three issues that the constitutional convention was unable to resolve were submitted to voters simultaneously with the proposed constitution. Voters approved the legalization of gambling, a bicameral legislature, and retention of the death penalty.

The 1972 constitution has been amended 31 times as of 2015. Major amendments include establishment of a reclamation trust (funded by taxes on natural resource extraction) to restore mined land (1974); restoration of sovereign immunity, when such immunity has been approved by a two-thirds vote in each house (1974); establishment of a 90-day biennial (rather than annual) legislative session (1974); establishment of a coal tax trust fund, funded by a tax on coal extraction (1976); conversion of the mandatory decennial review of county government into a voluntary one, to be approved or disallowed by residents in each county (1978); conversion of the provision of public assistance from a mandatory civil right to a non-fundamental legislative prerogative (1988); a new constitutional right to hunt and fish (2004); a now-defunct prohibition on same-sex marriage (2004); a prohibition on new taxes on the sale or transfer of real property (2010), and a constitutional provision codifying abortion rights (2024). In 1992, voters approved a constitutional amendment implementing term limits for certain statewide elected executive branch offices (governor, lieutenant governor, secretary of state, state auditor, attorney general, superintendent of public instruction) and for members of the Montana Legislature. Extensive new constitutional rights for victims of crime were approved in 2016.

The 1972 constitution requires that voters determine every 20 years whether to hold a new constitutional convention. Voters turned down a new convention in 1990 (84 percent no) and again in 2010 (58.6 percent no).
===Executive===

Montana has three branches of state government: legislative, executive, and judicial. The executive branch is headed by an elected governor. The governor is Greg Gianforte, a Republican elected in 2020. There are also nine other statewide elected offices in the executive branch: Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, Secretary of State, State Auditor (who also serves as Commissioner of Securities and Insurance), and Superintendent of Public Instruction. There are five public service commissioners, who are elected on a regional basis. (The Public Service Commission&#x27;s jurisdiction is statewide.)

There are 18 departments and offices which make up the executive branch: Administration; Agriculture; Auditor (securities and insurance); Commerce; Corrections; Environmental Quality; Fish, Wildlife &amp; Parks; Justice; Labor and Industry; Livestock; Military Affairs; Natural Resources and Conservation; Public Health and Human Services; Revenue; State; and Transportation. Elementary and secondary education are overseen by the Office of Public Instruction (led by the elected superintendent of public instruction), in cooperation with the governor-appointed Board of Public Education. Higher education is overseen by a governor-appointed Board of Regents, which in turn appoints a commissioner of higher education. The Office of the Commissioner of Higher Education acts in an executive capacity on behalf of the regents and oversees the state-run Montana University System.

Independent state agencies not within a department or office include the Montana Arts Council, Montana Board of Crime Control, Montana Historical Society, Montana Public Employees Retirement Administration, Commissioner of Political Practices, the Montana Lottery, Office of the State Public Defender, Public Service Commission, the Montana School for the Deaf and Blind, the Montana State Fund (which operates the state&#x27;s unemployment insurance, worker compensation, and self-insurance operations), the Montana State Library, and the Montana Teachers Retirement System.

Montana is an alcoholic beverage control state. It is an equitable distribution and no-fault divorce state. It is one of five states to have no sales tax.

===Legislative===
The Montana Legislature is bicameral and consists of the 50-member Montana Senate and the 100-member Montana House of Representatives. The legislature meets in the Montana State Capitol in Helena in odd-numbered years for 90 days, beginning the first weekday of the year. The deadline for a legislator to introduce a general bill is the 40th legislative day. The deadline for a legislator to introduce an appropriations, revenue, or referendum bill is the 62nd legislative day. Senators serve four-year terms, while Representatives serve two-year terms. All members are limited to serving no more than eight years in a single 16-year period.

===Judicial===

The Courts of Montana are established by the Constitution of Montana. The constitution requires the establishment of a Montana Supreme Court and Montana District Courts, and permits the legislature to establish Justice Courts, City Courts, Municipal Courts, and other inferior courts such as the legislature sees fit to establish.

The Montana Supreme Court is the court of last resort in the Montana court system. The constitution of 1889 provided for the election of no fewer than three Supreme Court justices, and one chief justice. Each court member served a six-year term. The legislature increased the number of justices to five in 1919. The 1972 constitution lengthened the term of office to eight years and established the minimum number of justices at five. It allowed the legislature to increase the number of justices by two, which the legislature did in 1979. The Montana Supreme Court has the authority to declare acts of the legislature and executive unconstitutional under either the Montana or U.S. constitutions. Its decisions may be appealed directly to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Clerk of the Montana Supreme Court is also an elected position and serves a six-year term. Neither justices nor the clerk is term-limited.

Montana District Courts are the courts of general jurisdiction in Montana. There are no intermediate appellate courts. District Courts have jurisdiction primarily over most civil cases, cases involving a monetary claim against the state, felony criminal cases, probate, and cases at law and in equity. When so authorized by the legislature, actions of executive branch agencies may be appealed directly to a District Court. The District Courts also have &quot;de novo&quot; appellate jurisdiction from inferior courts (city courts, justice courts, and municipal courts), and oversee naturalization proceedings. District Court judges are elected and serve six-year terms. They are not term-limited. There are 22 judicial districts in Montana, served by 56 District Courts and 46 District Court judges. The District Courts suffer from excessive workload, and the legislature has struggled to find a solution to the problem.

Montana Youth Courts were established by the Montana Youth Court Act of 1974. They are overseen by District Court judges. They consist of a chief probation officer, one or more juvenile probation officers, and support staff. Youth Courts have jurisdiction over misdemeanor and felony acts committed by those charged as a juvenile under the law. There is a Youth Court in every judicial district, and decisions of the Youth Court are appealable directly to the Montana Supreme Court.

The Montana Worker&#x27;s Compensation Court was established by the Montana Workers&#x27; Compensation Act in 1975. There is a single Workers&#x27; Compensation Court. It has a single judge, appointed by the governor. The Worker&#x27;s Compensation Court has statewide jurisdiction and holds trials in Billings, Great Falls, Helena, Kalispell, and Missoula. The court hears cases arising under the Montana Workers&#x27; Compensation Act and is the court of original jurisdiction for reviews of orders and regulations issued by the Montana Department of Labor and Industry. Decisions of the court are appealable directly to the Montana Supreme Court.

The Montana Water Court was established by the Montana Water Court Act of 1979. The Water Court consists of a chief water judge and four district water judges (Lower Missouri River Basin, Upper Missouri River Basin, Yellowstone River Basin, and Clark Fork River Basin). The court employs 12 permanent special masters. The Montana Judicial Nomination Commission develops short lists of nominees for all five Water Judges, who are then appointed by the Chief justice of the Montana Supreme Court (subject to confirmation by the Montana Senate). The Water Court adjudicates water rights claims under the Montana Water Use Act of 1973 and has statewide jurisdiction. District Courts have the authority to enforce decisions of the Water Court, but only the Montana Supreme Court has the authority to review decisions of the Water Court.

From 1889 to 1909, elections for judicial office in Montana were partisan. Beginning in 1909, these elections became nonpartisan. The Montana Supreme Court struck down the nonpartisan law in 1911 on technical grounds, but a new law was enacted in 1935 which barred political parties from endorsing, making contributions to, or making expenditures on behalf of or against judicial candidates. In 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Montana&#x27;s judicial nonpartisan election law in Although candidates must remain nonpartisan, spending by partisan entities is now permitted. Spending on state supreme court races exponentially increased to $1.6 million in 2014, and to more than $1.6 million in 2016 (both new records).

===Federal offices and courts===
The U.S. Constitution provides each state with two senators. Montana&#x27;s two U.S. senators are Steve Daines, first elected in 2014 and later reelected in 2020, and Tim Sheehy, elected in 2024. Both are Republicans. The U.S. Constitution provides each state with a single representative, with additional representatives apportioned based on population. From statehood in 1889 until 1913, Montana was represented in the United States House of Representatives by a single representative, elected at-large. Montana received a second representative in 1913, following the 1910 census and reapportionment. Both members, however, were still elected at-large. Beginning in 1919, Montana moved to district, rather than at-large, elections for its two House members. This created Montana&#x27;s 1st congressional district in the west and Montana&#x27;s 2nd congressional district in the east. In the reapportionment following the 1990 census, Montana lost one of its House seats. The remaining seat was again elected at-large.

In the reapportionment following the 2020 census, Montana regained a House seat, increasing the state&#x27;s number of representatives in the House to two after a thirty-year break, starting from 2023. Republicans Troy Downing and Ryan Zinke are the current officeholders.

Montana&#x27;s Senate district is the fourth largest by area, behind Alaska, Texas, and California. The most notorious of Montana&#x27;s early senators was William A. Clark, a &quot;Copper King&quot; and one of the 50 richest Americans ever. He is well known for having bribed his way into the U.S. Senate. Among Montana&#x27;s most historically prominent senators are Thomas J. Walsh (serving from 1913 to 1933), who was President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s choice for attorney general when he died; Burton K. Wheeler (serving from 1923 to 1947), an oft-mentioned presidential candidate and strong supporter of isolationism; Mike Mansfield, the longest-serving Senate majority leader in U.S. history; Max Baucus (served 1978 to 2014), longest-serving U.S. senator in Montana history, and the senator who shepherded the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act through the Senate in 2010; and Lee Metcalf (served 1961 to 1978), a pioneer of the environmental movement.

Montana&#x27;s House district is the largest congressional district in the United States by population, with just over 1,023,000 constituents. It is the second-largest House district by area, after Alaska&#x27;s at-large congressional district. Of Montana&#x27;s House delegates, Jeannette Rankin was the first woman to hold national office in the United States when she was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1916. Also notable is Representative (later Senator) Thomas H. Carter, the first Catholic to serve as chairman of the Republican National Committee (from 1892 to 1896).

Federal courts in Montana include the United States District Court for the District of Montana and the United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Montana. Three former Montana politicians have been named judges on the U.S. District Court: Charles Nelson Pray (who served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1907 to 1913), James F. Battin (who served in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1961 to 1969), and Paul G. Hatfield (who served as an appointed U.S. Senator in 1978). Brian Morris, who served as an associate justice of the Montana Supreme Court from 2005 to 2013, currently serves as a judge on the court.

==Politics==












Elections in the state had been historically competitive, particularly for state-level offices. The Democratic Party&#x27;s strength in the state was gained from support among unionized miners and railroad workers, while farmers generally voted Republican.

Montana had a history of voters splitting their tickets and filling elected offices with individuals from both parties. Through the mid-20th century, the state had a tradition of &quot;sending the liberals to Washington and the conservatives to Helena&quot;. Between 1988 and 2006, the pattern flipped, with voters more likely to elect conservatives to federal offices. There have also been long-term shifts in party control. From 1968 through 1988, the state was dominated by the Democratic Party, with Democratic governors for a 20-year period, and a Democratic majority of both the national congressional delegation and during many sessions of the state legislature. This pattern shifted, beginning with the 1988 election when Montana elected a Republican governor for the first time since 1964 and sent a Republican to the U.S. Senate for the first time since 1948. This shift continued with the reapportionment of the state&#x27;s legislative districts that took effect in 1994, when the Republican Party took control of both chambers of the state legislature, consolidating a Republican party dominance that lasted until the 2004 reapportionment produced more swing districts and a brief period of Democratic legislative majorities in the mid-2000s.

Montana has voted for the Republican nominee in all but two presidential elections since 1952. The state last supported a Democrat for president in 1992, when Bill Clinton won a plurality victory. However, since 1889 the state has voted for Democratic governors 60 percent of the time, and Republican governors 40 percent of the time. In the 2008 presidential election, Montana was considered a swing state and was ultimately won by Republican John McCain by a narrow margin of two percent.

The state&#x27;s congressional seats (now two districts, but until 2023, one at-large district) have been Republican since 1996, and its Senate seats have been held by Republicans Steve Daines since 2015 and Tim Sheehy since 2025. The two chambers of the state&#x27;s legislature had split party control from 2004 to 2010, when that year&#x27;s mid-term elections decisively returned both branches to Republican control. The Montana Senate is, as of 2021, controlled by Republicans 31 to 19, and the House of Representatives is currently 67 to 33. Historically, Republicans are strongest in the east, while Democrats are strongest in the west.

Montana had only one representative in the U.S. House after having lost its second district in the 1990 census reapportionment. However, it regained its second district due to reapportionment following the 2020 census. Before the 2020 reapportionment, Montana&#x27;s at-large congressional district held the largest population of any district in the country, which means its one member in the House of Representatives represented more people than any other member of the U.S. House (see List of U.S. states by population). Montana&#x27;s population grew at about the national average during the 2000s, but it had failed to regain its second seat in 2010.

In a 2020 study, Montana was ranked as the 21st easiest state for citizens to vote in.
==See also==

*Index of Montana-related articles
*List of the oldest buildings in Montana
*Outline of Montana
*Timeline of Montana history

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Reviewed by 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
==External links==

* Census of Montana
* General Information About Montana 
* List of Searchable Databases Produced by Montana State Agencies
* Montana Energy Data &amp; Statistics—From the U.S. Department of Energy
* Montana Historical Society
* Montana Official Travel Information Site 
* Montana Official Website 
* Montana State Facts From the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
* USGS Real-time, Geographic, and Other Scientific Resources of Montana </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="0" end="7" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="28" end="33" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="41" end="54" title="Mountain states" label="Mountain West"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="72" end="93" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="106" end="111" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="125" end="137" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="151" end="163" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="182" end="189" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="212" end="230" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="234" end="241" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="243" end="259" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="265" end="277" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="302" end="330" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="fourth-largest state by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="340" end="367" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="eighth-least populous state"/>
<link wikidata="Q280788" start="376" end="411" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population density" label="third-least densely populated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="417" end="424" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="428" end="434" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007562" start="446" end="464" title="List of municipalities in Montana" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="468" end="476" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="594" end="601" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="614" end="622" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="724" end="735" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="745" end="763" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="808" end="834" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="1013" end="1027" title="Homestead Acts" label="Homestead Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="1205" end="1210" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="1215" end="1221" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="1329" end="1337" title="List of U.S. state and territory nicknames" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q104876301" start="1494" end="1513" title="The Last Best Place" label="The Last Best Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1555" end="1566" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="1578" end="1583" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1591" end="1603" title="cereal grain" label="cereal grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="1658" end="1661" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="1663" end="1666" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1668" end="1672" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="1674" end="1680" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1686" end="1692" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889983" start="2280" end="2324" title="United States House Committee on Territories" label="United States House Committee on Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680840" start="2349" end="2361" title="James Mitchell Ashley" label="James Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2365" end="2369" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656599" start="2407" end="2422" title="Idaho Territory" label="Idaho Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q313302" start="2465" end="2477" title="Henry Wilson" label="Henry Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166894" start="2498" end="2517" title="Benjamin F. Harding" label="Benjamin F. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810689" start="2757" end="2774" title="Montana Territory" label="Montana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032998" start="2802" end="2812" title="Samuel S. Cox" label="Samuel Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875856" start="2885" end="2893" title="misnomer" label="misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2962" end="2977" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="3050" end="3058" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="3252" end="3270" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="3406" end="3410" title="Crow people" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="3442" end="3450" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="3455" end="3461" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="3484" end="3493" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="3495" end="3506" title="Assiniboine people" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q510032" start="3512" end="3524" title="Gros Ventres" label="Gros Ventres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550384" start="3572" end="3580" title="Ktunaxa" label="Kootenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q568625" start="3585" end="3591" title="Bitterroot Salish" label="Salish"/>
<link wikidata="Q492901" start="3657" end="3677" title="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreilles" label="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211838" start="3683" end="3691" title="Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation" label="Kalispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427364" start="3710" end="3723" title="Flathead Lake" label="Flathead Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="3853" end="3860" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="3895" end="3909" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="3960" end="3978" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="3995" end="4013" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874626" start="4086" end="4105" title="Hudson Bay drainage basin" label="Hudson Bay drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="4167" end="4193" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893491" start="4246" end="4255" title="Fur trade in Montana" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123248" start="4583" end="4592" title="Blackfeet Nation" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498202" start="4733" end="4745" title="Fort Raymond" label="Fort Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="4816" end="4829" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="4900" end="4907" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="4912" end="4928" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q388164" start="4950" end="4964" title="Oregon Country" label="Oregon Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590361" start="5044" end="5059" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Mission (Montana)" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q955315" start="5098" end="5110" title="Stevensville, Montana" label="Stevensville"/>
<link wikidata="Q285655" start="5121" end="5132" title="Fort Benton, Montana" label="Fort Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878247" start="5245" end="5255" title="Beaverhead River" label="Beaverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q858903" start="5260" end="5268" title="Big Hole River" label="Big Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="5286" end="5298" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578690" start="5383" end="5393" title="Gold Creek, Montana" label="Gold Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q955734" start="5411" end="5419" title="Garrison, Montana" label="Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q955580" start="5772" end="5785" title="Virginia City, Montana" label="Virginia City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704535" start="5900" end="5917" title="Confederate Gulch and Diamond City" label="Confederate Gulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17400774" start="5951" end="5961" title="Cooke City, Montana" label="Cooke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="6303" end="6319" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710656" start="6333" end="6353" title="Washington Territory" label="Washington Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="6400" end="6416" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="6457" end="6487" title="territories of the United States" label="territory of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q806862" start="6549" end="6556" title="Bannack, Montana" label="Bannack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603837" start="6558" end="6573" title="Sidney Edgerton" label="Sidney Edgerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="6666" end="6672" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904271" start="6758" end="6784" title="Montana Historical Society" label="Montana Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q987262" start="6817" end="6830" title="Virginia City" label="Virginia City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="6875" end="6886" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435573" start="6945" end="6965" title="Cook–Folsom–Peterson Expedition" label="Cook–Folsom–Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q357127" start="6974" end="7008" title="Washburn–Langford–Doane Expedition" label="Washburn–Langford–Doane Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="7159" end="7184" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q888719" start="7405" end="7418" title="Isaac Stevens" label="Isaac Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707512" start="7434" end="7449" title="Hellgate Treaty" label="Hellgate Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q503543" start="7701" end="7728" title="Flathead Indian Reservation" label="Flathead Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919062" start="7827" end="7844" title="Bitterroot Valley" label="Bitterroot Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027091" start="8031" end="8041" title="Camp Cooke (Montana)" label="Camp Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060306" start="8368" end="8388" title="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War" label="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="8394" end="8417" title="Great Sioux War of 1876" label="Great Sioux War of 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456086" start="8427" end="8440" title="Nez Perce War" label="Nez Perce War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673132" start="8463" end="8479" title="Piegan Blackfeet" label="Piegan Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120018" start="8507" end="8522" title="Marias Massacre" label="Marias Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="8531" end="8559" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Battle of the Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438386" start="8568" end="8590" title="Battle of the Big Hole" label="Battle of the Big Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870436" start="8603" end="8621" title="Battle of Bear Paw" label="Battle of Bear Paw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8739" end="8760" title="Crow War#Battle of Crow Agency" label="Battle of Crow Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="8864" end="8876" title="Indian reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="8915" end="8920" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="8924" end="8940" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="9136" end="9151" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="9182" end="9190" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543158" start="9519" end="9531" title="Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site" label="Johnny Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990747" start="9683" end="9695" title="Nelson Story" label="Nelson Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q390214" start="9714" end="9735" title="Texas longhorn (cattle)" label="Texas Longhorn cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596952" start="9764" end="9780" title="Granville Stuart" label="Granville Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509000" start="9782" end="9795" title="Samuel Hauser" label="Samuel Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096405" start="9833" end="9843" title="open range" label="open-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543158" start="9891" end="9931" title="Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site" label="Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q960518" start="9935" end="9945" title="Deer Lodge, Montana" label="Deer Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="10040" end="10061" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="10117" end="10142" title="Northern Pacific Railroad" label="Northern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163222" start="10319" end="10328" title="Jay Cooke" label="Jay Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="10465" end="10470" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="10483" end="10495" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="10540" end="10553" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="10683" end="10706" title="Great Sioux War of 1876" label="Great Sioux War of 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578690" start="10772" end="10782" title="Gold Creek, Montana" label="Gold Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902530" start="10798" end="10823" title="Utah and Northern Railway" label="Utah and Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="10846" end="10859" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="10873" end="10885" title="narrow-gauge" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="10905" end="10909" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355812" start="11018" end="11035" title="Oregon Short Line Railroad" label="Oregon Short Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904310" start="11037" end="11053" title="Montana Railroad" label="Montana Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="11059" end="11073" title="Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul, and Pacific Railroad" label="Milwaukee Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="11090" end="11113" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9074979" start="11356" end="11374" title="Scenic, Washington" label="Scenic, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059083" start="11395" end="11402" title="Hi Line Subdivision" label="Hi Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q522396" start="11520" end="11534" title="Thomas Francis Meagher" label="Thomas Meagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="11627" end="11652" title="constitutional convention (political meeting)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="11851" end="11867" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706145" start="11878" end="11890" title="omnibus bill" label="omnibus bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="12201" end="12218" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q367760" start="12296" end="12311" title="Joseph Toole" label="Joseph K. Toole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12446" end="12467" title="Homestead Acts#Homestead Act of 1862" label="Homestead Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263967" start="13107" end="13130" title="Desert Land Act" label="Desert Land Act of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q771991" start="13772" end="13785" title="James J. Hill" label="James J. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9367416" start="13947" end="13962" title="Reclamation Act" label="Reclamation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="14086" end="14108" title="Enlarged Homestead Act" label="Enlarged Homestead Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617845" start="14256" end="14283" title="Stock-Raising Homestead Act" label="Stock-Raising Homestead Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16046" end="16057" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q232407" start="16069" end="16085" title="Jeannette Rankin" label="Jeannette Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="16317" end="16327" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="16488" end="16495" title="Conscription" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="16617" end="16627" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889513" start="16781" end="16796" title="United States Army Remount Service" label="Remount station"/>
<link wikidata="Q960167" start="16800" end="16810" title="Miles City, Montana" label="Miles City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631661" start="16827" end="16841" title="Horses in World War I" label="cavalry horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="17067" end="17088" title="Espionage Act of 1917" label="Espionage Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445331" start="17116" end="17136" title="Sedition Act of 1918" label="Sedition Act of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q445823" start="17575" end="17591" title="Brian Schweitzer" label="Brian Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="17815" end="17825" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="17845" end="17855" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="17860" end="17870" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q881546" start="18009" end="18026" title="Samuel V. Stewart" label="Samuel V. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845063" start="18121" end="18144" title="Anaconda Copper Company" label="Anaconda Copper Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="18291" end="18300" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575345" start="18657" end="18681" title="Speculator Mine disaster" label="Speculator Mine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="18696" end="18727" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082693" start="18738" end="18750" title="Frank Little (unionist)" label="Frank Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="18914" end="18924" title="Vigilantism" label="vigilantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="18975" end="18983" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="19052" end="19066" title="National Guard of the United States" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q711631" start="19586" end="19603" title="Burton K. Wheeler" label="Burton K. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q960505" start="19852" end="19859" title="Forsyth, Montana" label="Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="19864" end="19873" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="20061" end="20084" title="Spanish flu" label="1918 influenza epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="20152" end="20167" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="20358" end="20374" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20398" end="20410" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q912310" start="21107" end="21119" title="Code Talkers" label="Code Talkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q574835" start="21208" end="21235" title="First Special Service Force" label="First Special Service Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472342" start="21332" end="21359" title="Fort William Henry Harrison" label="Fort William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q955640" start="21493" end="21500" title="Glasgow, Montana" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="21596" end="21608" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q695154" start="21644" end="21662" title="Fu-Go balloon bomb" label="Fu-Go balloon bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q232407" start="21786" end="21802" title="Jeannette Rankin" label="Jeannette Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="21934" end="21965" title="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="22221" end="22243" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q379497" start="22315" end="22326" title="smokejumper" label="smokejumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334471" start="22407" end="22418" title="Rimini, Montana" label="Camp Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="22543" end="22553" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470329" start="22554" end="22577" title="USS Montana" label="USS &amp;quot;Montana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="22736" end="22742" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q529351" start="22925" end="22935" title="Jon Tester" label="Jon Tester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="22949" end="22958" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q531247" start="23020" end="23029" title="Ray Mabus" label="Ray Mabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947789" start="23111" end="23118" title="USS Montana (SSN-794)" label="SSN-794"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="23230" end="23238" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="23267" end="23281" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851962" start="23282" end="23312" title="Military Air Transport Service" label="Military Air Transport Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252107" start="23344" end="23359" title="Douglas C-54 Skymaster" label="C-54 Skymasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q937064" start="23384" end="23405" title="Strategic Air Command" label="Strategic Air Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q956022" start="23443" end="23467" title="Malmstrom Air Force Base" label="Malmstrom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23509" end="23542" title="29th Training Systems Squadron#Air Defense Command" label="29th Fighter Interceptor Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825671" start="23544" end="23563" title="Aerospace Defense Command" label="Air Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="23651" end="23662" title="LGM-30 Minuteman" label="Minuteman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="23663" end="23697" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q632237" start="23808" end="23836" title="341st Missile Wing" label="341st Strategic Missile Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="23864" end="23884" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="23947" end="23962" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="24231" end="24246" title="Mountain States" label="Mountain States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="24296" end="24317" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="24330" end="24342" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="24347" end="24359" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="24373" end="24380" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="24398" end="24403" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="24442" end="24460" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="24464" end="24480" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="24482" end="24489" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="24495" end="24507" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="24638" end="24643" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="24647" end="24654" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="24714" end="24720" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="24722" end="24727" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="24733" end="24743" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="24814" end="24824" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="24851" end="24869" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="25114" end="25129" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q331762" start="25135" end="25143" title="Absaroka Mountains" label="Absaroka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145853" start="25148" end="25157" title="Beartooth Mountains" label="Beartooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438029" start="25261" end="25281" title="Rocky Mountain Front" label="Rocky Mountain Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q16946692" start="25363" end="25375" title="island range" label="island range"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="25396" end="25403" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="25531" end="25543" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q879008" start="25550" end="25570" title="Bitterroot Mountains" label="Bitterroot Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="25651" end="25657" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140849" start="25699" end="25727" title="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene Mountains" label="Coeur d&amp;#x27;Alene Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015465" start="25736" end="25753" title="Cabinet Mountains" label="Cabinet Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015465" start="25922" end="25939" title="Cabinet Mountains" label="Cabinet Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750698" start="25945" end="25959" title="Anaconda Range" label="Anaconda Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878644" start="25965" end="25973" title="Mission Range" label="Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523657" start="25979" end="25991" title="Garnet Range" label="Garnet Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421062" start="25997" end="26015" title="Sapphire Mountains" label="Sapphire Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459486" start="26025" end="26042" title="Flint Creek Range" label="Flint Creek Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438029" start="26145" end="26165" title="Rocky Mountain Front" label="Rocky Mountain Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747638" start="26203" end="26214" title="Lewis Range" label="Lewis Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="26237" end="26258" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042803" start="26334" end="26349" title="Northern Divide" label="Northern Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q971586" start="26381" end="26397" title="Seward Peninsula" label="Seward Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148432" start="26448" end="26466" title="Triple Divide Peak (Montana)" label="Triple Divide Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086628" start="26482" end="26496" title="Waterton River" label="Waterton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433645" start="26498" end="26503" title="Belly River" label="Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590512" start="26509" end="26519" title="St. Mary River (Montana-Alberta)" label="Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="26546" end="26553" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047" start="26583" end="26601" title="Saskatchewan River" label="Saskatchewan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="26633" end="26643" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597858" start="26750" end="26764" title="Gravelly Range" label="Gravelly Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728074" start="26766" end="26779" title="Madison Range" label="Madison Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027662" start="26781" end="26795" title="Gallatin Range" label="Gallatin Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q331762" start="26797" end="26815" title="Absaroka Mountains" label="Absaroka Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145853" start="26821" end="26840" title="Beartooth Mountains" label="Beartooth Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q599777" start="26988" end="27000" title="Granite Peak (Montana)" label="Granite Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905077" start="27038" end="27056" title="Big Belt Mountains" label="Big Belt Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966629" start="27058" end="27075" title="Bridger Mountains (Montana)" label="Bridger Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811491" start="27077" end="27090" title="Tobacco Root Mountains" label="Tobacco Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139255" start="27133" end="27148" title="Crazy Mountains" label="Crazy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649061" start="27153" end="27174" title="Little Belt Mountains" label="Little Belt Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q858903" start="27242" end="27250" title="Big Hole River" label="Big Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919062" start="27252" end="27262" title="Bitterroot Valley" label="Bitterroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q387978" start="27264" end="27272" title="Gallatin County, Montana" label="Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734386" start="27274" end="27282" title="Flathead Valley" label="Flathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134388" start="27288" end="27304" title="Paradise Valley (Montana)" label="Paradise Valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="27479" end="27494" title="Great Plains" label="Northern Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="27501" end="27510" title="Plateaus" label="tableland"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="27557" end="27565" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996590" start="27645" end="27659" title="Bull Mountains" label="Bull Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050197" start="27661" end="27677" title="Castle Mountains (Montana)" label="Castle Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139255" start="27679" end="27694" title="Crazy Mountains" label="Crazy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760066" start="27696" end="27714" title="Highwood Mountains" label="Highwood Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303590" start="27716" end="27732" title="Judith Mountains" label="Judith Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649061" start="27734" end="27755" title="Little Belt Mountains" label="Little Belt Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651780" start="27757" end="27779" title="Little Rocky Mountains" label="Little Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323101" start="27785" end="27800" title="Pryor Mountains" label="Pryor Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651980" start="27802" end="27824" title="Little Snowy Mountains" label="Little Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906382" start="27826" end="27845" title="Big Snowy Mountains" label="Big Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14476240" start="27847" end="27864" title="Sweet Grass Hills" label="Sweet Grass Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q961306" start="27915" end="27922" title="Ekalaka" label="Ekalaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673064" start="27927" end="27937" title="Long Pines" label="Long Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="28029" end="28034" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499751" start="28201" end="28216" title="Upper Missouri River Breaks National Monument" label="Missouri Breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q66037955" start="28239" end="28253" title="rock formation" label="rock formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554910" start="28262" end="28267" title="butte" label="butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="28278" end="28289" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q522464" start="28362" end="28371" title="laccolith" label="laccolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="28391" end="28403" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="28489" end="28498" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="28503" end="28508" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="28743" end="28748" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="28802" end="28811" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="28888" end="28892" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="28894" end="28900" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="28902" end="28906" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="28908" end="28912" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="28918" end="28930" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="28998" end="29007" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q836062" start="29069" end="29078" title="argillite" label="argillite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320719" start="29231" end="29241" title="proglacial lake" label="proglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476031" start="29242" end="29258" title="Lake Great Falls" label="Lake Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="29265" end="29272" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="29323" end="29343" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="Wisconsin glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886409" start="29400" end="29420" title="Makoshika State Park" label="Makoshika State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q967324" start="29426" end="29434" title="Glendive" label="Glendive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916293" start="29439" end="29464" title="Medicine Rocks State Park" label="Medicine Rocks State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="29510" end="29518" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q917642" start="29546" end="29566" title="Hell Creek Formation" label="Hell Creek Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="29609" end="29617" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="29618" end="29624" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="29627" end="29641" title="Paleontologist" label="Paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q247264" start="29642" end="29653" title="Jack Horner (paleontologist)" label="Jack Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628366" start="29661" end="29682" title="Museum of the Rockies" label="Museum of the Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="29686" end="29693" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929683" start="29884" end="29907" title="Blue Ribbon fishery" label="&amp;quot;blue-ribbon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="29908" end="29913" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="29978" end="29988" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="30151" end="30161" title="Drainage basin" label="watersheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q604673" start="30178" end="30196" title="continental divide" label="continental divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="30249" end="30263" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="30269" end="30279" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148432" start="30306" end="30324" title="Triple Divide Peak (Montana)" label="Triple Divide Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="30587" end="30601" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q664874" start="30607" end="30617" title="Clark Fork (river)" label="Clark Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975665" start="30663" end="30674" title="Clarks Fork Yellowstone River" label="Clarks Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="30712" end="30717" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="30741" end="30749" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114866" start="30777" end="30792" title="Blackfoot River (Montana)" label="Blackfoot River"/>
<link wikidata="Q334812" start="30797" end="30813" title="Bitterroot River" label="Bitterroot River"/>
<link wikidata="Q268532" start="30855" end="30869" title="Flathead River" label="Flathead River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632195" start="30897" end="30914" title="Lake Pend Oreille" label="Lake Pend Oreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q270499" start="30920" end="30938" title="Pend Oreille River" label="Pend Oreille River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262" start="31270" end="31284" title="Kootenai River" label="Kootenai River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="31414" end="31428" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q284790" start="31471" end="31480" title="Jefferson River" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q947477" start="31482" end="31489" title="Madison River" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325962" start="31495" end="31503" title="Gallatin River" label="Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q966283" start="31516" end="31527" title="Three Forks, Montana" label="Three Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="31591" end="31602" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492006" start="31715" end="31734" title="Fort Peck Lake" label="Fort Peck reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q14655637" start="31785" end="31805" title="Fred Robinson Bridge" label="Fred Robinson Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="31870" end="31900" title="National Wild and Scenic Rivers System" label="National Wild and Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="31930" end="31942" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362959" start="31948" end="31958" title="Fort Union Trading Post National Historic Site" label="Fort Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827896" start="32090" end="32096" title="Toston Dam" label="Toston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034202" start="32098" end="32110" title="Canyon Ferry Dam" label="Canyon Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268280" start="32112" end="32118" title="Hauser Dam" label="Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060451" start="32120" end="32126" title="Holter Dam" label="Holter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920713" start="32128" end="32139" title="Black Eagle Dam" label="Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284612" start="32141" end="32148" title="Rainbow Dam" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139430" start="32150" end="32158" title="Cochrane Dam" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384002" start="32160" end="32164" title="Ryan Dam" label="Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704739" start="32166" end="32172" title="Morony Dam" label="Morony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545297" start="32249" end="32254" title="Smith River (Montana)" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q217739" start="32256" end="32260" title="Milk River (Alberta–Montana)" label="Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q595366" start="32262" end="32268" title="Marias River" label="Marias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187977" start="32270" end="32276" title="Judith River" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955484" start="32282" end="32299" title="Musselshell River" label="Musselshell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410560" start="32392" end="32401" title="Roe River" label="Roe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="32416" end="32427" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="32484" end="32501" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q54874250" start="32537" end="32555" title="Hell Roaring Creek" label="Hell Roaring Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304926" start="32611" end="32619" title="Red Rock River (Montana)" label="Red Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878247" start="32621" end="32631" title="Beaverhead River" label="Beaverhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q284790" start="32633" end="32642" title="Jefferson River" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="32658" end="32675" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q486047" start="32723" end="32756" title="List of rivers by length" label="fourth longest river in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="32763" end="32780" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8528647" start="32818" end="32829" title="Younts Peak" label="Younts Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714851" start="32848" end="32864" title="Teton Wilderness" label="Teton Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="32889" end="32914" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q957037" start="32936" end="32944" title="Gardiner, Montana" label="Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q960253" start="32988" end="32998" title="Livingston, Montana" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q960167" start="33063" end="33073" title="Miles City, Montana" label="Miles City"/>
<link wikidata="Q967324" start="33075" end="33083" title="Glendive, Montana" label="Glendive"/>
<link wikidata="Q959533" start="33089" end="33095" title="Sidney, Montana" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q895050" start="33344" end="33351" title="Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana)" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617313" start="33353" end="33363" title="Stillwater River (Stillwater County, Montana)" label="Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q859686" start="33378" end="33385" title="Bighorn River" label="Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787489" start="33387" end="33393" title="Tongue River (Montana)" label="Tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096785" start="33399" end="33412" title="Powder River (Montana)" label="Powder Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433645" start="33538" end="33543" title="Belly River" label="Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590512" start="33549" end="33559" title="St. Mary River (Montana-Alberta)" label="Saint Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047" start="33615" end="33633" title="Saskatchewan River" label="Saskatchewan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="33665" end="33675" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427364" start="33770" end="33783" title="Flathead Lake" label="Flathead Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995883" start="33877" end="33891" title="Whitefish Lake State Park" label="Whitefish Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492006" start="34015" end="34034" title="Fort Peck Lake" label="Fort Peck Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637929" start="34193" end="34205" title="Hungry Horse Dam" label="Hungry Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476491" start="34229" end="34243" title="Lake Koocanusa" label="Lake Koocanusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475743" start="34267" end="34278" title="Lake Elwell" label="Lake Elwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127168" start="34300" end="34312" title="Clark Canyon Dam" label="Clark Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600045" start="34338" end="34348" title="Yellowtail Dam" label="Yellowtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034204" start="34371" end="34383" title="Canyon Ferry Lake" label="Canyon Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268280" start="34385" end="34391" title="Hauser Dam" label="Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060451" start="34393" end="34399" title="Holter Dam" label="Holter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284612" start="34401" end="34408" title="Rainbow Dam" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920713" start="34414" end="34425" title="Black Eagle Dam" label="Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="34506" end="34520" title="lodgepole pine" label="lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="34522" end="34536" title="ponderosa pine" label="ponderosa pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="34538" end="34549" title="Douglas fir" label="Douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="34551" end="34556" title="larch" label="larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="34558" end="34564" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087592" start="34566" end="34571" title="aspen" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="34573" end="34578" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="34580" end="34589" title="Thuja plicata" label="red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="34591" end="34598" title="Tsuga" label="hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="34600" end="34603" title="ash tree" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="34605" end="34610" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="34627" end="34632" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q678847" start="34637" end="34647" title="Populus sect. Aegiros" label="cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q517130" start="34727" end="34733" title="Aster (genus)" label="asters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113860" start="34735" end="34745" title="bitterroot" label="bitterroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="34748" end="34755" title="Asteraceae" label="daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q156811" start="34757" end="34762" title="lupin" label="lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q144723" start="34765" end="34772" title="Papaveraceae" label="poppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q158974" start="34774" end="34783" title="Primula" label="primroses"/>
<link wikidata="Q147641" start="34785" end="34794" title="Aquilegia" label="columbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194627" start="34796" end="34802" title="lily" label="lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="34804" end="34810" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q123279" start="34817" end="34823" title="dryas (plant)" label="dryads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="34844" end="34853" title="sagebrush" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="34858" end="34864" title="cacti" label="cactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="34921" end="34929" title="mushroom" label="mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="34935" end="34941" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="35019" end="35028" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="35043" end="35049" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="35054" end="35061" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="35071" end="35075" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="35116" end="35128" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="35164" end="35171" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="35180" end="35190" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="35217" end="35229" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="35294" end="35312" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q402885" start="35313" end="35332" title="black-footed ferret" label="black-footed ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q457477" start="35334" end="35348" title="whooping crane" label="whooping crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q28168" start="35350" end="35360" title="least tern" label="least tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q921461" start="35362" end="35377" title="pallid sturgeon" label="pallid sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q592876" start="35383" end="35397" title="white sturgeon" label="white sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197023" start="35408" end="35426" title="threatened species" label="threatened species"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="35441" end="35453" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="35455" end="35468" title="Canadian lynx" label="Canadian lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429513" start="35474" end="35484" title="bull trout" label="bull trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="35512" end="35521" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019742" start="35617" end="35663" title="Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks" label="Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555979" start="35727" end="35736" title="game fish" label="game fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="35772" end="35779" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q536224" start="35785" end="35800" title="smallmouth bass" label="smallmouth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="35861" end="35879" title="common pheasant" label="ring-neck pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26106" start="35881" end="35895" title="grey partridge" label="grey partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="35897" end="35900" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="35902" end="35920" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="35922" end="35931" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="35933" end="35947" title="whitetail deer" label="whitetail deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="35949" end="35958" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="35964" end="35977" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="36020" end="36041" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="36096" end="36121" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="36219" end="36251" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Little Bighorn National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906951" start="36253" end="36292" title="Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area" label="Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905829" start="36298" end="36327" title="Big Hole National Battlefield" label="Big Hole National Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971002" start="36333" end="36349" title="CSKT Bison Range" label="CSKT Bison Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q497587" start="36368" end="36407" title="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes" label="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744721" start="36416" end="36432" title="American Prairie (nature reserve)" label="American Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="36581" end="36611" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="36612" end="36626" title="United States Forest Service" label="Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="36661" end="36677" title="United States National Forest" label="National Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="36706" end="36716" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="36732" end="36747" title="wilderness area" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="36770" end="36809" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="National Wilderness Preservation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872810" start="36829" end="36851" title="Wilderness Act" label="Wilderness Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="36857" end="36888" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="36889" end="36914" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="36977" end="37002" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410668" start="37039" end="37063" title="National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010548" start="37144" end="37165" title="United States Bureau of Reclamation" label="Bureau of Reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019742" start="37236" end="37282" title="Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks" label="Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603600" start="37448" end="37465" title="State Trust Lands" label="School Trust Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217022" start="37508" end="37530" title="Land Ordinance of 1785" label="Land Ordinance of 1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="37711" end="37732" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905829" start="37744" end="37773" title="Big Hole National Battlefield" label="Big Hole National Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q960975" start="37779" end="37785" title="Wisdom, Montana" label="Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906951" start="37788" end="37827" title="Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area" label="Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q960959" start="37833" end="37843" title="Fort Smith, Montana" label="Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="37846" end="37867" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543158" start="37870" end="37910" title="Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site" label="Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q960518" start="37914" end="37924" title="Deer Lodge, Montana" label="Deer Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123048" start="37927" end="37966" title="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail" label="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865583" start="37969" end="38013" title="Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument" label="Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q964578" start="38019" end="38030" title="Crow Agency, Montana" label="Crow Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983993" start="38033" end="38067" title="Nez Perce National Historical Park" label="Nez Perce National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="38070" end="38095" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256191" start="38270" end="38283" title="45th parallel north" label="45th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="38330" end="38340" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="38349" end="38362" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330319" start="38495" end="38510" title="Eastern Montana" label="Eastern Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="38598" end="38607" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="38609" end="38620" title="Continentality" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="38630" end="38659" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="38666" end="38669" title="Cold steppe" label="BSk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="38682" end="38700" title="Continental Divide" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q967324" start="39303" end="39311" title="Glendive" label="Glendive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39804" end="39815" title="Rogers Pass (Montana)#Record cold temperature" label="Rogers Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="39863" end="39869" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q210316" start="40001" end="40021" title="cold front" label="cold continental air"/>
<link wikidata="Q898845" start="40192" end="40200" title="chinook wind" label="chinooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q431737" start="40389" end="40393" title="Loma, Montana" label="Loma"/>
<link wikidata="Q898845" start="40519" end="40531" title="chinook wind" label="chinook wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="40779" end="40790" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q966608" start="40805" end="40810" title="Heron, Montana" label="Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="40843" end="40856" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q955773" start="40939" end="40947" title="Lonepine, Montana" label="Lonepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q960518" start="40963" end="40973" title="Deer Lodge, Montana" label="Deer Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q634287" start="41041" end="41057" title="Grinnell Glacier" label="Grinnell Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="41061" end="41082" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079023" start="41266" end="41275" title="snowstorm" label="snowstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="41859" end="41870" title="bark beetle" label="bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="42219" end="42255" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612464" start="42718" end="42728" title="Geographic contiguity" label="contiguous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42748" end="42756" title="Geography of Colorado#Antipodes" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q319909" start="42767" end="42776" title="antipodes" label="antipodal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46772" start="42790" end="42807" title="Kerguelen Islands" label="Kerguelen Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q967099" start="42920" end="42927" title="Chester, Montana" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q955761" start="42932" end="42939" title="Rudyard, Montana" label="Rudyard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42991" end="42999" title="County#United States" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389680" start="43019" end="43037" title="Place (United States Census Bureau)" label="&amp;quot;places&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="43056" end="43083" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43111" end="43130" title="Place (United States Census Bureau)#Incorporated place" label="incorporated places"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="43139" end="43162" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="43233" end="43259" title="Consolidated city–county" label="consolidated city-counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="43284" end="43292" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="43373" end="43381" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="43383" end="43394" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="43399" end="43406" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="43432" end="43462" title="United States Micropolitan Statistical Area" label="Micropolitan Statistical Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="43476" end="43483" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="43485" end="43490" title="Butte-Silver Bow, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="43492" end="43498" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q853175" start="43500" end="43509" title="Kalispell, Montana" label="Kalispell"/>
<link wikidata="Q959425" start="43514" end="43519" title="Havre, Montana" label="Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="44040" end="44060" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q491569" start="44097" end="44111" title="Meagher County, Montana" label="Meagher County"/>
<link wikidata="Q957455" start="44128" end="44149" title="White Sulphur Springs, Montana" label="White Sulphur Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="44174" end="44201" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="44297" end="44308" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q387978" start="44525" end="44540" title="Gallatin County, Montana" label="Gallatin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q853175" start="44656" end="44665" title="Kalispell, Montana" label="Kalispell"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="44742" end="44750" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="45038" end="45041" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="45054" end="45087" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="45119" end="45127" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="45220" end="45226" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="45228" end="45234" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="45236" end="45243" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="45245" end="45250" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="45256" end="45263" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q109503" start="46122" end="46130" title="Big Horn County, Montana" label="Big Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q31091" start="46132" end="46139" title="Glacier County, Montana" label="Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q496751" start="46145" end="46154" title="Roosevelt County, Montana" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192650" start="46218" end="46224" title="Blaine County, Montana" label="Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193167" start="46226" end="46233" title="Cascade County, Montana" label="Cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q496589" start="46235" end="46239" title="Hill County, Montana" label="Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q496558" start="46241" end="46249" title="Missoula County, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q490283" start="46255" end="46275" title="Yellowstone County, Montana" label="Yellowstone Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q853085" start="46954" end="46969" title="ethnolinguistic" label="ethnolinguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="47135" end="47146" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="47497" end="47502" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="47504" end="47518" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="47653" end="47661" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="47663" end="47668" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="47674" end="47679" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="47797" end="47807" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="47812" end="47822" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="47905" end="47917" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="48048" end="48053" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="48152" end="48160" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713742" start="48852" end="48857" title="Hmong Americans" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="48910" end="48918" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="49124" end="49130" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019827" start="49524" end="49549" title="Indian Appropriations Act" label="Indian Appropriations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="49562" end="49571" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="49588" end="49613" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865809" start="49757" end="49795" title="Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians of Montana" label="Little Shell Tribe of Chippewa Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="49799" end="49810" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673132" start="49876" end="49885" title="Piegan Blackfeet" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123248" start="49917" end="49945" title="Blackfeet Indian Reservation" label="Blackfeet Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q964747" start="49956" end="49964" title="Browning, Montana" label="Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241804" start="49978" end="50001" title="Crow Indian Reservation" label="Crow Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q964578" start="50012" end="50023" title="Crow Agency, Montana" label="Crow Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q497587" start="50025" end="50057" title="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Nation" label="Confederated Salish and Kootenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q492901" start="50062" end="50081" title="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreilles tribe" label="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q503543" start="50089" end="50116" title="Flathead Indian Reservation" label="Flathead Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q968511" start="50127" end="50132" title="Pablo, Montana" label="Pablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457186" start="50134" end="50151" title="Northern Cheyenne" label="Northern Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457186" start="50159" end="50195" title="Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation" label="Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q960936" start="50206" end="50215" title="Lame Deer, Montana" label="Lame Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="50217" end="50228" title="Assiniboine people" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q510032" start="50233" end="50244" title="Gros Ventre" label="Gros Ventre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470798" start="50252" end="50283" title="Fort Belknap Indian Reservation" label="Fort Belknap Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q957580" start="50294" end="50313" title="Fort Belknap Agency, Montana" label="Fort Belknap Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="50331" end="50336" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332196" start="50344" end="50372" title="Fort Peck Indian Reservation" label="Fort Peck Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q961131" start="50383" end="50389" title="Poplar, Montana" label="Poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101668" start="50395" end="50408" title="Chippewa-Cree" label="Chippewa-Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q477408" start="50416" end="50451" title="Rocky Boy Indian Reservation" label="Rocky Boy&amp;#x27;s Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q955705" start="50464" end="50473" title="Box Elder, Montana" label="Box Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="50675" end="50680" title="Métis people (United States)" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904302" start="51433" end="51469" title="Montana Office of Public Instruction" label="Montana Office of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="51615" end="51627" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="51668" end="51677" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840326" start="51853" end="51867" title="Tribal colleges and universities" label="tribal college"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="51873" end="51894" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="52187" end="52191" title="Crow people" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123248" start="52197" end="52206" title="Blackfeet Nation" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="52212" end="52223" title="Assiniboine" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q510032" start="52229" end="52240" title="Gros Ventre" label="Gros Ventre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550384" start="52246" end="52254" title="Kutenai" label="Kootenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q568625" start="52260" end="52275" title="Bitterroot Salish" label="Flathead Salish"/>
<link wikidata="Q492901" start="52280" end="52288" title="Pend d&amp;#x27;Oreilles" label="Kalispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="52294" end="52299" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="52305" end="52310" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="52316" end="52323" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="52329" end="52336" title="Arikara" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q806902" start="52342" end="52349" title="Bannock people" label="Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="52355" end="52363" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="52369" end="52375" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="52381" end="52388" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="52394" end="52398" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="52404" end="52413" title="Nez Perce" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="52419" end="52425" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="52431" end="52439" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q491709" start="52448" end="52455" title="Spokane people" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332196" start="52654" end="52671" title="Fort Peck Indian Reservation" label="Assiniboine Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101668" start="52685" end="52698" title="Chippewa Cree" label="Chippewa Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285430" start="52925" end="52935" title="Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Nation" label="MHA Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470798" start="52955" end="52984" title="Fort Belknap Indian Reservation" label="Fort Belknap Indian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="53213" end="53227" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="53368" end="53375" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="53383" end="53400" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="53443" end="53454" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="54469" end="54506" title="United States Department of Education" label="United States Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="54754" end="54773" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116393" start="54879" end="54891" title="Christianity in the United States" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="54943" end="54977" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55049" end="55060" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="55114" end="55122" title="Mainline Protestant" label="mainline"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="55127" end="55152" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="55502" end="55549" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="55573" end="55611" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="56153" end="56173" title="New Age Spirituality" label="New Age spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="56200" end="56207" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051578" start="56216" end="56224" title="Buddhism in the United States" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="56312" end="56344" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166835" start="56438" end="56464" title="Per capita personal income in the United States" label="per capita personal income"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="56608" end="56620" title="microbrewery" label="microbrewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="56732" end="56738" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="56751" end="56761" title="mining" label="extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="56818" end="56822" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q194358" start="56828" end="56839" title="vermiculite" label="vermiculite"/>
<link wikidata="Q295822" start="56841" end="56847" title="Ecotax" label="Ecotax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457833" start="56900" end="56913" title="severance tax" label="severance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="56970" end="57004" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153729" start="57014" end="57048" title="Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana" label="Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="57251" end="57275" title="Battle of Little Bighorn" label="Battle of Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="57364" end="57374" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="57459" end="57468" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="57506" end="57518" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="57901" end="57910" title="mill levy" label="mill levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495887" start="59778" end="59803" title="Montana University System" label="Montana University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242645" start="59820" end="59844" title="Dawson Community College" label="Dawson Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457900" start="59847" end="59880" title="Flathead Valley Community College" label="Flathead Valley Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851351" start="59883" end="59906" title="Miles Community College" label="Miles Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="59909" end="59941" title="Montana State University" label="Montana State University Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="59945" end="59986" title="Gallatin College Montana State University" label="Gallatin College Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904332" start="59998" end="60031" title="Montana State University Billings" label="Montana State University Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904332" start="60035" end="60084" title="City College at Montana State University Billings" label="City College at Montana State University Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904331" start="60097" end="60130" title="Montana State University-Northern" label="Montana State University-Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599153" start="60140" end="60184" title="Great Falls College Montana State University" label="Great Falls College Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="60199" end="60229" title="University of Montana" label="University of Montana Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879418" start="60233" end="60271" title="Missoula College University of Montana" label="Missoula College University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904341" start="60284" end="60325" title="Montana Tech of the University of Montana" label="Montana Tech of the University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904341" start="60335" end="60368" title="Highlands College of Montana Tech" label="Highlands College of Montana Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551358" start="60378" end="60407" title="University of Montana Western" label="University of Montana Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704552" start="60418" end="60454" title="Helena College University of Montana" label="Helena College University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q39047721" start="60465" end="60505" title="Bitterroot College University of Montana" label="Bitterroot College University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661582" start="60554" end="60576" title="Aaniiih Nakoda College" label="Aaniiih Nakoda College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922829" start="60586" end="60613" title="Blackfeet Community College" label="Blackfeet Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096717" start="60625" end="60649" title="Chief Dull Knife College" label="Chief Dull Knife College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471807" start="60662" end="60689" title="Fort Peck Community College" label="Fort Peck Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649089" start="60699" end="60722" title="Little Big Horn College" label="Little Big Horn College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404844" start="60737" end="60760" title="Salish Kootenai College" label="Salish Kootenai College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618891" start="60769" end="60788" title="Stone Child College" label="Stone Child College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046531" start="60839" end="60854" title="Carroll College (Montana)" label="Carroll College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704764" start="60857" end="60879" title="Rocky Mountain College" label="Rocky Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895472" start="60882" end="60906" title="University of Great Falls" label="University of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q45257903" start="60909" end="60927" title="Apollos University" label="Apollos University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101797" start="61019" end="61030" title="Organic Act" label="Organic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065418" start="63089" end="63111" title="Charles Marion Russell" label="Charles Marion Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="63190" end="63196" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="63243" end="63264" title="American West" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="63272" end="63279" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006691" start="63293" end="63321" title="C. M. Russell Museum Complex" label="C. M. Russell Museum Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="63325" end="63345" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780211" start="63484" end="63496" title="Mary MacLane" label="Mary MacLane"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="63580" end="63585" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442316" start="63788" end="63802" title="Evelyn Cameron" label="Evelyn Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q192293" start="63839" end="63844" title="Terry, Montana" label="Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="64205" end="64219" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q203460" start="64227" end="64248" title="Wallace Earle Stegner" label="Wallace Earle Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551423" start="64324" end="64345" title="James Willard Schultz" label="James Willard Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q964747" start="64373" end="64381" title="Browning, Montana" label="Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="64653" end="64660" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q163944" start="65019" end="65028" title="sweet pea" label="sweet pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189083" start="65641" end="65660" title="Crow Fair" label="Crow Fair and Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q964591" start="65667" end="65673" title="Hardin, Montana" label="Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q964578" start="65716" end="65727" title="Crow Agency, Montana" label="Crow Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q960936" start="65916" end="65925" title="Lame Deer, Montana" label="Lame Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="66028" end="66040" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="66153" end="66165" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="66191" end="66199" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053079" start="66293" end="66304" title="Independent baseball league" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q870585" start="66331" end="66345" title="Pioneer League (baseball)" label="Pioneer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911952" start="66351" end="66368" title="Billings Mustangs" label="Billings Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599171" start="66370" end="66390" title="Great Falls Voyagers" label="Great Falls Voyagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879427" start="66392" end="66412" title="Missoula PaddleHeads" label="Missoula PaddleHeads"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654829" start="66421" end="66441" title="Glacier Range Riders" label="Glacier Range Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302336" start="66590" end="66611" title="University of Montana-Missoula" label="University of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="66616" end="66640" title="Montana State University - Bozeman" label="Montana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q859280" start="66661" end="66679" title="Big Sky Conference" label="Big Sky Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505978" start="66825" end="66844" title="Frontier Conference" label="Frontier Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599697" start="66869" end="66904" title="Great Northwest Athletic Conference" label="Great Northwest Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076619" start="67057" end="67073" title="six-man football" label="six-man football"/>
<link wikidata="Q786342" start="67127" end="67145" title="The Slaughter Rule" label="The Slaughter Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="67171" end="67181" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053709" start="67239" end="67269" title="North American 3 Hockey League" label="North American 3 Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952824" start="67275" end="67290" title="Bozeman Icedogs" label="Bozeman Icedogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544280" start="67292" end="67313" title="Great Falls Americans" label="Great Falls Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703518" start="67319" end="67334" title="Helena Bighorns" label="Helena Bighorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="67367" end="67378" title="Ski jumping" label="Ski jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990944" start="67392" end="67425" title="National Ski Hall of Fame" label="United States Skiing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q940879" start="67435" end="67448" title="Casper Oimoen" label="Casper Oimoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9600" start="67493" end="67513" title="1936 Winter Olympics" label="1936 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9596" start="67624" end="67644" title="1932 Winter Olympics" label="1932 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853265" start="67673" end="67687" title="United States Figure Skating Championships" label="U.S. champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310143" start="67715" end="67740" title="men&amp;#x27;s figure skating" label="men&amp;#x27;s figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361827" start="67765" end="67785" title="John Misha Petkevich" label="John Misha Petkevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="67871" end="67886" title="Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260841" start="67888" end="67899" title="Scott Davis (figure skater)" label="Scott Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9663" start="67940" end="67960" title="1994 Winter Olympics" label="1994 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q962422" start="67975" end="67984" title="Tommy Moe" label="Tommy Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9663" start="68027" end="68047" title="1994 Winter Olympics" label="1994 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="68051" end="68066" title="downhill skiing" label="downhill skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129021" start="68071" end="68078" title="super G" label="super G"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386122" start="68149" end="68162" title="Eric Bergoust" label="Eric Bergoust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68211" end="68234" title="Freestyle skiing#Aerial skiing" label="freestyle aerial skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="68242" end="68262" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="1998 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240205" start="68347" end="68360" title="Maggie Voisin" label="Maggie Voisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578847" start="68654" end="68661" title="Spokane (horse)" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141795" start="68713" end="68727" title="Kentucky Derby" label="Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904236" start="68784" end="68811" title="Montana Cowboy Hall of Fame" label="Montana Cowboy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="68833" end="68843" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q960995" start="68885" end="68894" title="Fort Shaw, Montana" label="Fort Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="68963" end="68992" title="Louisiana Purchase Exposition" label="Louisiana Purchase Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112080" start="69121" end="69151" title="Jack Dempsey vs. Tommy Gibbons" label="Jack Dempsey vs. Tommy Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q967384" start="69229" end="69235" title="Shelby, Montana" label="Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="69590" end="69601" title="Fly fishing" label="Fly fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="69647" end="69652" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440808" start="69765" end="69790" title="Federation of Fly Fishers" label="Federation of Fly Fishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q469946" start="69885" end="69895" title="lake trout" label="lake trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330205" start="69900" end="69914" title="kokanee salmon" label="kokanee salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462862" start="69938" end="69945" title="walleye" label="walleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="69993" end="70006" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q536224" start="70008" end="70018" title="smallmouth bass" label="smallmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q755105" start="70023" end="70038" title="largemouth bass" label="largemouth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="70060" end="70067" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q858011" start="70072" end="70082" title="paddlefish" label="paddlefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="70130" end="70144" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q581906" start="70152" end="70161" title="A River Runs Through It (film)" label="1992 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q736123" start="70165" end="70178" title="Norman Mclean" label="Norman Mclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686969" start="70199" end="70222" title="A River Runs Through It (novel)" label="A River Runs Through It"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="70618" end="70621" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="70623" end="70641" title="Pronghorn" label="pronghorn antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="70643" end="70657" title="whitetail deer" label="whitetail deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="70662" end="70671" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="70726" end="70731" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="70733" end="70746" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="70752" end="70765" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="70804" end="70814" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051992" start="70838" end="70880" title="Yellowstone Park bison herd" label="bison that leave Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="70986" end="70992" title="wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="70997" end="71010" title="mountain lion" label="mountain lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025728" start="71166" end="71195" title="Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation" label="Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="71314" end="71329" title="downhill skiing" label="downhill skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="71334" end="71354" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876520" start="71458" end="71475" title="Bear Paw Ski Bowl" label="Bear Paw Ski Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q959425" start="71481" end="71486" title="Havre, Montana" label="Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906372" start="71489" end="71503" title="Big Sky Resort" label="Big Sky Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q964258" start="71507" end="71514" title="Big Sky, Montana" label="Big Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923451" start="71517" end="71544" title="Blacktail Mountain Ski Area" label="Blacktail Mountain Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q964914" start="71550" end="71558" title="Lakeside, Montana" label="Lakeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966625" start="71561" end="71582" title="Bridger Bowl Ski Area" label="Bridger Bowl Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q569678" start="71588" end="71595" title="Bozeman, Montana" label="Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281969" start="71598" end="71616" title="Discovery Basin" label="Discovery Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q967012" start="71622" end="71633" title="Philipsburg, Montana" label="Philipsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599069" start="71636" end="71657" title="Great Divide Ski Area" label="Great Divide Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="71663" end="71669" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675506" start="71672" end="71708" title="Lookout Pass Ski and Recreation Area" label="Lookout Pass Ski and Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="71713" end="71726" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684278" start="71757" end="71783" title="Lost Trail Powder Mountain" label="Lost Trail Powder Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q968363" start="71789" end="71794" title="Darby, Montana" label="Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794173" start="71797" end="71823" title="Maverick Mountain Ski Area" label="Maverick Mountain Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q955026" start="71829" end="71835" title="Dillon, Montana" label="Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704736" start="71838" end="71854" title="Montana Snowbowl" label="Montana Snowbowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="71860" end="71868" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304548" start="71871" end="71896" title="Red Lodge Mountain Resort" label="Red Lodge Mountain Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q959349" start="71902" end="71911" title="Red Lodge, Montana" label="Red Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503202" start="71914" end="71931" title="Showdown Ski Area" label="Showdown Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q957455" start="71937" end="71958" title="White Sulphur Springs, Montana" label="White Sulphur Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704782" start="71961" end="71980" title="Teton Pass Ski Area" label="Teton Pass Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q967215" start="71986" end="71993" title="Choteau, Montana" label="Choteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855951" start="71996" end="72022" title="Turner Mountain Ski Resort" label="Turner Mountain Ski Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q957370" start="72028" end="72033" title="Libby, Montana" label="Libby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639823" start="72036" end="72061" title="Whitefish Mountain Resort" label="Whitefish Mountain Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q26446" start="72067" end="72076" title="Whitefish, Montana" label="Whitefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880255" start="72127" end="72146" title="Conference and resort hotels" label="destination resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="72589" end="72601" title="Snowmobile" label="Snowmobiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q956110" start="72799" end="72815" title="West Yellowstone, Montana" label="West Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820228" start="73066" end="73076" title="Snow coach" label="Snow coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501600" start="73182" end="73191" title="skijoring" label="skijoring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73297" end="73322" title="Whitefish Winter Carnival" label="Whitefish Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="73352" end="73360" title="Level I trauma center" label="Trauma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="73577" end="73586" title="Level II trauma center" label="Trauma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649931" start="73641" end="73658" title="AARP The Magazine" label="AARP The Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911943" start="73675" end="73690" title="Billings Clinic" label="Billings Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210297" start="73858" end="73870" title="suicide rate" label="suicide rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="74081" end="74093" title="media market" label="media market"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="74128" end="74150" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Media Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049377" start="74263" end="74293" title="List of television stations in Montana" label="television stations in Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414913" start="74319" end="74331" title="List of United States over-the-air television networks" label="U.S. network"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="74366" end="74369" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="74382" end="74387" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635871" start="74388" end="74417" title="List of radio stations in Montana" label="stations broadcast in Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168742" start="74469" end="74481" title="Copper Kings" label="Copper Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513538" start="74560" end="74575" title="Lee Enterprises" label="Lee Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911948" start="74682" end="74698" title="Billings Gazette" label="Billings Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599170" start="74733" end="74752" title="Great Falls Tribune" label="Great Falls Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879431" start="74779" end="74789" title="Missoulian" label="Missoulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="74882" end="74888" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q114258161" start="74912" end="74916" title="Temu (company)" label="Temu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="75130" end="75144" title="Milwaukee Road" label="Milwaukee Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="75150" end="75164" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="75174" end="75190" title="Northern Pacific Railway" label="Northern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="75203" end="75215" title="BNSF Railway" label="BNSF Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404944" start="75354" end="75370" title="Montana RailLink" label="Montana RailLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="75389" end="75406" title="Class II railroad" label="Class II railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="75516" end="75522" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="75536" end="75550" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q957370" start="75612" end="75617" title="Libby, Montana" label="Libby"/>
<link wikidata="Q26446" start="75619" end="75628" title="Whitefish, Montana" label="Whitefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841651" start="75630" end="75642" title="West Glacier, Montana" label="West Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399613" start="75644" end="75649" title="Essex, Montana" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q956142" start="75651" end="75668" title="East Glacier Park Village, Montana" label="East Glacier Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q964747" start="75670" end="75678" title="Browning, Montana" label="Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q968158" start="75680" end="75688" title="Cut Bank, Montana" label="Cut Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q967384" start="75690" end="75696" title="Shelby, Montana" label="Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q959425" start="75698" end="75703" title="Havre, Montana" label="Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q963370" start="75705" end="75710" title="Malta, Montana" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q955640" start="75712" end="75719" title="Glasgow, Montana" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q579020" start="75725" end="75735" title="Wolf Point, Montana" label="Wolf Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175527" start="75786" end="75801" title="Jefferson Lines" label="Jefferson Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q915657" start="75822" end="75863" title="Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport" label="Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q598269" start="75923" end="75959" title="Billings Logan International Airport" label="Billings Logan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565547" start="76027" end="76057" title="Missoula International Airport" label="Missoula International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456412" start="76059" end="76092" title="Great Falls International Airport" label="Great Falls International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273831" start="76094" end="76128" title="Glacier Park International Airport" label="Glacier Park International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885200" start="76130" end="76153" title="Helena Regional Airport" label="Helena Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q619659" start="76155" end="76174" title="Bert Mooney Airport" label="Bert Mooney Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051984" start="76180" end="76199" title="Yellowstone Airport" label="Yellowstone Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368759" start="76285" end="76306" title="Essential Air Service" label="Essential Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q406876" start="76331" end="76344" title="U.S. Route 10" label="U.S. Route 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="76559" end="76572" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q94965" start="76577" end="76590" title="Interstate 94" label="Interstate 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q406224" start="76652" end="76665" title="U.S. Route 2" label="U.S. Routes 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q407564" start="76670" end="76672" title="U.S. Route 12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235600" start="76677" end="76696" title="Montana Highway 200" label="Montana Highway 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="76780" end="76798" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234943" start="76802" end="76815" title="Interstate 15 in Montana" label="Interstate 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q410730" start="76858" end="76872" title="U.S. Route 87" label="U.S. Routes 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q410743" start="76874" end="76876" title="U.S. Route 89" label="89"/>
<link wikidata="Q410790" start="76878" end="76880" title="U.S. Route 93" label="93"/>
<link wikidata="Q472552" start="76886" end="76889" title="U.S. Route 191" label="191"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="76904" end="76916" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="77506" end="77532" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641889" start="77801" end="77816" title="Montana District Courts" label="District Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="77940" end="77962" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="granted women the vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="78022" end="78044" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="Progressive Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q232407" start="78045" end="78061" title="Jeannette Rankin" label="Jeannette Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="78387" end="78398" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973730" start="78582" end="78594" title="water rights" label="water rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="78607" end="78625" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="79143" end="79160" title="Land reclamation" label="reclamation trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="79887" end="79904" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876934" start="80030" end="80038" title="Abortion in Montana" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="80119" end="80130" title="term limits" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567567" start="80332" end="80351" title="Montana Legislature" label="Montana Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605607" start="80822" end="80836" title="Greg Gianforte" label="Greg Gianforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495887" start="82124" end="82149" title="Montana University System" label="Montana University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713323" start="82743" end="82775" title="alcoholic beverage control state" label="alcoholic beverage control state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190495" start="82786" end="82808" title="Division of property" label="equitable distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="82813" end="82829" title="no-fault divorce" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055488" start="82873" end="82882" title="sales tax" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567567" start="82907" end="82926" title="Montana Legislature" label="Montana Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525558" start="82970" end="82984" title="Montana Senate" label="Montana Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257237" start="83004" end="83036" title="Montana House of Representatives" label="Montana House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985180" start="83067" end="83088" title="Montana State Capitol" label="Montana State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178748" start="83566" end="83583" title="Courts of Montana" label="Courts of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704738" start="83681" end="83702" title="Montana Supreme Court" label="Montana Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641889" start="83707" end="83730" title="Montana District Courts" label="Montana District Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641894" start="83773" end="83787" title="Montana inferior courts" label="Justice Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641894" start="83789" end="83800" title="Montana inferior courts" label="City Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641894" start="83802" end="83818" title="Montana inferior courts" label="Municipal Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q115254796" start="84662" end="84696" title="Clerk of the Montana Supreme Court" label="Clerk of the Montana Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641889" start="84802" end="84825" title="Montana District Courts" label="Montana District Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641894" start="85321" end="85370" title="Montana inferior courts" label="city courts, justice courts, and municipal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641900" start="85725" end="85745" title="Montana Youth Courts" label="Montana Youth Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641936" start="86864" end="86883" title="Montana Water Court" label="Montana Water Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200900" start="88551" end="88563" title="Steve Daines" label="Steve Daines"/>
<link wikidata="Q124433916" start="88620" end="88630" title="Tim Sheehy" label="Tim Sheehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="88874" end="88912" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904203" start="89226" end="89267" title="Montana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="Montana&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904205" start="89284" end="89325" title="Montana&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="Montana&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q103158011" start="89688" end="89700" title="Troy Downing" label="Troy Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384672" start="89705" end="89715" title="Ryan Zinke" label="Ryan Zinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631638" start="89904" end="89920" title="William A. Clark" label="William A. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168742" start="89930" end="89941" title="Copper Kings" label="Copper King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399488" start="90117" end="90132" title="Thomas J. Walsh" label="Thomas J. Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q711631" start="90257" end="90274" title="Burton K. Wheeler" label="Burton K. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889152" start="90382" end="90396" title="Mike Mansfield" label="Mike Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="90418" end="90440" title="Party leaders of the United States Senate" label="Senate majority leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q470748" start="90458" end="90468" title="Max Baucus" label="Max Baucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="90576" end="90618" title="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act" label="Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288076" start="90651" end="90662" title="Lee Metcalf" label="Lee Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q232407" start="91008" end="91024" title="Jeannette Rankin" label="Jeannette Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424696" start="91204" end="91220" title="Thomas H. Carter" label="Thomas H. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="91269" end="91298" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889779" start="91359" end="91415" title="United States District Court for the District of Montana" label="United States District Court for the District of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065626" start="91568" end="91587" title="Charles Nelson Pray" label="Charles Nelson Pray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680413" start="91657" end="91672" title="James F. Battin" label="James F. Battin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059697" start="91746" end="91762" title="Paul G. Hatfield" label="Paul G. Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964814" start="91814" end="91826" title="Brian Morris (judge)" label="Brian Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="92079" end="92095" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578606" start="92269" end="92292" title="Split-ticket voting" label="splitting their tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="92985" end="92995" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286103" start="93137" end="93152" title="reapportionment" label="reapportionment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="93653" end="93665" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="93836" end="93862" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="93889" end="93900" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="93938" end="93949" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356264" start="94063" end="94080" title="Montana&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district" label="at-large district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200900" start="94166" end="94178" title="Steve Daines" label="Steve Daines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525558" start="94411" end="94425" title="Montana Senate" label="Montana Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257237" start="94486" end="94510" title="Montana House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="94643" end="94666" title="At-large" label="only one representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="94837" end="94848" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="95118" end="95151" title="List of U.S. states by population" label="List of U.S. states by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018464" start="95389" end="95422" title="Index of Montana-related articles" label="Index of Montana-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q115773857" start="95424" end="95463" title="List of the oldest buildings in Montana" label="List of the oldest buildings in Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147706" start="95465" end="95483" title="Outline of Montana" label="Outline of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866132" start="95485" end="95512" title="Timeline of Montana history" label="Timeline of Montana history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19980" wikidata="Q79798" url="?curid=19980" title="Machine translation">
<text>Machine translation is use of computational techniques to translate text or speech from one language to another, including the contextual, idiomatic and pragmatic nuances of both languages.

Early approaches were mostly rule-based or statistical. These methods have since been superseded by neural machine translation and large language models.

==History==
===Origins===
The origins of machine translation can be traced back to the work of Al-Kindi, a ninth-century Arabic cryptographer who developed techniques for systemic language translation, including cryptanalysis, frequency analysis, and probability and statistics, which are used in modern machine translation. The idea of machine translation later appeared in the 17th century. In 1629, René Descartes proposed a universal language, with equivalent ideas in different tongues sharing one symbol.

The idea of using digital computers for translation of natural languages was proposed as early as 1947 by England&#x27;s A. D. Booth and Warren Weaver at Rockefeller Foundation in the same year. &quot;The memorandum written by Warren Weaver in 1949 is perhaps the single most influential publication in the earliest days of machine translation.&quot; Others followed. A demonstration was made in 1954 on the APEXC machine at Birkbeck College (University of London) of a rudimentary translation of English into French. Several papers on the topic were published at the time, and even articles in popular journals (for example an article by Cleave and Zacharov in the September 1955 issue of &quot;Wireless World&quot;). A similar application, also pioneered at Birkbeck College at the time, was reading and composing Braille texts by computer.

===1950s===
The first researcher in the field, Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, began his research at MIT (1951). A Georgetown University MT research team, led by Professor Michael Zarechnak, followed (1951) with a public demonstration of its Georgetown-IBM experiment system in 1954. MT research programs popped up in Japan and Russia (1955), and the first MT conference was held in London (1956).

David G. Hays &quot;wrote about computer-assisted language processing as early as 1957&quot; and &quot;was project leader on computational linguistics
at Rand from 1955 to 1968.&quot;

===1960–1975===
Researchers continued to join the field as the Association for Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics was formed in the U.S. (1962) and the National Academy of Sciences formed the Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee (ALPAC) to study MT (1964). Real progress was much slower, however, and after the ALPAC report (1966), which found that the ten-year-long research had failed to fulfill expectations, funding was greatly reduced. According to a 1972 report by the Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&amp;E), the feasibility of large-scale MT was reestablished by the success of the Logos MT system in translating military manuals into Vietnamese during that conflict.

The French Textile Institute also used MT to translate abstracts from and into French, English, German and Spanish (1970); Brigham Young University started a project to translate Mormon texts by automated translation (1971).

===1975 and beyond===
SYSTRAN, which &quot;pioneered the field under contracts from the U.S. government&quot; in the 1960s, was used by Xerox to translate technical manuals (1978). Beginning in the late 1980s, as computational power increased and became less expensive, more interest was shown in statistical models for machine translation. MT became more popular after the advent of computers. SYSTRAN&#x27;s first implementation system was implemented in 1988 by the online service of the French Postal Service called Minitel. Various computer based translation companies were also launched, including Trados (1984), which was the first to develop and market Translation Memory technology (1989), though this is not the same as MT. The first commercial MT system for Russian / English / German-Ukrainian was developed at Kharkov State University (1991).

By 1998, &quot;for as little as $29.95&quot; one could &quot;buy a program for translating in one direction between English and a major European language of
your choice&quot; to run on a PC.

MT on the web started with SYSTRAN offering free translation of small texts (1996) and then providing this via AltaVista Babelfish, which racked up 500,000 requests a day (1997). The second free translation service on the web was Lernout &amp; Hauspie&#x27;s GlobaLink. &quot;Atlantic Magazine&quot; wrote in 1998 that &quot;Systran&#x27;s Babelfish and GlobaLink&#x27;s Comprende&quot; handled
&quot;Don&#x27;t bank on it&quot; with a &quot;competent performance.&quot;

Franz Josef Och (the future head of Translation Development AT Google) won DARPA&#x27;s speed MT competition (2003). More innovations during this time included MOSES, the open-source statistical MT engine (2007), a text/SMS translation service for mobiles in Japan (2008), and a mobile phone with built-in speech-to-speech translation functionality for English, Japanese and Chinese (2009). In 2012, Google announced that Google Translate translates roughly enough text to fill 1 million books in one day.

==Approaches==
Before the advent of deep learning methods, statistical methods required a lot of rules accompanied by morphological, syntactic, and semantic annotations.

===Rule-based===
The rule-based machine translation approach was used mostly in the creation of dictionaries and grammar programs. Its biggest downfall was that everything had to be made explicit: orthographical variation and erroneous input must be made part of the source language analyser in order to cope with it, and lexical selection rules must be written for all instances of ambiguity.

====Transfer-based machine translation====
Transfer-based machine translation was similar to interlingual machine translation in that it created a translation from an intermediate representation that simulated the meaning of the original sentence. Unlike interlingual MT, it depended partially on the language pair involved in the translation.

====Interlingual====
Interlingual machine translation was one instance of rule-based machine-translation approaches. In this approach, the source language, i.e. the text to be translated, was transformed into an interlingual language, i.e. a &quot;language neutral&quot; representation that is independent of any language. The target language was then generated out of the interlingua. The only interlingual machine translation system that was made operational at the commercial level was the KANT system (Nyberg and Mitamura, 1992), which was designed to translate Caterpillar Technical English (CTE) into other languages.

====Dictionary-based====
Machine translation used a method based on dictionary entries, which means that the words were translated as they are by a dictionary.

===Statistical===

Statistical machine translation tried to generate translations using statistical methods based on bilingual text corpora, such as the Canadian Hansard corpus, the English-French record of the Canadian parliament and EUROPARL, the record of the European Parliament. Where such corpora were available, good results were achieved translating similar texts, but such corpora were rare for many language pairs. The first statistical machine translation software was CANDIDE from IBM. In 2005, Google improved its internal translation capabilities by using approximately 200 billion words from United Nations materials to train their system; translation accuracy improved.

SMT&#x27;s biggest downfall included it being dependent upon huge amounts of parallel texts, its problems with morphology-rich languages (especially with translating &quot;into&quot; such languages), and its inability to correct singleton errors.

Some work has been done in the utilization of multiparallel corpora, that is a body of text that has been translated into 3 or more languages. Using these methods, a text that has been translated into 2 or more languages may be utilized in combination to provide a more accurate translation into a third language compared with if just one of those source languages were used alone.

=== Neural MT ===
A deep learning-based approach to MT, neural machine translation has made rapid progress in recent years. However, the current consensus is that the so-called human parity achieved is not real, being based wholly on limited domains, language pairs, and certain test benchmarks i.e., it lacks statistical significance power.

Translations by neural MT tools like DeepL Translator, which is thought to usually deliver the best machine translation results as of 2022, typically still need post-editing by a human.

Instead of training specialized translation models on parallel datasets, one can also directly prompt generative large language models like GPT to translate a text. This approach is considered promising, but is still more resource-intensive than specialized translation models.

==Issues==
Studies using human evaluation (e.g. by professional literary translators or human readers) have systematically identified various issues with the latest advanced MT outputs. Common issues include the translation of ambiguous parts whose correct translation requires common sense-like semantic language processing or context. There can also be errors in the source texts, missing high-quality training data and the severity of frequency of several types of problems may not get reduced with techniques used to date, requiring some level of human active participation.

===Disambiguation===

Word-sense disambiguation concerns finding a suitable translation when a word can have more than one meaning. The problem was first raised in the 1950s by Yehoshua Bar-Hillel. He pointed out that without a &quot;universal encyclopedia&quot;, a machine would never be able to distinguish between the two meanings of a word. Today there are numerous approaches designed to overcome this problem. They can be approximately divided into &quot;shallow&quot; approaches and &quot;deep&quot; approaches.

Shallow approaches assume no knowledge of the text. They simply apply statistical methods to the words surrounding the ambiguous word. Deep approaches presume a comprehensive knowledge of the word. So far, shallow approaches have been more successful.

Claude Piron, a long-time translator for the United Nations and the World Health Organization, wrote that machine translation, at its best, automates the easier part of a translator&#x27;s job; the harder and more time-consuming part usually involves doing extensive research to resolve ambiguities in the source text, which the grammatical and lexical exigencies of the target language require to be resolved:

The ideal deep approach would require the translation software to do all the research necessary for this kind of disambiguation on its own; but this would require a higher degree of AI than has yet been attained. A shallow approach which simply guessed at the sense of the ambiguous English phrase that Piron mentions (based, perhaps, on which kind of prisoner-of-war camp is more often mentioned in a given corpus) would have a reasonable chance of guessing wrong fairly often. A shallow approach that involves &quot;ask the user about each ambiguity&quot; would, by Piron&#x27;s estimate, only automate about 25% of a professional translator&#x27;s job, leaving the harder 75% still to be done by a human.

===Non-standard speech===
One of the major pitfalls of MT is its inability to translate non-standard language with the same accuracy as standard language. Heuristic or statistical based MT takes input from various sources in standard form of a language. Rule-based translation, by nature, does not include common non-standard usages. This causes errors in translation from a vernacular source or into colloquial language. Limitations on translation from casual speech present issues in the use of machine translation in mobile devices.

===Named entities===

In information extraction, named entities, in a narrow sense, refer to concrete or abstract entities in the real world such as people, organizations, companies, and places that have a proper name: George Washington, Chicago, Microsoft. It also refers to expressions of time, space and quantity such as 1 July 2011, $500.

In the sentence &quot;Smith is the president of Fabrionix&quot; both &quot;Smith&quot; and &quot;Fabrionix&quot; are named entities, and can be further qualified via first name or other information; &quot;president&quot; is not, since Smith could have earlier held another position at Fabrionix, e.g. Vice President.
The term rigid designator is what defines these usages for analysis in statistical machine translation.

Named entities must first be identified in the text; if not, they may be erroneously translated as common nouns, which would most likely not affect the BLEU rating of the translation but would change the text&#x27;s human readability. They may be omitted from the output translation, which would also have implications for the text&#x27;s readability and message.

Transliteration includes finding the letters in the target language that most closely correspond to the name in the source language. This, however, has been cited as sometimes worsening the quality of translation. For &quot;Southern California&quot; the first word should be translated directly, while the second word should be transliterated. Machines often transliterate both because they treated them as one entity. Words like these are hard for machine translators, even those with a transliteration component, to process.

Use of a &quot;do-not-translate&quot; list, which has the same end goal – transliteration as opposed to translation. still relies on correct identification of named entities.

A third approach is a class-based model. Named entities are replaced with a token to represent their &quot;class&quot;; &quot;Ted&quot; and &quot;Erica&quot; would both be replaced with &quot;person&quot; class token. Then the statistical distribution and use of person names, in general, can be analyzed instead of looking at the distributions of &quot;Ted&quot; and &quot;Erica&quot; individually, so that the probability of a given name in a specific language will not affect the assigned probability of a translation. A study by Stanford on improving this area of translation gives the examples that different probabilities will be assigned to &quot;David is going for a walk&quot; and &quot;Ankit is going for a walk&quot; for English as a target language due to the different number of occurrences for each name in the training data. A frustrating outcome of the same study by Stanford (and other attempts to improve named recognition translation) is that many times, a decrease in the BLEU scores for translation will result from the inclusion of methods for named entity translation.

==Applications==
While no system provides the ideal of fully automatic high-quality machine translation of unrestricted text, many fully automated systems produce reasonable output. The quality of machine translation is substantially improved if the domain is restricted and controlled. This enables using machine translation as a tool to speed up and simplify translations, as well as producing flawed but useful low-cost or ad-hoc translations.

===Travel===
Machine translation applications have also been released for most mobile devices, including mobile telephones, pocket PCs, PDAs, etc. Due to their portability, such instruments have come to be designated as mobile translation tools enabling mobile business networking between partners speaking different languages, or facilitating both foreign language learning and unaccompanied traveling to foreign countries without the need of the intermediation of a human translator.

For example, the Google Translate app allows foreigners to quickly translate text in their surrounding via augmented reality using the smartphone camera that overlays the translated text onto the text. It can also recognize speech and then translate it.

===Public administration===
Despite their inherent limitations, MT programs are used around the world. Probably the largest institutional user is the European Commission. In 2012, with an aim to replace a rule-based MT by newer, statistical-based MT@EC, The European Commission contributed 3.072 million euros (via its ISA programme).

===Wikipedia===
Machine translation has also been used for translating Wikipedia articles and could play a larger role in creating, updating, expanding, and generally improving articles in the future, especially as the MT capabilities may improve. There is a &quot;content translation tool&quot; which allows editors to more easily translate articles across several select languages. English-language articles are thought to usually be more comprehensive and less biased than their non-translated equivalents in other languages. As of 2022, English Wikipedia has over 6.5 million articles while the German and Swedish Wikipedias each only have over 2.5 million articles, each often far less comprehensive.

===Surveillance and military===
Following terrorist attacks in Western countries, including 9-11, the U.S. and its allies have been most interested in developing Arabic machine translation programs, but also in translating Pashto and Dari languages. Within these languages, the focus is on key phrases and quick communication between military members and civilians through the use of mobile phone apps. The Information Processing Technology Office in DARPA hosted programs like TIDES and Babylon translator. US Air Force has awarded a $1 million contract to develop a language translation technology.

===Social media===
The notable rise of social networking on the web in recent years has created yet another niche for the application of machine translation software – in utilities such as Facebook, or instant messaging clients such as Skype, Google Talk, MSN Messenger, etc. – allowing users speaking different languages to communicate with each other.

==== Online games ====
Lineage W gained popularity in Japan because of its machine translation features allowing players from different countries to communicate.

===Medicine===
Despite being labelled as an unworthy competitor to human translation in 1966 by the Automated Language Processing Advisory Committee put together by the United States government, the quality of machine translation has now been improved to such levels that its application in online collaboration and in the medical field are being investigated. The application of this technology in medical settings where human translators are absent is another topic of research, but difficulties arise due to the importance of accurate translations in medical diagnoses.

Researchers caution that the use of machine translation in medicine could risk mistranslations that can be dangerous in critical situations. Machine translation can make it easier for doctors to communicate with their patients in day to day activities, but it is recommended to only use machine translation when there is no other alternative, and that translated medical texts should be reviewed by human translators for accuracy.

=== Law ===
Legal language poses a significant challenge to machine translation tools due to its precise nature and atypical use of normal words. For this reason, specialized algorithms have been developed for use in legal contexts. Due to the risk of mistranslations arising from machine translators, researchers recommend that machine translations should be reviewed by human translators for accuracy, and some courts prohibit its use in formal proceedings.

The use of machine translation in law has raised concerns about translation errors and client confidentiality. Lawyers who use free translation tools such as Google Translate may accidentally violate client confidentiality by exposing private information to the providers of the translation tools. In addition, there have been arguments that consent for a police search that is obtained with machine translation is invalid, with different courts issuing different verdicts over whether or not these arguments are valid.

=== Ancient languages ===
The advancements in convolutional neural networks in recent years and in low resource machine translation (when only a very limited amount of data and examples are available for training) enabled machine translation for ancient languages, such as Akkadian and its dialects Babylonian and Assyrian.

==Evaluation==

There are many factors that affect how machine translation systems are evaluated. These factors include the intended use of the translation, the nature of the machine translation software, and the nature of the translation process.

Different programs may work well for different purposes. For example, statistical machine translation (SMT) typically outperforms example-based machine translation (EBMT), but researchers found that when evaluating English to French translation, EBMT performs better. The same concept applies for technical documents, which can be more easily translated by SMT because of their formal language.

In certain applications, however, e.g., product descriptions written in a controlled language, a dictionary-based machine-translation system has produced satisfactory translations that require no human intervention save for quality inspection.

There are various means for evaluating the output quality of machine translation systems. The oldest is the use of human judges to assess a translation&#x27;s quality. Even though human evaluation is time-consuming, it is still the most reliable method to compare different systems such as rule-based and statistical systems. Automated means of evaluation include BLEU, NIST, METEOR, and LEPOR.

Relying exclusively on unedited machine translation ignores the fact that communication in human language is context-embedded and that it takes a person to comprehend the context of the original text with a reasonable degree of probability. It is certainly true that even purely human-generated translations are prone to error. Therefore, to ensure that a machine-generated translation will be useful to a human being and that publishable-quality translation is achieved, such translations must be reviewed and edited by a human. The late Claude Piron wrote that machine translation, at its best, automates the easier part of a translator&#x27;s job; the harder and more time-consuming part usually involves doing extensive research to resolve ambiguities in the source text, which the grammatical and lexical exigencies of the target language require to be resolved. Such research is a necessary prelude to the pre-editing necessary in order to provide input for machine-translation software such that the output will not be meaningless.

In addition to disambiguation problems, decreased accuracy can occur due to varying levels of training data for machine translating programs. Both example-based and statistical machine translation rely on a vast array of real example sentences as a base for translation, and when too many or too few sentences are analyzed accuracy is jeopardized. Researchers found that when a program is trained on 203,529 sentence pairings, accuracy actually decreases. The optimal level of training data seems to be just over 100,000 sentences, possibly because as training data increases, the number of possible sentences increases, making it harder to find an exact translation match.

Flaws in machine translation have been noted for their entertainment value. Two videos uploaded to YouTube in April 2017 involve two Japanese hiragana characters えぐ (&quot;e&quot; and &quot;gu&quot;) being repeatedly pasted into Google Translate, with the resulting translations quickly degrading into nonsensical phrases such as &quot;DECEARING EGG&quot; and &quot;Deep-sea squeeze trees&quot;, which are then read in increasingly absurd voices; the full-length version of the video currently has 6.9 million views 

==Machine translation and signed languages==

In the early 2000s, options for machine translation between spoken and signed languages were severely limited. It was a common belief that deaf individuals could use traditional translators. However, stress, intonation, pitch, and timing are conveyed much differently in spoken languages compared to signed languages. Therefore, a deaf individual may misinterpret or become confused about the meaning of written text that is based on a spoken language.

Researchers Zhao, et al. (2000), developed a prototype called TEAM (translation from English to ASL by machine) that completed English to American Sign Language (ASL) translations. The program would first analyze the syntactic, grammatical, and morphological aspects of the English text. Following this step, the program accessed a sign synthesizer, which acted as a dictionary for ASL. This synthesizer housed the process one must follow to complete ASL signs, as well as the meanings of these signs. Once the entire text is analyzed and the signs necessary to complete the translation are located in the synthesizer, a computer generated human appeared and would use ASL to sign the English text to the user.

==Copyright==
Only works that are original are subject to copyright protection, so some scholars claim that machine translation results are not entitled to copyright protection because MT does not involve creativity. The copyright at issue is for a derivative work; the author of the original work in the original language does not lose his rights when a work is translated: a translator must have permission to publish a translation.

==See also==

*AI-complete
*Cache language model
*Comparison of machine translation applications
*Comparison of different machine translation approaches
*Computational linguistics
*Computer-assisted translation and Translation memory
*Controlled language in machine translation
*Controlled natural language
*Foreign language writing aid
*Fuzzy matching (computer-assisted translation)
*History of machine translation
*Human language technology
*Humour in translation (&quot;howlers&quot;)
*Language and Communication Technologies
*Language barrier
*List of emerging technologies
*List of research laboratories for machine translation
*Mobile translation
*Neural machine translation
*OpenLogos
*Phraselator
*Postediting
*Pseudo-translation
*Round-trip translation
*Statistical machine translation
*Translation memory
*ULTRA (machine translation system)
*Universal Networking Language
*Universal translator
==Notes==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* The Advantages and Disadvantages of Machine Translation
* International Association for Machine Translation (IAMT) 
*Machine Translation Archive by John Hutchins. An electronic repository (and bibliography) of articles, books and papers in the field of machine translation and computer-based translation technology
*Machine translation (computer-based translation) – Publications by John Hutchins (includes PDFs of several books on machine translation)
*Machine Translation and Minority Languages
*John Hutchins 1999 
*Slator News &amp; analysis of the latest developments in machine translation
*From Classroom to Real World: How Machine Translation is Changing the Landscape of Foreign Language Learning</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="0" end="19" title="Machine translation" label="Machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="58" end="67" title="translation" label="translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="92" end="100" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378909" start="220" end="230" title="Rule-based machine translation" label="rule-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245113" start="234" end="245" title="Statistical machine translation" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053937" start="291" end="317" title="neural machine translation" label="neural machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115305900" start="322" end="343" title="Large language model" label="large language models"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="441" end="449" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="474" end="487" title="cryptographer" label="cryptographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="558" end="571" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565636" start="573" end="591" title="frequency analysis" label="frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="597" end="608" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="613" end="623" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="748" end="762" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090592" start="979" end="990" title="Andrew Donald Booth" label="A. D. Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q510591" start="995" end="1008" title="Warren Weaver" label="Warren Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="1012" end="1034" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q510591" start="1085" end="1098" title="Warren Weaver" label="Warren Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q476193" start="1266" end="1271" title="APEXC" label="APEXC"/>
<link wikidata="Q375606" start="1283" end="1299" title="Birkbeck, University of London" label="Birkbeck College"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="1301" end="1321" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358489" start="1554" end="1568" title="Wireless World" label="Wireless World"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="1674" end="1681" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q584382" start="1749" end="1768" title="Yehoshua Bar-Hillel" label="Yehoshua Bar-Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="1806" end="1827" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160483" start="1933" end="1958" title="Georgetown-IBM experiment" label="Georgetown-IBM experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233935" start="2090" end="2103" title="David G. Hays" label="David G. Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="2244" end="2248" title="RAND Corporation" label="Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q372321" start="2613" end="2625" title="ALPAC" label="ALPAC report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316175" start="3244" end="3251" title="SYSTRAN" label="SYSTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="3435" end="3446" title="computation" label="computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245113" start="3519" end="3561" title="statistical machine translation" label="statistical models for machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q373724" start="3713" end="3734" title="La Poste (France)" label="French Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809862" start="4501" end="4522" title="Lernout &amp;amp; Hauspie" label="Lernout &amp;amp; Hauspie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303405" start="4743" end="4758" title="Franz Josef Och" label="Franz Josef Och"/>
<link wikidata="Q135622" start="5165" end="5181" title="Google Translate" label="Google Translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="5286" end="5299" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="5368" end="5381" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="5383" end="5392" title="syntax" label="syntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="5398" end="5406" title="semantics" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="5517" end="5529" title="dictionaries" label="dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652459" start="5909" end="5941" title="interlingual machine translation" label="interlingual machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q856574" start="6534" end="6545" title="interlinguistics" label="interlingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q23622" start="6854" end="6864" title="dictionary" label="dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="7035" end="7054" title="statistical methods" label="statistical methods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7100" end="7116" title="Hansard#Translation" label="Canadian Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412081" start="7182" end="7190" title="Europarl corpus" label="EUROPARL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="7210" end="7229" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7427" end="7434" title="CANDIDE" label="CANDIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="7440" end="7443" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="7942" end="7949" title="text corpus" label="corpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="8285" end="8298" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053937" start="8321" end="8347" title="neural machine translation" label="neural machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43968444" start="8645" end="8661" title="DeepL Translator" label="DeepL Translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q108941486" start="8881" end="8896" title="Prompt engineering" label="directly prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115305900" start="8908" end="8928" title="large language model" label="large language model"/>
<link wikidata="Q116777014" start="8935" end="8938" title="Generative pre-trained transformer" label="GPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="9182" end="9222" title="problem-solving" label="systematically identified various issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q584382" start="9831" end="9850" title="Yehoshua Bar-Hillel" label="Yehoshua Bar-Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12801" start="10427" end="10439" title="Claude Piron" label="Claude Piron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="10495" end="10520" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="10714" end="10725" title="ambiguity" label="ambiguities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754533" start="10733" end="10744" title="source text" label="source text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187300" start="10756" end="10767" title="grammatical" label="grammatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q789016" start="10772" end="10779" title="Lexical (semiotics)" label="lexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="10798" end="10813" title="Translation" label="target language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="11021" end="11023" title="AI" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662562" start="12110" end="12132" title="information extraction" label="information extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q910691" start="12755" end="12771" title="rigid designator" label="rigid designator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500773" start="13003" end="13007" title="Bilingual evaluation understudy" label="BLEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="13216" end="13231" title="Transliteration" label="Transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500773" start="14912" end="14916" title="Bilingual evaluation understudy" label="BLEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751346" start="15681" end="15699" title="mobile translation" label="mobile translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="16055" end="16072" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="16162" end="16178" title="speech recognition" label="recognize speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="16353" end="16372" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="16610" end="16619" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q328" start="17080" end="17097" title="English Wikipedia" label="English Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48183" start="17138" end="17144" title="German Wikipedia" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q169514" start="17149" end="17166" title="Swedish Wikipedia" label="Swedish Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="17338" end="17342" title="9-11" label="9-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783430" start="17408" end="17434" title="Arabic machine translation" label="Arabic machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="17469" end="17475" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="17480" end="17484" title="Dari (Eastern Persian)" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="17697" end="17702" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204294" start="17724" end="17729" title="DARPA TIDES program" label="TIDES"/>
<link wikidata="Q797941" start="17734" end="17752" title="Babylon translator" label="Babylon translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="17887" end="17904" title="social networking" label="social networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="18037" end="18045" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="18050" end="18067" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="18084" end="18089" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q51713" start="18091" end="18102" title="Google Talk" label="Google Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q71493" start="18104" end="18117" title="MSN Messenger" label="MSN Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392147" start="18226" end="18235" title="Lineage W" label="Lineage W"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374908" start="19384" end="19398" title="Legal English" label="Legal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301203" start="19812" end="19830" title="Legal proceeding" label="formal proceedings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132486" start="19920" end="19942" title="client confidentiality" label="client confidentiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084460" start="20400" end="20428" title="convolutional neural network" label="convolutional neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="20627" end="20635" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245113" start="20998" end="21029" title="statistical machine translation" label="statistical machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753284" start="21058" end="21091" title="example-based machine translation" label="example-based machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575129" start="21398" end="21417" title="controlled language" label="controlled language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273953" start="21421" end="21457" title="dictionary-based machine translation" label="dictionary-based machine-translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="21895" end="21903" title="Automate" label="Automate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500773" start="21933" end="21937" title="Bilingual evaluation understudy" label="BLEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954384" start="21939" end="21943" title="NIST (metric)" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715476" start="21945" end="21951" title="METEOR" label="METEOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105294" start="21957" end="21962" title="LEPOR" label="LEPOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="22056" end="22070" title="natural language" label="human language"/>
<link wikidata="Q196626" start="22136" end="22143" title="context (language use)" label="context"/>
<link wikidata="Q12801" start="22504" end="22516" title="Claude Piron" label="Claude Piron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="22709" end="22720" title="ambiguity" label="ambiguities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754533" start="22728" end="22739" title="source text" label="source text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187300" start="22751" end="22762" title="grammatical" label="grammatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q789016" start="22767" end="22774" title="Lexical (semiotics)" label="lexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569381" start="22991" end="23002" title="garbage in garbage out" label="meaningless"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350365" start="23729" end="23754" title="Humour in translation" label="their entertainment value"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="23779" end="23786" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="23822" end="23830" title="hiragana" label="hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40481" start="23852" end="23853" title="E (kana)" label="e"/>
<link wikidata="Q40554" start="23870" end="23872" title="Ku (kana)" label="gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="24836" end="24858" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17537576" start="25429" end="25433" title="creative work" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914681" start="25444" end="25452" title="originality" label="original"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="25468" end="25477" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="25615" end="25625" title="creativity" label="creativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="25659" end="25674" title="derivative work" label="derivative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914681" start="25694" end="25707" title="originality" label="original work"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="25751" end="25757" title="rights" label="rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="25822" end="25829" title="publishing" label="publish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631839" start="25861" end="25872" title="AI-complete" label="AI-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015979" start="25874" end="25894" title="Cache language model" label="Cache language model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633297" start="25896" end="25942" title="Comparison of machine translation applications" label="Comparison of machine translation applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155859" start="25944" end="25998" title="Comparison of different machine translation approaches" label="Comparison of different machine translation approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q182557" start="26000" end="26025" title="Computational linguistics" label="Computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q468495" start="26027" end="26056" title="Computer-assisted translation" label="Computer-assisted translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333761" start="26061" end="26079" title="Translation memory" label="Translation memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333660" start="26081" end="26123" title="Controlled language in machine translation" label="Controlled language in machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575129" start="26125" end="26152" title="Controlled natural language" label="Controlled natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468415" start="26154" end="26182" title="Foreign language writing aid" label="Foreign language writing aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11970570" start="26184" end="26230" title="Fuzzy matching (computer-assisted translation)" label="Fuzzy matching (computer-assisted translation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231826" start="26232" end="26262" title="History of machine translation" label="History of machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976109" start="26264" end="26289" title="Human language technology" label="Human language technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350365" start="26291" end="26312" title="Humour in translation" label="Humour in translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486692" start="26336" end="26375" title="Language and Communication Technologies" label="Language and Communication Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588869" start="26377" end="26393" title="Language barrier" label="Language barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667876" start="26395" end="26424" title="List of emerging technologies" label="List of emerging technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636492" start="26426" end="26479" title="List of research laboratories for machine translation" label="List of research laboratories for machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751346" start="26481" end="26499" title="Mobile translation" label="Mobile translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053937" start="26501" end="26527" title="Neural machine translation" label="Neural machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398766" start="26529" end="26538" title="OpenLogos" label="OpenLogos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188077" start="26540" end="26551" title="Phraselator" label="Phraselator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234140" start="26553" end="26564" title="Postediting" label="Postediting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254933" start="26566" end="26584" title="Pseudo-translation" label="Pseudo-translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536405" start="26586" end="26608" title="Round-trip translation" label="Round-trip translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245113" start="26610" end="26641" title="Statistical machine translation" label="Statistical machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333761" start="26643" end="26661" title="Translation memory" label="Translation memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345973" start="26663" end="26697" title="ULTRA (machine translation system)" label="ULTRA (machine translation system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063748" start="26699" end="26728" title="Universal Networking Language" label="Universal Networking Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q622217" start="26730" end="26750" title="Universal translator" label="Universal translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013632" start="26958" end="26971" title="W. John Hutchins" label="John Hutchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="27217" end="27220" title="PDF format" label="PDF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19983" wikidata="Q1088747" url="?curid=19983" title="Central moment">
<text>In probability theory and statistics, a central moment is a moment of a probability distribution of a random variable about the random variable&#x27;s mean; that is, it is the expected value of a specified integer power of the deviation of the random variable from the mean. The various moments form one set of values by which the properties of a probability distribution can be usefully characterized. Central moments are used in preference to ordinary moments, computed in terms of deviations from the mean instead of from zero, because the higher-order central moments relate only to the spread and shape of the distribution, rather than also to its location.

Sets of central moments can be defined for both univariate and multivariate distributions.

==Univariate moments==

The &quot;n&quot;th moment about the mean (or &quot;n&quot;th central moment) of a real-valued random variable &quot;X&quot; is the quantity &quot;μ&quot;&quot;n&quot; := E[(&quot;X&quot; − E[&quot;X&quot;])&quot;n&quot;], where E is the expectation operator. For a continuous univariate probability distribution with probability density function &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;), the &quot;n&quot;th moment about the mean &quot;μ&quot; is
:formula_1

For random variables that have no mean, such as the Cauchy distribution, central moments are not defined.

The first few central moments have intuitive interpretations:
* The &quot;zeroth&quot; central moment &quot;μ&quot;0 is 1.
* The first central moment &quot;μ&quot;1 is 0 (not to be confused with the first raw moment or the expected value &quot;μ&quot;).
* The second central moment &quot;μ&quot;2 is called the variance, and is usually denoted &quot;σ&quot;2, where σ represents the standard deviation.
* The third and fourth central moments are used to define the standardized moments which are used to define skewness and kurtosis, respectively.

===Properties===
For all &quot;n&quot;, the &quot;n&quot;th central moment is homogeneous of degree &quot;n&quot;:

:formula_2

&quot;Only&quot; for &quot;n&quot; such that n equals 1, 2, or 3 do we have an additivity property for random variables &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; that are independent:

:formula_3 provided &quot;n&quot; ∈ .

A related functional that shares the translation-invariance and homogeneity properties with the &quot;n&quot;th central moment, but continues to have this additivity property even when &quot;n&quot; ≥ 4 is the &quot;n&quot;th cumulant κ&quot;n&quot;(&quot;X&quot;). For &quot;n&quot; = 1, the &quot;n&quot;th cumulant is just the expected value; for &quot;n&quot; = either 2 or 3, the &quot;n&quot;th cumulant is just the &quot;n&quot;th central moment; for &quot;n&quot; ≥ 4, the &quot;n&quot;th cumulant is an &quot;n&quot;th-degree monic polynomial in the first &quot;n&quot; moments (about zero), and is also a (simpler) &quot;n&quot;th-degree polynomial in the first &quot;n&quot; central moments.

===Relation to moments about the origin===
Sometimes it is convenient to convert moments about the origin to moments about the mean. The general equation for converting the &quot;n&quot;th-order moment about the origin to the moment about the mean is

:formula_4

where &quot;μ&quot; is the mean of the distribution, and the moment about the origin is given by

:formula_5

For the cases &quot;n&quot; = 2, 3, 4 — which are of most interest because of the relations to variance, skewness, and kurtosis, respectively — this formula becomes (noting that formula_6 and formula_7):

:formula_8 which is commonly referred to as formula_9

:formula_10

:formula_11

... and so on, following Pascal&#x27;s triangle, i.e.

:formula_12

because formula_13

The following sum is a stochastic variable having a compound distribution

:formula_14

where the formula_15 are mutually independent random variables sharing the same common distribution and formula_16 a random integer variable independent of the formula_17 with its own distribution. The moments of formula_18 are obtained as 

:formula_19

where formula_20 is defined as zero for formula_21.

===Symmetric distributions===

In distributions that are symmetric about their means (unaffected by being reflected about the mean), all odd central moments equal zero whenever they exist, because in the formula for the &quot;n&quot;th moment, each term involving a value of &quot;X&quot; less than the mean by a certain amount exactly cancels out the term involving a value of &quot;X&quot; greater than the mean by the same amount.

==Multivariate moments==

For a continuous bivariate probability distribution with probability density function &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;y&quot;) the (&quot;j&quot;,&quot;k&quot;) moment about the mean &quot;μ&quot; = (&quot;μ&quot;&quot;X&quot;, &quot;μ&quot;&quot;Y&quot;) is
:formula_22

==Central moment of complex random variables==
The &quot;n&quot;th central moment for a complex random variable &quot;X&quot; is defined as 

The absolute &quot;n&quot;th central moment of &quot;X&quot; is defined as
The 2nd-order central moment &quot;β&quot;2 is called the &quot;variance&quot; of &quot;X&quot; whereas the 2nd-order central moment &quot;α&quot;2 is the &quot;pseudo-variance&quot; of &quot;X&quot;.

==See also==
*Standardized moment
*Image moment
*Complex random variable

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="3" end="21" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="26" end="36" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088747" start="40" end="54" title="Central moment" label="central moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q638982" start="60" end="66" title="moment (mathematics)" label="moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="72" end="96" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="102" end="117" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="151" end="155" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="176" end="190" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621185" start="653" end="661" title="location parameter" label="location"/>
<link wikidata="Q638982" start="800" end="806" title="moment (mathematics)" label="moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="817" end="821" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="875" end="890" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="1018" end="1038" title="expected value" label="expectation operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="1046" end="1056" title="continuous probability distribution" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681619" start="1057" end="1067" title="univariate" label="univariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="1068" end="1092" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="1098" end="1126" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q726441" start="1280" end="1299" title="Cauchy distribution" label="Cauchy distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q638982" start="1540" end="1550" title="raw moment" label="raw moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="1558" end="1572" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="1646" end="1654" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="1718" end="1736" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111691" start="1800" end="1819" title="standardized moment" label="standardized moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q330828" start="1846" end="1854" title="skewness" label="skewness"/>
<link wikidata="Q287251" start="1859" end="1867" title="kurtosis" label="kurtosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="1962" end="1973" title="Homogeneous function" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="2173" end="2184" title="statistical independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q746007" start="2452" end="2460" title="cumulant" label="cumulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="2556" end="2570" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="3399" end="3407" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q330828" start="3409" end="3417" title="skewness" label="skewness"/>
<link wikidata="Q287251" start="3423" end="3431" title="kurtosis" label="kurtosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="3615" end="3637" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000505" start="4131" end="4158" title="symmetric distribution" label="symmetric about their means"/>
<link wikidata="Q426221" start="4180" end="4189" title="reflection (mathematics)" label="reflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="4541" end="4551" title="continuous probability distribution" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333358" start="4552" end="4561" title="Joint probability distribution" label="bivariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="4562" end="4586" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="4592" end="4620" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5084" end="5104" title="Complex random variable#Variance and pseudo-variance" label="&amp;quot;variance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5181" end="5208" title="Complex random variable#Variance and pseudo-variance" label="&amp;quot;pseudo-variance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111691" start="5242" end="5261" title="Standardized moment" label="Standardized moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q841934" start="5263" end="5275" title="Image moment" label="Image moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25101820" start="5277" end="5300" title="Complex random variable" label="Complex random variable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19986" wikidata="Q96261" url="?curid=19986" title="Murad I">
<text>Murad I (; (nicknamed Hüdavendigâr, from – meaning &quot;sovereign&quot; in this context); 29 June 1326 – 15 June 1389) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1362 to 1389. He was the son of Orhan Gazi and Nilüfer Hatun. Murad I came into the throne after his elder brother Süleyman Pasha&#x27;s death.

Murad I conquered Adrianople, renamed it to Edirne, and in 1363 made it the new capital of the Ottoman Sultanate. Then he further expanded the Ottoman realm in Southern Europe by bringing most of the Balkans under Ottoman rule, and forced the princes of Serbia and Bulgaria as well as the Byzantine emperor John V Palaiologos to pay him tribute. Murad I administratively divided his sultanate into the two provinces of Anatolia (Asia Minor) and Rumelia (the Balkans).

==Titles==
According to the Ottoman sources, Murad I&#x27;s titles included &quot;Bey&quot;, &quot;Emîr-i a’zam&quot; (Great Emir), &quot;Ghazi&quot;, &quot;Hüdavendigâr&quot;, &quot;Khan&quot;, &quot;Padishah&quot;, &quot;Sultânü’s-selâtîn&quot; (Sultan of sultans), &quot;Melikü’l-mülûk&quot; (Malik of maliks), while in Bulgarian and Serbian sources he was referred to as Tsar. In a Genoese document, he was referred to as &quot;dominus armiratorum Turchie&quot; (Master lord of Turks).

==Wars==

Murad fought against the powerful beylik of Karaman in Anatolia and against the Serbs, Albanians, Bulgarians and Hungarians in Europe. In particular, a Serb expedition to expel the Turks from Adrianople led by the Serbian brothers King Vukašin and Despot Uglješa, was defeated on September 26, 1371, by Murad&#x27;s capable second lieutenant Lala Şâhin Paşa, the first governor (&quot;beylerbey&quot;) of Rumeli. In 1385, Sofia fell to the Ottomans. In 1386, Prince Lazar Hrebeljanović defeated an Ottoman force at the Battle of Pločnik. The Ottoman army suffered heavy casualties, and was unable to capture Niš on the way back.

==Battle of Kosovo==

In 1389, Murad&#x27;s army fought the Serbian Army and its allies under the leadership of Lazar at the Battle of Kosovo.

There are different accounts from different sources about when and how Murad I was assassinated. The contemporary sources mainly noted that the battle took place and that both Prince Lazar and the Sultan lost their lives in the battle. The existing evidence of the additional stories and speculations as to how Murad I died were disseminated and recorded in the 15th century and later, decades after the actual event. One Western source states that during the first hours of the battle, Murad I was assassinated by Serbian nobleman and knight Miloš Obilić by knife. Most Ottoman chroniclers (including Dimitrie Cantemir) state that he was assassinated after the finish of the battle while going around the battlefield. His older son Bayezid, who was in charge of the left wing of the Ottoman forces, took charge after that. His other son, Yakub Bey, who was in charge of the other wing, was called to the Sultan&#x27;s command center tent by Bayezid, but when Yakub Bey arrived he was strangled, leaving Bayezid as the sole claimant to the throne.

In a letter from the Florentine senate (written by Coluccio Salutati) to the King Tvrtko I of Bosnia, dated 20 October 1389, Murad I&#x27;s (and Yakub Bey&#x27;s) killing was described. A party of twelve Serbian lords slashed their way through the Ottoman lines defending Murad I. One of them, allegedly Miloš Obilić, had managed to get through to the Sultan&#x27;s tent and kill him with sword stabs to the throat and belly.

Murad&#x27;s internal organs were buried in Kosovo field and remain to this day on a corner of the battlefield in a location called &quot;Meshed-i Hudavendigar&quot; which has gained a religious significance for the local Muslims. It was vandalized between 1999 and 2006 and was renovated recently. His other remains were carried to Bursa, his Anatolian capital city, and were buried in a tomb at the complex built in his name.

==Family==
Murad was the son of Orhan and Nilüfer Hatun, a slave concubine who was of ethnic Greek descent. 

===Consorts===
Murad I had at least seven consorts:
*Gulçicek Hatun. Slave concubine, mother of Bayezid I.
*&quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun. Daughter of Ahî Seyyid Sultân, married Murad in 1366.
*Paşa Melek Hatun. Daughter of Kızıl Murad Bey.
*&quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun. Daughter of Konstantin of Kostendil, she married Murad in 1372. Two of her sisters married two of Murad&#x27;s sons, Bayezid I and Yakub Çelebi. 
*Kera Tamara Hatun. Bulgarian princess, daughter of Tsar Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria. Renowned for her beauty, she was forced to marry Murad when he conquered Bulgaria, in 1378. 
*&quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun. Daughter of Cândâroğlu Süleyman II Paşah, she married Murad in 1383. Her mother was Sultan Hatun, daughter of Süleyman Pasha, Murad&#x27;s older half-brother. 
*Maria Hatun. Born Maria Paleologa, she was the daughter of the Byzantine emperor John V and his wife Helena Kantakouzene. She married Murad in 1386.

===Sons===
Murad I had at least five sons:
*Savci Bey (died in 1374). Executed by his father after he rebelled against him. He had a son, Davud Murad Bey, who fled to Hungary when his father died.
*Bayezid I (1360 - 1403) - with Gulçiçek Hatun. Ottoman Sultan. 
*Yakub Çelebi ( 1362 - 20 June 1389). Strangled on Bayezid&#x27;s orders.
*Ibrahim Bey ( 1365 - 1385). Buried in the Osman I mausoleum. 
*Yahşi Bey (? - before 1389) - with Gülçiçek Hatun.

===Daughters===
Murad I had at least five daughters:
* Nefise Melek Sultan Hatun ( 1363 - after 1402). In 1378 she was married off to Karamânoğlu Alâeddîn Alî Bey in an unsuccessful attempt to stop the war. She had at least three sons by him: Mehmed II Bey (1379 - 1423), Alaeddin Ali II Bey (1381 - 1424) and Oğuz Bey (probably died in infancy). Widowed in 1397, she returned to live in Bursa, but on the death of Bayezid I returned to Karaman, where her eldest son assumed the throne.
* Özer Hatun. She married and had issue. In 1426 her grandson Mehmed Bey held a post at court of Murad II.
* Erhundi Hatun. She married Saruhânoğlu Hızır Bey before 1389.
* Mihriali Devlet Sultan Hatun. She married Karamânoglu Turgut Bey, by whom she had a son, Mahmud Bey.
* Nilüfer Hatun. She built a mosque at Bursa.

==Further reading==

* Harris, Jonathan, &quot;The End of Byzantium&quot;. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2010. 

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="0" end="7" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="57" end="66" title="Head of state" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="128" end="156" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="194" end="204" title="Orhan Gazi" label="Orhan Gazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468123" start="209" end="222" title="Nilüfer Hatun" label="Nilüfer Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087653" start="277" end="291" title="Süleyman Pasha (son of Orhan)" label="Süleyman Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q983012" start="315" end="335" title="Ottoman conquest of Adrianople" label="conquered Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="351" end="357" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="467" end="482" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="507" end="514" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406298" start="561" end="567" title="Serbian Empire" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q420759" start="572" end="580" title="Second Bulgarian Kingdom" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="596" end="605" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="614" end="632" title="John V Palaiologos" label="John V Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331869" start="726" end="734" title="Anatolia Eyalet" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="736" end="746" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811008" start="752" end="759" title="Rumelia Eyalet" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="858" end="861" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="901" end="905" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128777" start="914" end="919" title="Ghazi (warrior)" label="Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181888" start="959" end="963" title="Khan (title)" label="Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q849545" start="1072" end="1077" title="Malik" label="Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="1151" end="1155" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="1162" end="1169" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="1311" end="1317" title="Anatolian beyliks" label="beylik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469100" start="1321" end="1328" title="Karamanids" label="Karaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1332" end="1340" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="1357" end="1362" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="1364" end="1373" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="1375" end="1385" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="1390" end="1400" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q380071" start="1513" end="1520" title="Vukašin Mrnjavčević" label="Vukašin"/>
<link wikidata="Q889870" start="1525" end="1531" title="Despot (court title)" label="Despot"/>
<link wikidata="Q700889" start="1532" end="1539" title="Jovan Uglješa" label="Uglješa"/>
<link wikidata="Q939570" start="1545" end="1575" title="Battle of Maritsa" label="defeated on September 26, 1371"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531115" start="1619" end="1634" title="Lala Shahin Pasha" label="Lala Şâhin Paşa"/>
<link wikidata="Q740406" start="1662" end="1671" title="beylerbey" label="beylerbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="1682" end="1688" title="Rumili Province" label="Rumeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="1699" end="1704" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1717" end="1725" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q310197" start="1743" end="1762" title="Lazar Hrebeljanović" label="Lazar Hrebeljanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q612288" start="1796" end="1813" title="Battle of Pločnik" label="Battle of Pločnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="1885" end="1888" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q179288" start="2032" end="2048" title="Battle of Kosovo" label="Battle of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="2587" end="2593" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q314075" start="2594" end="2606" title="Miloš Obilić" label="Miloš Obilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="2653" end="2670" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="2784" end="2791" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571371" start="2890" end="2899" title="Yakub Çelebi" label="Yakub Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q93113" start="3151" end="3168" title="Coluccio Salutati" label="Coluccio Salutati"/>
<link wikidata="Q319605" start="3182" end="3200" title="Tvrtko I of Bosnia" label="Tvrtko I of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q314075" start="3404" end="3416" title="Miloš Obilić" label="Miloš Obilić"/>
<link wikidata="Q954697" start="3665" end="3686" title="Tomb of Sultan Murat" label="Meshed-i Hudavendigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="3860" end="3865" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3871" end="3879" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="3988" end="3993" title="Orhan" label="Orhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468123" start="3998" end="4011" title="Nilüfer Hatun" label="Nilüfer Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="4049" end="4054" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447304" start="4119" end="4133" title="Gülçiçek Hatun" label="Gulçicek Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q887149" start="4341" end="4364" title="Konstantin Dejanović" label="Konstantin of Kostendil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393280" start="4476" end="4493" title="Kera Tamara" label="Kera Tamara Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q122610" start="4532" end="4558" title="Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria" label="Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q420759" start="4633" end="4641" title="Second Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4692" end="4720" title="Süleyman II of Candar" label="Cândâroğlu Süleyman II Paşah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087653" start="4790" end="4804" title="Süleyman Pasha (son of Orhan)" label="Süleyman Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="4922" end="4928" title="John V Palaiologos" label="John V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658379" start="4942" end="4961" title="Helena Kantakouzene" label="Helena Kantakouzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131375" start="5035" end="5044" title="Savcı Bey" label="Savci Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="5189" end="5198" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571371" start="5254" end="5266" title="Yakub Çelebi" label="Yakub Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337737" start="5498" end="5523" title="Nefise Hatun" label="Nefise Melek Sultan Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705136" start="5577" end="5605" title="Alaattin Ali of Karaman" label="Karamânoğlu Alâeddîn Alî Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809630" start="5686" end="5699" title="Mehmet II of Karaman" label="Mehmed II Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887755" start="5715" end="5734" title="Bengi Ali of Karaman" label="Alaeddin Ali II Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469100" start="5880" end="5887" title="Karamanids" label="Karaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="6027" end="6035" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968654" start="6066" end="6077" title="Sarukhanids" label="Saruhânoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469100" start="6145" end="6156" title="Karamanids" label="Karamânoglu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19987" wikidata="Q168769" url="?curid=19987" title="Mehmed I">
<text>Mehmed I ( – 26 May 1421), also known as Mehmed Çelebi (, &quot;the noble-born&quot;) or Kirişçi (, &quot;lord&#x27;s son&quot;), was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1413 to 1421. Son of Sultan Bayezid I and his concubine Devlet Hatun, he fought with his brothers over control of the Ottoman realm in the Ottoman Interregnum (1402–1413). Starting from the province of Rûm he managed to bring first Anatolia and then the European territories (Rumelia) under his control, reuniting the Ottoman state by 1413, and ruling it until his death in 1421. Called &quot;The Restorer,&quot; he reestablished central authority in Anatolia, and he expanded the Ottoman presence in Europe by the conquest of Wallachia in 1415. Venice destroyed his fleet off Gallipoli in 1416 as the Ottomans lost a naval war.

==Early life==
Mehmed was born in 1386 or 1387 as the fourth son of Sultan Bayezid I () and one of his consorts, the slave girl Devlet Hatun. Following Ottoman custom, when he reached adolescence in 1399, he was sent to gain experience as provincial governor over the Rûm Eyalet (central northern Anatolia), recently conquered from its Eretnid rulers.

On 20 July 1402, his father Bayezid was defeated in the Battle of Ankara by the Turko-Mongol conqueror and ruler Timur. The brothers (with the exception of Mustafa, who was captured and taken along with Bayezid to Samarkand) were rescued from the battlefield, Mehmed being saved by Bayezid Pasha, who took him to his hometown of Amasya. Mehmed later made Bayezid Pasha his grand vizier (1413–1421).

The early Ottoman Empire had no regulated succession, and according to Turkish tradition, every son could succeed his father. Of Mehmed&#x27;s brothers, the eldest, Ertuğrul, had died in 1400, while the next in line, Mustafa, was a prisoner of Timur. Leaving aside the underage siblings, this left four princes—Mehmed, Süleyman, İsa, and Musa, to contend over control of the remaining Ottoman territories in the civil war known as the &quot;Ottoman Interregnum&quot;. In modern historiography, these princes are usually called by the title &quot;Çelebi&quot;, but in contemporary sources, the title is reserved for Mehmed and Musa. The Byzantine sources translated the title as &quot;Kyritzes&quot; (Κυριτζής), which was in turn adopted into Turkish as &quot;kirişçi&quot;, sometimes misinterpreted as &quot;güreşçi&quot;, &quot;the wrestler&quot;.

During the early interregnum, Mehmed Çelebi behaved as Timur&#x27;s vassal. Beside the other princes, Mehmed minted coin which Timur&#x27;s name appeared as &quot;Demur han Gürgân&quot; (تيمور خان كركان), alongside his own as &quot;Mehmed bin Bayezid han&quot; (محمد بن بايزيد خان). This was probably an attempt on Mehmed&#x27;s part to justify to Timur his conquest of Bursa after the Battle of Ulubad. After Mehmed established himself in &quot;Rum&quot;, Timur had already begun preparations for his return to Central Asia, and took no further steps to interfere with the &quot;status quo&quot; in Anatolia.

==Reign==
After winning the Interregnum, Mehmed crowned himself sultan in the Thracian city of Edirne that lay in the European part of the empire (the area dividing the Anatolian and European sides of the empire, Constantinople and the surrounding region, was still held by the Byzantine Empire), becoming Mehmed I. He consolidated his power, made Edirne the most important of the dual capitals, and conquered parts of Albania, the Jandarid emirate, and the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia from the Mamluks. Taking his many achievements into consideration, Mehmed is widely known as the &quot;second founder&quot; of the Ottoman Sultanate.

Soon after Mehmed began his reign, his brother Mustafa Çelebi, who had originally been captured along with their father Bayezid I during the Battle of Ankara and held captive in Samarkand, hiding in Anatolia during the Interregnum, reemerged and asked Mehmed to partition the empire with him. Mehmed refused and met Mustafa&#x27;s forces in battle, easily defeating them. Mustafa escaped to the Byzantine city of Thessaloniki, but after an agreement with Mehmed, the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaiologos exiled Mustafa to the island of Lemnos.

However, Mehmed still faced some problems, first being the problem of his nephew Orhan, who Mehmed perceived as a threat to his rule, much like his late brothers had been. There was allegedly a plot involving him by Manuel II Palaiologos, who tried to use Orhan against Sultan Mehmed; however, the sultan found out about the plot and had Orhan blinded for betrayal, according to a common Byzantine practice.

Furthermore, as a result of the Battle of Ankara and other civil wars, the population of the empire had become unstable and traumatized. A very powerful social and religious movement arose in the empire and became disruptive. The movement was led by Sheikh Bedreddin (1359–1420), a famous Muslim Sufi and charismatic theologian. He was an eminent Ulema, born of a Greek mother and a Muslim father in Simavna (Kyprinos) southwest of Edirne (formerly Adrianople). Mehmed&#x27;s brother Musa had made Bedreddin his &quot;qadi of the army,&quot; or the supreme judge. Bedreddin created a populist religious movement in the Ottoman Sultanate, &quot;subversive conclusions promoting the suppression of social differences between rich and poor as well as the barriers between different forms of monotheism.&quot; Successfully developing a popular social revolution and syncretism of the various religions and sects of the empire, Bedreddin&#x27;s movement began in the European side of the empire and underwent further expansion in western Anatolia.

In 1416, Sheikh Bedreddin started his rebellion against the throne. After a four-year struggle, he was finally captured by Mehmed&#x27;s grand vizier Bayezid Pasha and hanged in the city of Serres, a city in modern-day Greece, in 1420.

==Death==

The reign of Mehmed I as sultan of the re-united empire lasted only eight years before his death, but he had also been the most powerful brother contending for the throne and &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of most of the empire for nearly the whole preceding period of 11 years of the Ottoman Interregnum that passed between his father&#x27;s captivity at Ankara and his own final victory over his brother Musa Çelebi at the Battle of Çamurlu.

Before his death, to secure passing the throne safely to his son Murad II, Mehmed blinded his nephew Orhan Çelebi (son of Süleyman), and decided to send his two sons Yusuf and Mahmud to be held as a hostage by Emperor Manuel II, hoping to ensure the continuing custody of his brother Mustafa.

He was buried in Bursa, in a mausoleum erected by himself near the celebrated mosque which he built there, and which, because of its decorations of green glazed tiles, is called the Green Mosque. Mehmed I also completed another mosque in Bursa, which his grandfather Murad I had commenced but which had been neglected during the reign of Bayezid. Mehmed founded in the vicinity of his own Green Mosque and mausoleum two other characteristic institutions, one a school and one a refectory for the poor, both of which he endowed with royal munificence.

==Family==
===Consorts===
Mehmed I had three known consorts:
*Emine Hatun. Daughter of Nasireddin Mehmed Bey, fifth ruler of Dulkadirids. She married Mehmed in 1403 and according to tradition she was the mother of Murad II. Her niece Sittişah Hatun would later marry Mehmed II.
*Şahzade Hatun. Daughter of Dividdar Ahmed Pasha, third ruler of Kutluşah of Canik. According to some historians, she was the real mother of Murad II.
* Kumru Hatun. Slave concubine.

===Sons===
Mehmed I had at least five sons:
* Murad II (1404–1451) - with Emine Hatun. Sultan of the Ottoman Empire.
* Mustafa Çelebi, known as &quot;Küçük Mustafa&quot; (1408–1423). He disputed the throne with Murad II, by whom he was defeated and executed. 
* Mahmud Çelebi (1413 - August 1429. Buried in the mausoleum&#x27;s Mehmed I, Bursa) 
* Yusuf Çelebi (1414 - August 1429. Buried in the mausoleum&#x27;s Mehmed I, Bursa) 
* Ahmed Çelebi. Died in infancy.

===Daughters===
Mehmed I had at least eight daughters:
*Selçuk Hatun ( 1407 - 25 October 1485, buried in Mehmed I Mausoleum, Bursa) - with Kumru Hatun. She married Taceddin Ibrahim II Bey, ruler of Isfendiyarids (1392 – 30 May 1443), son of İsfendiyar Bey. They had three sons and three daughters, all died in infancy except a daughter, Hatice Hanzade Hatun. After widowed, she married Anadolu Beylerbeyi Karaca. They had a daughter, who died young.
*Ilaldi Sultan Hatun (? - 1444). In 1425 she married Ibrahim II Bey, ruler of Karamanids (died 16 July 1464), son of Mehmed II Bey (son of Nefise Hatun, a Murad I&#x27;s daughter), and had six sons, amongs them Piri Ahmed Bey, Kasim Bey, Kaya Bey (who married his cousin Hafsa Hatun, daughter of Murad II) and Alaeddin Bey; but the marriage was unhappy and her husband hated her and their sons because their Ottoman blood. 
*Hatice Hatun (1408–1442). She married to Karaca Pasha (died on 10 November 1444).
*Hafsa Hatun (? - 1445, buried in Mehmed I Mausoleum, Bursa). She married Mahmud Bey (died in January 1444), son of Çandarlı Halil Pasha. By him she had six sons and a daughter. 
*Incu Hatun. In 1427 she married to Isa Bey (died in 1437), son of Mehmed II Bey. 
* Ayşe Sultan Hatun (1412–1469, buried in Mehmed I Mausoleum, Bursa). In 1427 she married to Alaeddin Ali Bey, ruler of Karamanids, son of Mehmed II Bey.
*Şahzade Sitti Hatun (1413– ?, buried in Mehmed I Mausoleum, Bursa). In 1427 she married Sinan Pasha (died in 1442).
*Fatma Sultan Hatun. She married Kıvameddin Kazim Bey, son of Isfendyar Bey and brother of Selçuk&#x27;s husband Ibrahim II Bey. 

==References==
==Sources==
* 

==Further reading==
* Harris, Jonathan, &quot;The End of Byzantium&quot;. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2010. 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q168769" start="0" end="8" title="Mehmed I" label="Mehmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q168769" start="41" end="54" title="Mehmed I" label="Mehmed Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q168769" start="89" end="96" title="Mehmed I" label="Kirişçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="138" end="166" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="200" end="209" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706312" start="228" end="240" title="Devlet Hatun" label="Devlet Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q726261" start="311" end="330" title="Ottoman Interregnum" label="Ottoman Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q487574" start="374" end="377" title="Rûm Eyalet" label="Rûm"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="404" end="412" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="448" end="455" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="699" end="708" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="749" end="758" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="877" end="886" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706312" start="930" end="942" title="Devlet Hatun" label="Devlet Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="986" end="997" title="adolescence" label="adolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q487574" start="1070" end="1080" title="Rûm Eyalet" label="Rûm Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1099" end="1107" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q583057" start="1138" end="1145" title="Eretnid" label="Eretnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="1211" end="1227" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Battle of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="1268" end="1273" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q944433" start="1311" end="1318" title="Mustafa Çelebi" label="Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="1369" end="1378" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874493" start="1437" end="1450" title="Bayezid Pasha" label="Bayezid Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="1484" end="1490" title="Amasya" label="Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142289" start="1528" end="1540" title="Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire" label="grand vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="1587" end="1607" title="order of succession" label="regulated succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095044" start="1874" end="1882" title="Süleyman Çelebi" label="Süleyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085744" start="1884" end="1887" title="İsa Çelebi" label="İsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095287" start="1893" end="1897" title="Musa Çelebi" label="Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q726261" start="1996" end="2015" title="Ottoman Interregnum" label="Ottoman Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508376" start="2101" end="2107" title="Çelebi (title)" label="Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="2775" end="2780" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30680822" start="2791" end="2807" title="Battle of Ulubad" label="Battle of Ulubad"/>
<link wikidata="Q726261" start="3044" end="3055" title="Ottoman Interregnum" label="Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="3094" end="3102" title="Thrace" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="3111" end="3117" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="3229" end="3243" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3294" end="3310" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="3435" end="3442" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096678" start="3448" end="3456" title="Jandarids" label="Jandarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="3474" end="3501" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="3511" end="3518" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q944433" start="3700" end="3714" title="Mustafa Çelebi" label="Mustafa Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="3794" end="3810" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Battle of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="3831" end="3840" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="4066" end="4078" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37097" start="4138" end="4159" title="Manuel II Palaiologos" label="Manuel II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192483" start="4192" end="4198" title="Lemnos" label="Lemnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37097" start="4417" end="4438" title="Manuel II Palaiologos" label="Manuel II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="4642" end="4658" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Battle of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372236" start="4860" end="4876" title="Sheikh Bedreddin" label="Sheikh Bedreddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="4957" end="4962" title="Ulema" label="Ulema"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="5042" end="5048" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="5059" end="5069" title="Adrianople" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095287" start="5094" end="5098" title="Musa Çelebi" label="Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217029" start="5128" end="5132" title="qadi" label="qadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="5472" end="5482" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142289" start="5791" end="5803" title="Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire" label="grand vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874493" start="5804" end="5817" title="Bayezid Pasha" label="Bayezid Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q206957" start="5844" end="5850" title="Serres" label="Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="5873" end="5879" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q726261" start="6183" end="6202" title="Ottoman Interregnum" label="Ottoman Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="6254" end="6260" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095287" start="6304" end="6315" title="Musa Çelebi" label="Musa Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817327" start="6323" end="6340" title="Battle of Çamurlu" label="Battle of Çamurlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18228398" start="6425" end="6432" title="Blinding (punishment)" label="blinded"/>
<link wikidata="Q37097" start="6553" end="6570" title="Manuel II Palaiologos" label="Emperor Manuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549086" start="6819" end="6831" title="Green Mosque (Bursa)" label="Green Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="6904" end="6911" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="6975" end="6982" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436960" start="7251" end="7262" title="Emine Hatun" label="Emine Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264808" start="7314" end="7325" title="Beylik of Dulkadir" label="Dulkadirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12811870" start="7423" end="7437" title="Sittişah Hatun" label="Sittişah Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="7456" end="7465" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046351" start="7544" end="7549" title="Beyliks of Canik" label="Canik"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="7697" end="7705" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131793" start="7801" end="7814" title="Küçük Mustafa" label="Küçük Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="7962" end="7971" title="Türbe" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="7989" end="7994" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="8047" end="8056" title="Türbe" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="8074" end="8079" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31191563" start="8172" end="8184" title="Selçuk Hatun" label="Selçuk Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8280" end="8303" title="Ibrahim II of Candar" label="Taceddin Ibrahim II Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096678" start="8314" end="8327" title="Isfendiyarids" label="Isfendiyarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087036" start="8357" end="8371" title="İsfendiyar Bey" label="İsfendiyar Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011506" start="8619" end="8633" title="Ibrahim II of Karaman" label="Ibrahim II Bey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8635" end="8654" title="Karamanids#List of rulers" label="ruler of Karamanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809630" start="8683" end="8696" title="Mehmet II of Karaman" label="Mehmed II Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337737" start="8705" end="8717" title="Nefise Hatun" label="Nefise Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="8721" end="8728" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581124" start="8777" end="8791" title="Pir Ahmed" label="Piri Ahmed Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628751" start="8793" end="8802" title="Kasım of Karaman" label="Kasim Bey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8837" end="8848" title="Murad II#Daughters" label="Hafsa Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572451" start="9189" end="9209" title="Çandarlı Halil Pasha the Younger" label="Çandarlı Halil Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809630" start="9319" end="9332" title="Mehmet II of Karaman" label="Mehmed II Bey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9446" end="9465" title="Karamanids#List of rulers" label="ruler of Karamanids"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19988" wikidata="Q131394" url="?curid=19988" title="Murad II">
<text>Murad II (, ; June 1404 – 3 February 1451) was twice the sultan of the Ottoman Empire, from 1421 to 1444 and from 1446 to 1451.

== Early life ==
Murad was born in June 1404 to Mehmed I, while the identity of his mother is disputed according to various accounts. According to 15th century historian Şükrullah, Murad&#x27;s mother was a concubine. Hüseyin Hüsâmeddin Yasar, an early 20th century historian, wrote in his work &quot;Amasya Tarihi&quot; that his mother was Şahzade Hatun, daughter of Divitdar Ahmed Pasha. According to historians İsmail Hami Danişmend, and Heath W. Lowry, his mother was Emine Hatun, a Dulkadirid princess.

He spent his early childhood in Amasya. In 1410, Murad came along with his father to the Ottoman capital, Edirne. After his father ascended to the Ottoman throne, he made Murad governor of the Amasya Sanjak. Murad remained at Amasya until the death of Mehmed I in 1421. He was solemnly recognized as sultan of the Ottoman Sultanate at sixteen years of age, girded with the Sword of Osman at Bursa, and the troops and officers of the state willingly paid homage to him as their sovereign.

==Reign==
===Accession and first reign===
Murad&#x27;s reign was troubled by insurrection early on. The Byzantine Emperor, Manuel II, released the &#x27;pretender&#x27; Mustafa Çelebi (known as Düzmece Mustafa) from confinement and acknowledged him as the legitimate heir to the throne of Bayezid I (1389–1402). The Byzantine Emperor had first secured a stipulation that Mustafa should, if successful, repay him for his liberation by giving up a large number of important cities. The pretender was landed by the Byzantine galleys in the European dominion of the sultan and for a time made rapid progress. Many Ottoman soldiers joined him, and he defeated and killed the veteran general Bayazid Pasha, whom Murad had sent to fight him. Mustafa defeated Murad&#x27;s army and declared himself Sultan of Adrianople (Edirne). He then crossed the Dardanelles to Asia with a large army but Murad out-manoeuvered Mustafa. Mustafa&#x27;s force passed over in large numbers to Murad II. Mustafa took refuge in the city of Gallipoli, but the sultan, who was greatly aided by a Genoese commander named Adorno, besieged him there and stormed the place. Mustafa was taken and put to death by the sultan, who then turned his arms against the Roman emperor and declared his resolution to punish the Palaiologos for their unprovoked enmity by the capture of Constantinople.

Murad II then formed a new army called Azeb in 1421 and marched through the Byzantine Empire and laid siege to Constantinople. While Murad was besieging the city, the Byzantines, in league with some independent Turkish Anatolian states, sent the sultan&#x27;s younger brother Küçük Mustafa (who was only 13 years old) to rebel against the sultan and besiege Bursa. Murad had to abandon the siege of Constantinople in order to deal with his rebellious brother. He caught Prince Mustafa and executed him. The Anatolian states that had been constantly plotting against him — Aydinids, Germiyanids, Menteshe and Teke — were annexed and henceforth became part of the Ottoman Sultanate.

Murad II then declared war against Venice, the Karamanid Emirate, Serbia and Hungary. The Karamanids were defeated in 1428 and Venice withdrew in 1432 following the defeat at the second Siege of Thessalonica in 1430. In the 1430s Murad captured vast territories in the Balkans and succeeded in annexing Serbia in 1439. In 1441 the Holy Roman Empire and Poland joined the Serbian-Hungarian coalition. Murad II won the Crusade of Varna in 1444 against John Hunyadi.

===Abdication and second reign===
Murad II relinquished his throne in 1444 to his son Mehmed II, but a Janissary revolt in the Empire forced him to return.

In 1448 he defeated the Christian coalition at the Second Battle of Kosovo (the first one took place in 1389). When the Balkan front was secured, Murad II turned east to defeat Timur&#x27;s son, Shah Rokh, and the emirates of Karamanid and Çorum-Amasya. In 1450 Murad II led his army into Albania and unsuccessfully besieged the Castle of Krujë in an effort to defeat the resistance led by Skanderbeg. In the winter of 1450–1451, Murad II fell ill, and died in Edirne. He was succeeded by his son Mehmed II (1451–1481).

===As ghazi sultan===
When Murad ascended the throne, he sought to regain lost Ottoman territories that had reverted to autonomy following his grandfather Bayezid I&#x27;s defeat at the Battle of Ankara in 1402 at the hands of Timur. He needed the support of both the public and the nobles &quot;who would enable him to exercise his rule&quot;, and utilized the old and potent Islamic trope of the &quot;ghazi king&quot;.

In order to gain popular international support for his conquests, Murad II modeled himself after the legendary &quot;Ghazi&quot; kings of old. The Ottomans already presented themselves as &quot;ghazis&quot;, painting their origins as rising from the &quot;ghazas&quot; of Osman, the founder of the dynasty. For them, &quot;ghaza&quot; was the noble championing of Islam and justice against non-Muslims and Muslims alike, if they were cruel; for example, Bayezid I labeled Timur Lang, also a Muslim, an apostate prior to the Battle of Ankara because of the violence his troops had committed upon innocent civilians and because &quot;all you do is to break promises and vows, shed blood, and violate the honor of women.&quot; Murad II only had to capitalize on this dynastic inheritance of doing &quot;ghaza&quot;, which he did by actively crafting the public image of Ghazi Sultan.

After his accession, there was a flurry of translating and compiling activity where old Persian, Arab, and Anatolian epics were translated into Turkish so Murad II could uncover the &quot;ghazi king&quot; legends. He drew from the noble behavior of the nameless Caliphs in the &quot;Battalname&quot;, an epic about a fictional Arab warrior who fought against the Byzantines, and modelled his actions on theirs. He was careful to embody the simplicity, piety, and noble sense of justice that was part of the &quot;ghazi king&quot; persona.

For example, the Caliph in &quot;Battalname&quot; saw the battle turning in his enemy&#x27;s favor, and got down from his horse and prayed, after which the battle ended in a victory for him. In the Battle of Varna in 1444, Murad II saw the Hungarians gaining the upper hand, and he got down from his horse and prayed just like the Caliph. The tide soon turned in the Ottoman&#x27;s favor and Władysław III of Poland, King of Hungary, was killed in a charge. Similarly, the Caliph in the epic roused his warriors by saying &quot;Those of you who die will be martyrs. Those of you who kill will be ghazis&quot;; before the Battle of Varna, Murad II repeated these words to his army, saying &quot;Those of us who kill will be ghazis; those of us who die will be martyrs.&quot; In another instance, since the &quot;ghazi king&quot; is meant to be just and fair, when Murad took Thessalonica in the Balkans, he took care to keep the troops in check and prevented widespread looting. Finally, just as the fictional Caliph&#x27;s ghazas were immortalized in &quot;Battalname&quot;, Murad II&#x27;s battles and victories were also compiled and given the title &quot;The &quot;Ghazas&quot; of Sultan Murad&quot; (&quot;Gazavat- i Sultan Murad)&quot;.

Murad II successfully painted himself as a simple soldier who did not partake in royal excesses, and as a noble ghazi sultan who sought to consolidate Muslim power against non-Muslims such as the Venetians and Hungarians. Through this self-presentation, he got the support of the Muslim population of not only the Ottoman territories, for both himself and his extensive, expensive campaigns, but also the greater Muslim populations in the Dar-al-Islam – such as the Mamluks and the Muslim Delhi Sultanates of India. Murad II was basically presenting himself not only as &quot;a &quot;ghazi king&quot; who fights caffres [non-muslims], but also serves as protector and master of lesser &quot;ghazis&quot;.&quot;

===Economy===
Murad II&#x27;s reign saw a period of great economic development, with an increase in trade and a considerable expansion of Ottoman cities. In 1432, the traveller Bertrandon de la Broquière noted that Ottoman annual revenue had increased to 2,500,000 ducats.

==Appearance==
Bertrandon de la Broquière met with Murad II in Adrianople, and described him in the following terms:
==Family==
===Consorts===
Murad II had at least six consorts:
*Tacünnisa Hatice Halime Hatun ( – ), daughter of İsfendiyar Bey, ruler of the Beylik of Candar. Also known as Alime Hatun or Sultan Hatun. She married Murad in 1425.
*Hüma Hatun (? – September 1449). Mother of Mehmed II. There are several theories as to her origin, according to differing accounts, she was either of Italian and/or Jewish, Slavic, most likely Serb, or Greek origins.
*Mara Despina Hatun ( 1420 – 14 September 1487), born Mara Branković, daughter of Despot of Serbia Durad Branković. She married Murad in September 1435 and was his legal wife. She never converted to Islam and remained a Christian. In Europe she became known as the &quot;Sultanina&quot; or &quot;Sultana Maria&quot;. Considered the &quot;adoptive mother&quot; of Mehmed II, who held her in very high regard and call her &quot;mother&quot; in official documents.
* Yeni Hatun, daughter of Şadgeldi Paşahzade Mustafa Bey of the Kutluşah of Amasya.
* Hundi Ümmügülsüm Hatun (? – 14 February 1486). According to some sources, she was two distinct consorts.
* Hatice Hatun, daughter of Taceddin Ibrahim II Bey, son of İsfendiyar Bey (brother of Hatice Halime Hatun) and his first wife. She married Murad following her aunt&#x27;s death and was the mother of Şehzade Küçük Ahmed. After the death of Murad II her son was executed on the orders of Mehmed II. Mehmed subsequently forced her to marry Ishak Pasha, with whom she had others eight children.

=== Sons ===
Murad II was the sultan who conferred on his sons and their male descendants the title of &quot;Şehzade&quot;, meaning &quot;descendant of the Şah&quot;, replacing the simple honorific of &quot;Çelebi&quot;. The title of Şehzade remained in use until the abolition of the Ottoman Empire.

Murad II had at least eight sons:

* Şehzade Ahmed (1419–1420), also known as &quot;Büyük&quot; Ahmed (Ahmed the Elder). Buried with his father.
* Şehzade Alaeddin Ali (1425 – June 1443) – with Hundi Ümmügülsüm Hatun. Murad&#x27;s favorite son, he was governor of Manisa and Amasya. In 1443 he took part in the expedition of Karaman and died on his way back from a fall from his horse. Buried with his father in Muradiye Complex of Bursa. He had a known consort, Yeni Hatun, and two sons: Şehzade Giyaşüddin (1441–1445) and Şehzade Taceddin (1442–1443).
* Şehzade Isfendiyâr (1425–1425) – with Halime Hatun
* Şehzade Hüseyn (? – 1439). Died young
* Şehzade Orhan (? – 1441). Died young
* Mehmed II (1432–1481) – with Hüma Hatun. Mehmed succeeded his father as Sultan of the Ottoman Empire and was to become known by the epithet &quot;Fâtih&quot; (&quot;the Conqueror&quot;) following his successful conquest of Constantinople in 1453.
* Şehzade Hasan (? – 1444). Died young
* Şehzade Ahmed (May 1450 – 18 February 1451) – with Hatice Hatun. Also known as &quot;Küçük&quot; &quot;Ahmed&quot; (Ahmed the Younger). Killed on the orders of Mehmed II while his was mother congratulated Mehmed on his accession to the throne. Mehmed was to subsequently legalize this act with the promulgation of the &quot;Law of Fratricide&quot;.

=== Daughters ===
Murad II had at least six daughters:

* Hundi Hatun (1423 – ?) – with Hundi Ümmügülsüm Hatun. Also known as Erhundi Hatun. She first married Mirahur İlyas Bey and later Yaqub Bey, royal tutor of Şehzade Cem, son of Mehmed II. 
* Hatice Hatun (1425 – after 1470) – with Hüma Hatun. She married Candaroğlu İsmail Kemaleddin Bey and had three sons: Hasan Bey (who married his cousin Kamerhan Hatun, daughter of Mehmed II, and had a daughter, Hanzade Hatun), Yahya Bey and Mahmud Bey. Her descendants were still alive during the reign of Abdulmejid I in the 19th century. In August 1470, she remarried with Isa Bey. When she died, she was buried with her father. 
* Hafsa Hatun (1426 – ?). She married her cousin Karamanoğlu Kaya Bey, son of her aunt Ilaldi Sultan Hatun, daughter of Mehmed I, by her husband Ibrahim II of Karaman. They had a son, Karamanoğlu Kasim Bey.
* Fatma Hatun (1430 – after 1464) – with Hüma Hatun. She married Zaganos Pasha and had two sons: Hamza Bey and Ahmed Çelebi, who would become an important adviser to his cousin Bayezid II. After divorced in 1462, she married Mahmud Çelebi.
* Şahzade Selçuk Hatun (1430 – 21 October 1480). She was married twice, first to Güveyi Karaça Paşah (d. 1456) and then to Yusuf Sinaneddin Paşah (d. 1486). She was buried with her father, next to Şehzade Alaeddin Ali. 
* Ilaldi Hatun. She married Kasim Bey, of the &quot;İsfendiyaroğulları&quot; of Sinop.

== Portrayals ==
Murad II is portrayed by İlker Kurt in 2012 film &quot;Fetih 1453&quot;, by Vahram Papazian in the Albanian movie &quot;The Great Warrior Skanderbeg&quot; in 1953, by Tolga Tekin in the 2020 Netflix series &quot;Rise of Empires: Ottoman&quot;, and by Teoman Kumbaracibaşı in 2024 series &quot;&quot;. 

==References==
;Attribution

==Further reading==
* Harris, Jonathan, &quot;The End of Byzantium&quot;. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2010. 
* Imber, Colin, &quot;The Ottoman Empire&quot;. London: Palgrave/Macmillan, 2002. 

==External links==
*Encyclopædia Britannica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="0" end="8" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="57" end="85" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q168769" start="177" end="185" title="Mehmed I" label="Mehmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854270" start="299" end="308" title="Şükrullah" label="Şükrullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693570" start="570" end="584" title="Heath W. Lowry" label="Heath W. Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436960" start="601" end="612" title="Emine Hatun" label="Emine Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264808" start="616" end="626" title="Dulkadirids" label="Dulkadirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="670" end="676" title="Amasya" label="Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="727" end="742" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="744" end="750" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="838" end="844" title="Sanjak" label="Sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q168769" start="890" end="898" title="Mehmed I" label="Mehmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="938" end="944" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589379" start="1011" end="1025" title="Sword of Osman" label="Sword of Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="1029" end="1034" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1231" end="1240" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37097" start="1250" end="1259" title="Manuel II Palaiologos" label="Manuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q944433" start="1296" end="1310" title="Mustafa Çelebi" label="Mustafa Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="1416" end="1425" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1639" end="1648" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874493" start="1813" end="1826" title="Bayazid Pasha" label="Bayazid Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="1928" end="1938" title="Adrianople" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="1940" end="1946" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="1969" end="1980" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="2140" end="2149" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2194" end="2201" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q207585" start="2411" end="2422" title="Palaiologos" label="Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2469" end="2483" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q779353" start="2525" end="2529" title="Azeb" label="Azeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q700886" start="2583" end="2611" title="Siege of Constantinople (1422)" label="laid siege to Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="2697" end="2704" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2705" end="2713" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131793" start="2762" end="2775" title="Küçük Mustafa" label="Küçük Mustafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="2844" end="2849" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q717112" start="3058" end="3066" title="Aydinids" label="Aydinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324889" start="3068" end="3079" title="Germiyanids" label="Germiyanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400572" start="3081" end="3089" title="Menteshe" label="Menteshe"/>
<link wikidata="Q373988" start="3094" end="3098" title="Beylik of Teke" label="Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3148" end="3165" title="Ottoman Sultanate" label="Ottoman Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3203" end="3209" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469100" start="3215" end="3224" title="Karamanid" label="Karamanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3234" end="3240" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="3245" end="3252" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3295" end="3301" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426040" start="3354" end="3375" title="Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430)" label="Siege of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="3437" end="3444" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="3499" end="3516" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3521" end="3527" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3539" end="3545" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14366850" start="3585" end="3601" title="Crusade of Varna" label="Crusade of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q242688" start="3618" end="3630" title="John Hunyadi" label="John Hunyadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="3719" end="3728" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="3736" end="3745" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q698706" start="3841" end="3864" title="Second Battle of Kosovo" label="Second Battle of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179288" start="3870" end="3879" title="Battle of Kosovo" label="first one"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="3910" end="3916" title="Balkan" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="3967" end="3972" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q553204" start="3985" end="3994" title="Shah Rukh (Timurid dynasty)" label="Shah Rokh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469100" start="4016" end="4025" title="Karamanid" label="Karamanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="4079" end="4086" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q73670" start="4106" end="4114" title="Siege of Krujë (1450)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409023" start="4119" end="4134" title="Castle of Krujë" label="Castle of Krujë"/>
<link wikidata="Q160614" start="4180" end="4190" title="Skanderbeg" label="Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="4251" end="4257" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="4466" end="4475" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="4497" end="4513" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Battle of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="4538" end="4543" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128777" start="4922" end="4940" title="Ghazi (warrior)" label="&amp;quot;ghazis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15812216" start="4984" end="5039" title="Gaza thesis" label="&amp;quot;ghazas&amp;quot; of Osman, the founder of the dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="5878" end="5885" title="Caliphate" label="Caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="6354" end="6369" title="Battle of Varna" label="Battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q54053" start="6548" end="6571" title="Władysław III of Poland" label="Władysław III of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="6573" end="6588" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="7030" end="7042" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="7050" end="7057" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229353" start="7838" end="7850" title="Divisions of the world in Islam" label="Dar-al-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="7865" end="7872" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="7888" end="7903" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899779" start="8288" end="8314" title="Bertrandon de la Broquière" label="Bertrandon de la Broquière"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="8376" end="8382" title="ducats" label="ducats"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841606" start="8565" end="8594" title="Hatice Halime Hatun" label="Tacünnisa Hatice Halime Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087036" start="8614" end="8628" title="İsfendiyar Bey" label="İsfendiyar Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096678" start="8643" end="8659" title="Beylik of Candar" label="Beylik of Candar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436946" start="8732" end="8742" title="Hüma Hatun" label="Hüma Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="8925" end="8929" title="Serbs" label="Serb"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="8934" end="8939" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q452777" start="8950" end="8968" title="Mara Branković" label="Mara Despina Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q342130" start="9048" end="9063" title="Đurađ Branković" label="Durad Branković"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9475" end="9483" title="Beyliks of Canik#Tacettinoğulları" label="Kutluşah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="9487" end="9493" title="Amasya" label="Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9604" end="9616" title="Hatice Halime Hatun#After her death" label="Hatice Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841606" start="9689" end="9708" title="Hatice Halime Hatun" label="Hatice Halime Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073358" start="9940" end="9951" title="Ishak Pasha" label="Ishak Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q388715" start="10104" end="10111" title="Şehzade" label="Şehzade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508376" start="10202" end="10208" title="Çelebi (title)" label="Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274280" start="10549" end="10557" title="Sanjak-bey" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q147089" start="10561" end="10567" title="Manisa" label="Manisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="10572" end="10578" title="Amasya" label="Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q262579" start="10622" end="10629" title="Karaman" label="Karaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747162" start="10709" end="10725" title="Muradiye Complex" label="Muradiye Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="10729" end="10734" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="10985" end="10994" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="11057" end="11085" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="Sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="11196" end="11222" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="conquest of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11597" end="11614" title="Law of Fratricide" label="Law of Fratricide"/>
<link wikidata="Q441311" start="11836" end="11847" title="Şehzade Cem" label="Şehzade Cem"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="12049" end="12058" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="12175" end="12187" title="Abdulmejid I" label="Abdulmejid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q168769" start="12421" end="12429" title="Mehmed I" label="Mehmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011506" start="12446" end="12467" title="Ibrahim II of Karaman" label="Ibrahim II of Karaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353735" start="12573" end="12586" title="Zaganos Pasha" label="Zaganos Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q165983" start="12685" end="12695" title="Bayezid II" label="Bayezid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096678" start="13020" end="13038" title="İsfendiyaroğulları" label="İsfendiyaroğulları"/>
<link wikidata="Q171731" start="13128" end="13138" title="Fetih 1453" label="Fetih 1453"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653188" start="13149" end="13164" title="Vahram Papazian" label="Vahram Papazian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707305" start="13193" end="13221" title="The Great Warrior Skanderbeg" label="The Great Warrior Skanderbeg"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13285" end="13309" title="Rise of Empires: Ottoman" label="Rise of Empires: Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082171" start="13324" end="13344" title="Teoman Kumbaracıbaşı" label="Teoman Kumbaracibaşı"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19989" wikidata="Q159934" url="?curid=19989" title="Murad III">
<text>Murad III (; ; 4 July 1546 – 16 January 1595) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1574 until his death in 1595. His rule saw battles with the Habsburgs and exhausting wars with the Safavids. The long-independent Morocco was for a time made a vassal of the empire but regained independence in 1582. His reign also saw the empire&#x27;s expanding influence on the eastern coast of Africa. However, the empire was beset by increasing corruption and inflation from the New World which led to unrest among the Janissary and commoners. Relations with Elizabethan England were cemented during his reign, as both had a common enemy in the Spanish. He was also a great patron of the arts, commissioning the &quot;Siyer-i-Nebi&quot; and other illustrated manuscripts.

==Early life==
Born in Manisa on 4 July 1546, Şehzade Murad was the oldest son of Şehzade Selim and his powerful wife Nurbanu Sultan. He received a good education and learned the Arabic and Persian languages. After his ceremonial circumcision in 1557, Murad&#x27;s grandfather, the Sultan Suleiman I, appointed him &quot;sancakbeyi&quot; (governor) of Akşehir in 1558. At the age of 18 he was appointed &quot;sancakbeyi&quot; of Saruhan. Suleiman died in 1566 when Murad was 20, and his father became the new sultan, Selim II. Selim II broke with tradition by sending only his oldest son out of the palace to govern a province, assigning Murad to Manisa.

==Reign==
Selim died in 1574 and was succeeded by Murad, who began his reign by having his five younger brothers strangled. His authority was undermined by harem influences – more specifically, those of his mother and later of his favorite concubine Safiye Sultan, often to the detriment of Sokollu Mehmed Pasha&#x27;s influence on the court. Selim&#x27;s power had only been maintained by the effective leadership of the powerful Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha, who remained in office until his assassination in October 1579. During Murad&#x27;s reign, the northern borders with the Habsburg monarchy were defended by the Bosnian governor Hasan Predojević. The reign of Murad III was marked by exhausting wars on the empire&#x27;s western and eastern fronts. The Ottomans also suffered defeats in battles such as the Battle of Sisak.

===Expedition to Morocco===
Abd al-Malik became a trusted member of the Ottoman establishment during his exile. He made the proposition of making Morocco an Ottoman vassal in exchange for the support of Murad III in helping him gain the Saadi throne.

With an army of 10,000 men, most of whom were Turks, Ramazan Pasha and Abd al-Malik left from Algiers to install Abd al-Malik as an Ottoman vassal ruler of Morocco. Ramazan Pasha conquered Fez which caused the Saadi Sultan to flee to Marrakesh which was also conquered. Abd al-Malik then assumed rule over Morocco as a client of the Ottomans.

Abd al-Malik made a deal with the Ottoman troops by paying them a large amount of gold and sending them back to Algiers, suggesting a looser concept of vassalage than Murad III may have thought. Murad&#x27;s name was recited in the Friday prayer and stamped on coinage marking the two traditional signs of sovereignty in the Islamic world. The reign of Abd al-Malik is understood to be a period of Moroccan vassalage to the Ottoman Empire. Abd al-Malik died in 1578 and was succeeded by his brother Ahmad al-Mansur who formally recognised the suzerainty of the Ottoman Sultan at the start of his reign while remaining &quot;de facto&quot; independent. He stopped minting coins in Murad&#x27;s name, dropped his name from the Khutba and declared his full independence in 1582.

===War with the Safavids===

The Ottomans had been at peace with the neighbouring rivaling Safavid Empire since 1555, per the Treaty of Amasya, that for some time had settled border disputes. But in 1577 Murad declared war, starting the Ottoman–Safavid War (1578–1590), seeking to take advantage of the chaos in the Safavid court after the death of Shah Tahmasp I. Murad was influenced by viziers Lala Kara Mustafa Pasha and Sinan Pasha and disregarded the opposing counsel of Grand Vizier Sokollu. Murad also fought the Safavids which would drag on for 12 years, ending with the Treaty of Constantinople (1590), which resulted in temporary significant territorial gains for the Ottomans.

===Ottoman activity in the Horn of Africa===

During his reign, an Ottoman Admiral by the name of Mir Ali Beg was successful in establishing Ottoman supremacy in numerous cities in the Swahili coast between Mogadishu and Kilwa. Ottoman suzerainty was recognised in Mogadishu in 1585 and Ottoman supremacy was also established in other cities such as Barawa, Mombasa, Kilifi, Pate, Lamu, and Faza.

===Financial affairs===
Murad&#x27;s reign was a time of financial stress for the Ottoman state. To keep up with changing military techniques, the Ottomans trained infantrymen in the use of firearms, paying them directly from the treasury. By 1580 an influx of silver from the New World had caused high inflation and social unrest, especially among Janissaries and government officials who were paid in debased currency. Deprivation from the resulting rebellions, coupled with the pressure of over-population, was especially felt in Anatolia. Competition for positions within the government grew fierce, leading to bribery and corruption. Ottoman and Habsburg sources accuse Murad himself of accepting enormous bribes, including 20,000 ducats from a statesman in exchange for the governorship of Tripoli and Tunisia, thus outbidding a rival who had tried bribing the Grand Vizier.

During his period, excessive inflation was experienced, the value of silver money was constantly played, food prices increased. 400 dirhams should be cut from 600 dirhams of silver, while 800 was cut, which meant 100 percent inflation. For the same reason, the purchasing power of wage earners was halved, and the consequence was an uprising.

===English pact===
Numerous envoys and letters were exchanged between Elizabeth I and Sultan Murad III. In one correspondence, Murad entertained the notion that Islam and Protestantism had &quot;much more in common than either did with Roman Catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols&quot;, and argued for an alliance between England and the Ottoman Empire. To the dismay of Catholic Europe, England exported tin and lead (for cannon-casting) and ammunition to the Ottoman Empire, and Elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with Murad III during the outbreak of war with Spain in 1585, as Francis Walsingham was lobbying for a direct Ottoman military involvement against the common Spanish enemy. This diplomacy would be continued under Murad&#x27;s successor Mehmed III, by both the sultan and Safiye Sultan alike.

==Personal life==
===Palace life===
Following the example of his father Selim II, Murad was the second Ottoman sultan who never went on campaign during his reign, instead spending it entirely in Constantinople. During the final years of his reign, he did not even leave Topkapı Palace. For two consecutive years, he did not attend the Friday procession to the imperial mosque—an unprecedented breaking of custom. The Ottoman historian Mustafa Selaniki wrote that whenever Murad planned to go out to Friday prayer, he changed his mind after hearing of alleged plots by the Janissaries to dethrone him once he left the palace. Murad withdrew from his subjects and spent the majority of his reign keeping to the company of few people and abiding by a daily routine structured by the five daily Islamic prayers. Murad&#x27;s personal physician Domenico Hierosolimitano described a typical day in the life of the sultan:

Özgen Felek argues that Murad&#x27;s sedentary lifestyle and lack of participation in military campaigns earned him the disapproval of Mustafa Âlî and Mustafa Selaniki, the major Ottoman historians who lived during his reign. Their negative portrayals of Murad influenced later historians.

===Children===
Before becoming sultan, Murad had been loyal to Safiye Sultan, his Albanian concubine. His monogamy was disapproved of by Nurbanu Sultan, who worried that Murad needed more sons to succeed him in case Mehmed died young. She also worried about Safiye&#x27;s influence over her son and the Ottoman dynasty. Five or six years after his accession to the throne, Murad was given a pair of concubines by his sister Ismihan. Upon attempting sexual intercourse with them, he proved impotent. &quot;The arrow [of Murad], [despite] keeping with his created nature, for many times [and] for many days has been unable to reach at the target of union and pleasure,&quot; wrote Mustafa Ali. Nurbanu accused Safiye and her retainers of causing Murad&#x27;s impotence with witchcraft. Several of Safiye&#x27;s servants were tortured by eunuchs in order to discover a culprit. Court physicians, working under Nurbanu&#x27;s orders, eventually prepared a successful cure, but a side effect was a drastic increase in sexual appetite; by the time Murad died, he was said to have fathered over a hundred children. Nineteen of these were executed by Mehmed III when he became sultan.

===Women at court===
Influential ladies of his court included his mother Nurbanu Sultan, his sister Ismihan Sultan, wife of grand vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha, and musahibes (favourites) mistress of the housekeeper Canfeda Hatun, mistress of financial affairs Raziye Hatun, and the poet Hubbi Hatun, Finally, after the death of his mother and older sister, Safiye Sultan was the only influential woman in the court.

===Eunuchs at court===
Before Murad, the palace eunuchs had been mostly white, especially Circassians or Syrians. This began to change in 1582 when Murad gave an important position to a black eunuch. Before, the eunuchs&#x27; roles in the palace were racially determined: black eunuchs guarded the harem and the princesses, and white eunuchs guarded the Sultan and male pages in another part of the palace. The chief black eunuch was known as the Kizlar Agha, and the chief white eunuch was known as the Kapi Agha.

==Murad and the arts==
Murad took great interest in the arts, particularly miniatures and books. He actively supported the court of Society of Miniaturists, commissioning several volumes including the &quot;Siyer-i Nebi&quot;, the most heavily illustrated biographical work on the life of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, the &quot;Book of Skills&quot;, the &quot;Book of Festivities&quot; and the &quot;Book of Victories&quot;. He had two large alabaster urns transported from Pergamon and placed on two sides of the nave in the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople and a large wax candle dressed in tin which was donated by him to the Rila monastery in Bulgaria is on display in the monastery museum.

Murad also furnished the content of &quot;Kitabü’l-Menamat&quot; (&quot;The Book of Dreams&quot;), addressed to Murad&#x27;s spiritual advisor, Şüca Dede. A collection of first person accounts, it tells of Murad&#x27;s spiritual experiences as a Sufi disciple. Compiled from thousands of letters Murad wrote describing his dream visions, it presents a hagiographic self-portrait. Murad dreams of various activities, including being stripped naked by his father and having to sit on his lap, single-handedly killing 12,000 infidels in battle, walking on water, ascending to heaven, and producing milk from his fingers.

In another letter addressed to Şüca Dede, Murad wrote &quot;I wish that God, may He be glorified and exalted, had not created this poor servant as the descendant of the Ottomans so that I would not hear this and that, and would not worry. I wish I were of unknown pedigree. Then, I would have one single task, and could ignore the whole world.&quot;

The diplomatic edition of these dream letters have been recently published by Ozgen Felek in Turkish.

==Death==
Murad died from what is assumed to be natural causes in the Topkapı Palace on 16 January 1595 and was buried in a tomb next to the Hagia Sophia. In the mausoleum are 54 sarcophagus of the sultan, his wives and children that are also buried there. He is also responsible for changing the burial customs of the sultans&#x27; mothers. Murad had his mother Nurbanu buried next to her husband Selim II, making her the first consort to share a sultan&#x27;s tomb.

==Family==
===Consorts===
Murad is believed to have had Safiye Sultan as his only concubine for circa fifteen years. However, Safiye was opposed by Murad&#x27;s mother, Nurbanu Sultan, and by his sister, Ismihan Sultan, and around 1580, she was exiled to the Old Palace on charges of having rendered the sultan impotent with a spell, after he had not succeeded or had not wanted to have sex with two concubines received by his sister. Furthermore, Nurbanu was concerned about the future of the dynasty, as she believed that Safiye&#x27;s son alone, Mehmed, (two of three sons that Safiye gave to Murad were dead before 1580) were not enough to ensure the succession. After Safiye&#x27;s exile, revoked only after Nurbanu&#x27;s death on December 1583, Murad, to deny the rumor about his impotency, took a huge number of concubines and he had more than fifty known children, although according to sources the total number could exceed hundred.

At time of his death in 1595, Murad had at least thirty-five concubines, amongs others:
* Safiye Sultan, an ethnic Albanian. Haseki Sultan of Murad and Valide sultan of Mehmed III;
* Şemsiruhsar Hatun, mother of Rukiye Sultan. She commissioned Koranic readings of prayers in the Prophet&#x27;s mosque in Medina. She died before 1623.
* Mihriban Hatun;
* Şahıhuban Hatun; she commissioned a school in Fatih, where she is buried
* Nazperver Hatun; she commissioned a mosque in Eyüp
* Zerefşan Hatun
*Fakriye Hatun
* A concubine who died in August 1591, along with their stillborn son and were interred together.
*Fiveteen pregnant concubines were placed in sacks and tossed into the Sea of Marmara, where they drowned, in 1595, by order of Mehmed III. 
*A concubine seduced and made pregnant by Mehmed III when he was a prince. The act was a violation of the rules of the harem, so Mehmed’s grandmother, Nurbanu Sultan, ordered the girl to be drowned in order to protect her grandson.

After the death of Murad III many of his concubines who became childless when at his accession Mehmed had his half-brothers killed, and others who never had children by Murad, were remarried off to palace officials, such as door keepers, cavalry forces (&quot;bölük halkı&quot;), and sergeants (&quot;çavus&quot;).

===Sons===
Murad III had at least 27 known sons.

On Murad&#x27;s death in 1595 Mehmed III, his eldest son and new sultan, son of Safiye Sultan, executed the 19 half-brothers still alive and drowned seven pregnant concubines, fulfilling the Law of Fraticide.

Known sons of Murad III are:
* Sultan Mehmed III (26 May 1566, Manisa Palace, Manisa – 22 December 1603, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Mehmed III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque, Constantinople), with Safiye Sultan, became the next sultan;
* Şehzade Selim (1567, Manisa Palace, Manisa - 25 May 1577, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople), with Safiye Sultan.
* Şehzade Mahmud (1568, Manisa Palace, Manisa – before 1580, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Selim II Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque), with Safiye Sultan.
* Şehzade &quot;Fülan&quot; (June 1582, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - June 1582, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople. buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque). Stillbirth.
* Şehzade Cihangir (February 1585, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - August 1585, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque); twin of Şehzade Süleyman. 
* Şehzade Süleyman (February 1585, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - 1585, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque); twin of Şehzade Cihangir. 
* Şehzade Abdüllah (1585, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Mustafa (1585, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Abdürrahman (1585, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Bayezid (1586, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Hasan (1586, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - died 1591, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Cihangir (1587, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Yakub (1587, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Ahmed (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - before 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade &quot;Fülan&quot; (August 1591, stillbirth);
* Şehzade Alaeddin (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Davud (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Alemşah (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Ali (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Hüseyin (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Ishak (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Murad (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Osman (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - died 1587, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Yusuf (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Korkud (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Ömer (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Şehzade Selim (?, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - murdered 28 January 1595, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque);
In addition to these, a European braggart, Alexander of Montenegro, claimed to be the lost son of Murad III and Safiye Sultan, presenting himself with the name of Şehzade Yahya and claiming the throne for it. His claims were never proven and appear dubious to say the least.

===Daughters===
Murad had more than thirty daughters still alive at his death in 1595, of whom nineteen died of plague (or smallpox) in 1598.

It is not known if and how many daughters may have died before him.

Known daughters of Murad III are:
* Hümaşah Sultan (Manisa, 1564 - Costantinople, 1625 ); buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Safiye Sultan. Also called Hüma Sultan. She married Nişar Mustafazade Mehmed Pasha (died 1586). She may have then married Serdar Ferhad Pasha (d.1595) in 1591. She was lastly married in 1605 to Nakkaş Hasan Pasha (died 1622); 
* Ayşe Sultan (Manisa, - Costantinople, 15 May 1605, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Safiye Sultan. Married firstly on 20 May 1586, to Ibrahim Pasha, married secondly on 5 April 1602, to Yemişçi Hasan Pasha, married thirdly on 29 June 1604, to Güzelce Mahmud Pasha.
* Fatma Sultan (Manisa, 1573 - Costantinople, 1620, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Safiye Sultan. Married first on 6 December 1593, to Halil Pasha, married second December 1604, to Cafer Pasha; married third 1610 Hizir Pasha, married fourth Murad Pasha.
* Mihrimah Sultan (Costantinople, 1578/1579 - after 1625 ; buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) - possibly with Safiye Sultan;
* Fahriye Sultan (died in 1656, buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque), - possibly with Safiye Sultan, perhaps born after her return from exile in Old Palace. Called also Fahri Sultan. She married firstly to Cuhadar Ahmed Pasha, Governor of Mosul, married secondly to Sofu Bayram Pasha, Governor of Bosnia (died in 1633);, married thirdly to Deli Dilaver Pasha (died 1668).
* Rukiye Sultan (buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Şemsiruhsar Hatun.
* Mihriban Sultan (buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) married in 1613;
* Hatice Sultan (1583 - 1648, buried in Şehzade Mosque), was married in 1598 to Sokolluzade Lala Mehmed Pasha and had two sons and a daughter. She participated in the reparation of the minarets of Bayezid Veli Mosque inside Kerch Fortress in 1599. After widowed, in 1613 she married Gürşci Mehmed Pasha of Kefe, governor of Bosnia.
*Fethiye Sultan (buried in Murad III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque).
* Beyhan Sultan (died 1648), married in 1613 to Vizier Kurşuncuzade Mustafa Pasha;
* Sehime Sultan, married in 1613 to Topal Mehmed Pasha, formerly a Kapucıbaşı;
* A daughter married to Davud Pasha;
* A daughter married in 1613 to Kücük Mirahur Mehmed Agha;
* A daughter married in 1613 to Mirahur-i Evvel Muslu Agha;
* A daughter married in 1613 to Bostancıbaşı Hasan Agha;
* A daughter married in 1613 to Cığalazade Mehmed Bey (son of Cığalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha and Safiye Hanimsultan);
*Nineteen daughters, died of plague in 1598; 
* A daughter who died young on 29 July 1585.

==In fiction==
* Murad is portrayed by the Romanian actor Colea Rautu in the historic epic film Michael the Brave.
* Orhan Pamuk&#x27;s historical novel &quot;Benim Adım Kırmızı&quot; (&quot;My Name is Red&quot;, 1998) takes place at the court of Murad III, during nine snowy winter days of 1591, which the writer uses in order to convey the tension between East and West. Murad is not specifically named in the book, and is referred to only as &quot;Our Sultan&quot;.
* The Harem Midwife by Roberta Rich - a historical fiction set in Constantinople (1578) which follows Hannah, a midwife, who tends to many of the women in Sultan Murad III&#x27;s harem.
* In the 2011 TV series &quot;Muhteşem Yüzyıl&quot;, Murad III is portrayed by Turkish actor Serhan Onat.

==References==
==External links==
* Ancestry of Sultana Nur-Banu (Cecilia Venier-Baffo)
[aged 48]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="0" end="9" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="54" end="82" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="148" end="157" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="187" end="195" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="218" end="225" title="Saadi Sultanate" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="511" end="520" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="551" end="570" title="Elizabethan England" label="Elizabethan England"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="637" end="644" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442502" start="710" end="722" title="Siyer-i Nebi" label="Siyer-i-Nebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q147089" start="788" end="794" title="Manisa" label="Manisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="855" end="860" title="Selim II" label="Selim"/>
<link wikidata="Q238091" start="883" end="897" title="Nurbanu Sultan" label="Nurbanu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179561" start="995" end="1007" title="Khitan (circumcision)" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="1054" end="1064" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274280" start="1080" end="1102" title="Sanjak-bey" label="&amp;quot;sancakbeyi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q169974" start="1117" end="1124" title="Akşehir" label="Akşehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="1282" end="1290" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="1383" end="1391" title="sanjak" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q224606" start="1577" end="1582" title="harem (Ottoman)" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="1671" end="1684" title="Safiye Sultan (mother of Mehmed III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="1712" end="1732" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="1852" end="1864" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2008" end="2025" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165235" start="2047" end="2054" title="Bosnians" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755483" start="2064" end="2080" title="Hasan Predojević" label="Hasan Predojević"/>
<link wikidata="Q701335" start="2242" end="2257" title="Battle of Sisak" label="Battle of Sisak"/>
<link wikidata="Q335118" start="2288" end="2300" title="Abu Marwan Abd al-Malik I Saadi" label="Abd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q400911" start="3355" end="3370" title="Ahmad al-Mansur" label="Ahmad al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119319" start="3759" end="3775" title="Treaty of Amasya" label="Treaty of Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q701644" start="3870" end="3901" title="Ottoman–Safavid War (1578–90)" label="Ottoman–Safavid War (1578–1590)"/>
<link wikidata="Q298410" start="3987" end="3996" title="Tahmasp I" label="Tahmasp I"/>
<link wikidata="Q529665" start="4030" end="4053" title="Lala Kara Mustafa Pasha" label="Lala Kara Mustafa Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q717115" start="4058" end="4069" title="Sinan Pasha" label="Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470144" start="4213" end="4244" title="Treaty of Constantinople (1590)" label="Treaty of Constantinople (1590)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648391" start="4421" end="4432" title="Mir Ali Beg" label="Mir Ali Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="4508" end="4521" title="Swahili coast" label="Swahili coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q613246" start="4673" end="4679" title="Barawa" label="Barawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="4681" end="4688" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="4998" end="5007" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="5708" end="5719" title="food prices" label="food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="6017" end="6028" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6118" end="6131" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6183" end="6200" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q138409" start="6562" end="6580" title="Francis Walsingham" label="Francis Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="6733" end="6743" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="6768" end="6781" title="Safiye Sultan (mother of Mehmed III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="7060" end="7074" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943329" start="7225" end="7241" title="Mustafa Selaniki" label="Mustafa Selaniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="7362" end="7373" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646767" start="7842" end="7853" title="Mustafa Âlî" label="Mustafa Âlî"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943329" start="7858" end="7874" title="Mustafa Selaniki" label="Mustafa Selaniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="8061" end="8074" title="Safiye Sultan (mother of Mehmed III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15388533" start="9276" end="9290" title="Ismihan Sultan" label="Ismihan Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298419" start="9313" end="9333" title="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokollu Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q27911182" start="9390" end="9403" title="Canfeda Hatun" label="Canfeda Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922174" start="9435" end="9447" title="Raziye Hatun" label="Raziye Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27929579" start="9462" end="9473" title="Hubbi Hatun" label="Hubbi Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="9640" end="9646" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="9682" end="9693" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="9697" end="9704" title="Syrians" label="Syrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896780" start="10039" end="10050" title="Kizlar Agha" label="Kizlar Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567001" start="10096" end="10105" title="Kapi Agha" label="Kapi Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q268639" start="10183" end="10193" title="Ottoman miniature" label="miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442502" start="10315" end="10327" title="Siyer-i Nebi" label="Siyer-i Nebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="10417" end="10425" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="10551" end="10560" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18986" start="10583" end="10591" title="Pergamon" label="Pergamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="10635" end="10647" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207945" start="10736" end="10750" title="Rila monastery" label="Rila monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="10754" end="10762" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q378426" start="11777" end="11795" title="Diplomatics" label="diplomatic edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="11946" end="11960" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="12017" end="12029" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="12401" end="12414" title="Safiye Sultan (mother of Mehmed III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238091" start="12514" end="12528" title="Nurbanu Sultan" label="Nurbanu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15388533" start="12549" end="12563" title="Ismihan Sultan" label="Ismihan Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="13379" end="13392" title="Safiye Sultan (mother of Mehmed III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="13404" end="13412" title="Albanians" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="13414" end="13427" title="Haseki sultan" label="Haseki Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="13441" end="13454" title="Valide sultan" label="Valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="13458" end="13468" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q486080" start="13568" end="13589" title="Al-Masjid an-Nabawi" label="Prophet&amp;#x27;s mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="13593" end="13599" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="13970" end="13984" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14830" end="14846" title="Fratricide#Ottoman Empire" label="Law of Fraticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="14887" end="14897" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="15018" end="15030" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="16255" end="16267" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956143" start="19315" end="19338" title="Count Alexander of Montenegro" label="Alexander of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="19660" end="19666" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19796" end="19810" title="Hümaşah Sultan (daughter of Murad III)" label="Hümaşah Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777403" start="20031" end="20050" title="Serdar Ferhad Pasha" label="Serdar Ferhad Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091752" start="20138" end="20149" title="Ayşe Sultan (daughter of Murad III)" label="Ayşe Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q951058" start="20298" end="20311" title="Damat Ibrahim Pasha" label="Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584312" start="20350" end="20369" title="Yemişçi Hasan Pasha" label="Yemişçi Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q46639312" start="20431" end="20443" title="Fatma Sultan (daughter of Murad III)" label="Fatma Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585494" start="20698" end="20709" title="Kuyucu Murad Pasha" label="Murad Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q109539876" start="20713" end="20728" title="Mihrimah Sultan (daughter of Murad III)" label="Mihrimah Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27566047" start="20855" end="20869" title="Fahriye Sultan" label="Fahriye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000313" start="21013" end="21023" title="Eski Saray" label="Old Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055400" start="21165" end="21171" title="Bosnia Eyalet" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="21463" end="21477" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048167" start="21503" end="21532" title="Sokolluzade Lala Mehmed Pasha" label="Sokolluzade Lala Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q248058" start="22262" end="22290" title="Cığalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha" label="Cığalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22295" end="22313" title="Ayşe Hümaşah Sultan#Daughters" label="Safiye Hanimsultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108017" start="22466" end="22477" title="Colea Răutu" label="Colea Rautu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348435" start="22504" end="22521" title="Michael the Brave (film)" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q241248" start="22525" end="22536" title="Orhan Pamuk" label="Orhan Pamuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q470464" start="22599" end="22613" title="My Name is Red" label="My Name is Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q176615" start="23093" end="23108" title="Muhteşem Yüzyıl" label="Muhteşem Yüzyıl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19990" wikidata="Q171465" url="?curid=19990" title="Mehmed III">
<text>Mehmed III (, &quot;Meḥmed-i sālis&quot;; ; 26 May 1566 – 22 December 1603) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1595 until his death in 1603. Mehmed was known for ordering the execution of his brothers and leading the army in the Long Turkish War, during which the Ottoman army was victorious at the decisive Battle of Keresztes. This victory was however undermined by some military losses such as in Győr and Nikopol. He also ordered the successful quelling of the Jelali rebellions. The sultan also communicated with the court of Elizabeth I on the grounds of stronger commercial relations and in the hopes of England to ally with the Ottomans against the Spanish.

== Early life ==
Mehmed was born at the Manisa Palace on 26 May 1566, during the reign of his great-grandfather, Suleiman the Magnificent. He was the son of Murad III, himself the son of Selim II, who was the son of Sultan Suleiman and Hurrem Sultan. His mother was Safiye Sultan, an Albanian from the Dukagjin Highlands. His great-grandfather Suleiman I died the year he was born, and his grandfather became the new sultan, Selim II. His grandfather Selim II died when Mehmed was eight, and Mehmed&#x27;s father, Murad III, became sultan in 1574. Murad died in 1595, when Mehmed was 28 years old.

Mehmed spent most of his time in Manisa with his parents and his teacher, Ibrahim Efendi. His circumcision took place on 29 May 1582 when he was 16 years old.

==Reign==

=== Fratricide ===
Upon ascending to the throne, Mehmed III ordered that all of his nineteen brothers be executed. They were strangled by his royal executioners, many of whom were deaf, mute or &#x27;half-witted&#x27; to ensure absolute loyalty. Fratricidal successions were not unprecedented, as sultans would often have dozens of children with their concubines.

=== Power struggle in Constantinople ===
Mehmed III was an idle ruler, leaving government to his mother Safiye Sultan, the valide sultan. His first major problem was the rivalry between two of his viziers, Serdar Ferhad Pasha and Koca Sinan Pasha, and their supporters. His mother and her son-in-law Damat Ibrahim Pasha supported Koca Sinan Pasha and prevented Mehmed III from taking control of the issue himself. The issue grew to cause major disturbances by janissaries. On 7 July 1595, Mehmed III finally sacked Serdar Ferhad Pasha from the position of Grand Vizier due to his failure in Wallachia and replaced him with Sinan.

=== Austro-Hungarian War ===
The major event of his reign was the Austro-Ottoman War in Hungary (1593–1606). Ottoman defeats in the war caused Mehmed III to take personal command of the army, the first sultan to do so since Suleiman I in 1566. Accompanied by the Sultan, the Ottomans conquered Eger in 1596. Upon hearing of the Habsburg army&#x27;s approach, Mehmed wanted to dismiss the army and return to Istanbul. However, the Ottomans eventually decided to face the enemy and defeated the Habsburg and Transylvanian forces at the Battle of Keresztes (known in Ottoman Turkish as the Battle of Haçova), during which the Sultan had to be dissuaded from fleeing the field halfway through the battle. Upon returning to Istanbul in victory, Mehmed told his viziers that he would campaign again. The next year the Venetian Bailo in Istanbul noted, &quot;the doctors declared that the Sultan cannot leave for a war on account of his bad health, produced by excesses of eating and drinking&quot;.

In reward for his services at the war, Cigalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha was made Grand Vizier in 1596. However, with pressure from the court and his mother, Mehmed reinstated Damat Ibrahim Pasha to this position shortly afterward.

However, the victory at the Battle of Keresztes was soon set back by some important losses, including the loss of Győr () to the Austrians and the defeat of the Ottoman forces led by Hafız Ahmet Pasha by the Wallachian forces under Michael the Brave in Nikopol in 1599. In 1600, Ottoman forces under Tiryaki Hasan Pasha captured Nagykanizsa after a 40-day siege and later successfully held it against a much greater attacking force in the Siege of Nagykanizsa.

=== Jelali revolts ===
Another major event of his reign was the Jelali revolts in Anatolia. Karayazıcı Abdülhalim, a former Ottoman official, captured the city of Urfa and declared himself a sultan in 1600. The rumors of his claim to the throne spread to Constantinople and Mehmed ordered the rebels to be treated harshly to dispel the rumors, among these, was the execution of Hüseyin Pasha, whom Karayazıcı Abdülhalim styled as Grand Vizier. In 1601, Abdülhalim fled to the vicinity of Samsun after being defeated by the forces under Sokulluzade Hasan Pasha, the governor of Baghdad. However, his brother, Deli Hasan, killed Sokulluzade Hasan Pasha and defeated troops under the command of Hadım Hüsrev Pasha. He then marched on to Kütahya, captured and burned the city.

==Relationship with England==
In 1599, the fourth year of Mehmed III&#x27;s reign, Queen Elizabeth I sent a convoy of gifts to the Ottoman court. These gifts were originally intended for the sultan&#x27;s predecessor, Murad III, who had died before they had arrived. Included in these gifts was a large jewel-studded clockwork organ that was assembled on the slope of the Royal Private Garden by a team of engineers including Thomas Dallam. The organ took many weeks to complete and featured dancing sculptures such as a flock of blackbirds that sung and shook their wings at the end of the music. Also among the English gifts was a ceremonial coach, accompanied by a letter from the Queen to Mehmed&#x27;s mother, Safiye Sultan. These gifts were intended to cement relations between the two countries, building on the trade agreement signed in 1581 that gave English merchants priority in the Ottoman region. Under the looming threat of Spanish military presence, England was eager to secure an alliance with the Ottomans, the two nations together having the capability to divide the power. Elizabeth&#x27;s gifts arrived in a large 27-gun merchantman ship that Mehmed personally inspected, a clear display of English maritime strength that would prompt him to build up his fleet over the following years of his reign. The Anglo-Ottoman alliance would never be consummated, however, as relations between the nations grew stagnant due to anti-European sentiments reaped from the worsening Austro-Ottoman War and the deaths of Safiye Sultan&#x27;s interpreter and the pro-English chief Hasan Pasha.

==Death==
Mehmed died on 22 December 1603 at the age of 37. According to one source, the cause of his death was the distress caused by the death of his son, Şehzade Mahmud. According to another source, he died either of a plague or a stroke. He was buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque. He was succeeded by his 13 year old son Ahmed I as the new sultan.

==Family==
===Consorts===
Mehmed III had three known consorts, none of whom, according to the harem records, held the title of Haseki Sultan:
* Handan Hatun (died 9 November 1605, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople; buried in Mehmed III Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque). She was mother and Valide Sultan of Ahmed I. 
* Halime Hatun (dead after 1623, Old Palace, Constantinople; buried in Mustafa I Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque, Constantinople). She was mother and Valide Sultan of Mustafa I.
* &quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun (dead in 1598, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople). She died in 1598 with her infant son during the outbreak of plague or smallpox.

===Sons===
Mehmed III had at least eight sons:
*Şehzade Selim (1585, Manisa Palace, Manisa – 20 April 1597, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople; buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Handan. He died of scarlet fever.
* Şehzade Süleyman ( 1586, Manisa Palace, Manisa, - 1597, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople; buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Handan. He died of scarlet fever.
*Şehzade Mahmud (1587, Manisa Palace, Manisa – executed by Mehmed III, 7 June 1603, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople; buried in Şehzade Mahmud Mausoleum, Şehzade Mosque) - with Halime.
* Ahmed I (18 April 1590, Manisa Palace, Manisa – 22 November 1617, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople; buried in Ahmed I Mausoleum, Sultan Ahmed Mosque) - with Handan. 14th Sultan of the Ottoman Empire.
*Şehzade Osman ( 1597, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople – 1601, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople; buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Handan.
*Şehzade &quot;Fülan&quot; ( 1597/1598, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople - 1598, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople; buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with &quot;Fülane&quot;. He died with his mother of plague or smallpox. 
*Şehzade Cihangir (1599, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople – 1602, Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, buried in Hagia Sophia Mosque);
* Mustafa I ( 1600/1602, Topkapi Palace, Constantinople – 20 January 1639, Eski Palace, Constantinople, buried in Mustafa I Mausoleum, Hagia Sophia Mosque) - with Halime. 15th Sultan of the Ottoman Empire.

===Daughters===
Mehmed III had at least ten daughters:
*Fatma Sultan (1584?, Manisa - ?) - with Handan. She married firstly in 1600 with Mahmud Pasha, sanjakbey of Cairo, secondly in 1604 to Damat Tiryaki Hasan Pasha (d. 1611) and had a son and two daughters, finally in 1616 to Güzelce Ali Pasha, Grand Vizier, until his death in 1621.
*Ayşe Sultan ( 1587?, Manisa - after 1614) - with Handan. She married to Destari Mustafa Pasha, with whom she had a son and two daughters died in infancy. Some sources also suggest that she remarried to Gazi Hüsrev Pasha. She was buried in Destari&#x27;s türbe (Şehzade Mosque) with their children. 
*Beyhan Sultan (born before 1590, Manisa). She married in 1612 to Damat Halil Pasha. They had two sons, Sultanzade Mahmud Bey and Sultanzade Ebubekir Bey. 
*Hatice Sultan (1590, Manisa - 1613, Constantinople) - with Halime. She married firstly in 1604 to Mirahur Mustafa Pasha, married secondly on 10 February 1612 to Cağaloğlu Mahmud Pasha (d.1643), son of Cigalazade Sinan Pasha and Saliha Hanimsultan (daughter of Ayşe Hümaşah Sultan, granddaughter of Sultan Suleyman I). She died soon after her second marriage and was buried in her own türbe in the Şehzade Mosque. 
*Şah Sultan (1592?, Manisa - after 1623, Constantinople) - with Halime. She married in 1604 (consummated in March 1606) to Damat Kara Davud Pasha, Grand Vizier. She had a son, Sultanzade Süleyman Bey, and a daughter. During Mustafa I&#x27;s second reign, she was suspected, together with her husband, of wanting to install her son on the throne.
*Hümaşah Sultan (? - ?). She married in October 1613 Cağaloğlu Mahmud Pasha, after her half-sister Hatice&#x27;s death. 
* Esra Sultan (? - ?). She married Ali Pasha (d.1617).
* Ümmügülsüm Sultan (? - after 1622). She was among the unmarried princesses in 1622.
* Halime Sultan (? - after 1622). She was among the unmarried princesses in 1622.
* Akile Sultan (? - after 1622). She was among the unmarried princesses in 1622.

==References==
==External links==


[aged 37]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="0" end="10" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="84" end="112" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q690361" start="236" end="252" title="Long Turkish War" label="Long Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q690495" start="315" end="334" title="Battle of Keresztes" label="Battle of Keresztes"/>
<link wikidata="Q134494" start="407" end="411" title="Győr" label="Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q409102" start="416" end="423" title="Nikopol, Bulgaria" label="Nikopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052771" start="472" end="489" title="Celali rebellions" label="Jelali rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="538" end="549" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="664" end="671" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="787" end="811" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="831" end="840" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="861" end="869" title="Selim II" label="Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q255809" start="910" end="923" title="Hurrem Sultan" label="Hurrem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="940" end="953" title="Safiye Sultan (wife of Murad III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="958" end="966" title="Albanian people" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q73412" start="976" end="994" title="Dukagjin Highlands" label="Dukagjin Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1549" end="1557" title="Fratricide#Ottoman Empire" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="1913" end="1926" title="Safiye Sultan (wife of Murad III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="1932" end="1945" title="valide sultan" label="valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777403" start="2015" end="2034" title="Serdar Ferhad Pasha" label="Serdar Ferhad Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q717115" start="2039" end="2055" title="Koca Sinan Pasha" label="Koca Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q951058" start="2109" end="2128" title="Damat Ibrahim Pasha" label="Damat Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="2269" end="2280" title="janissaries" label="janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="2400" end="2409" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q690361" start="2506" end="2524" title="Long Turkish War" label="Austro-Ottoman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2528" end="2535" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q167109" start="2734" end="2738" title="Eger" label="Eger"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="2933" end="2941" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="2946" end="2958" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q690495" start="2974" end="2993" title="Battle of Mezőkeresztes" label="Battle of Keresztes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="3004" end="3019" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q248058" start="3473" end="3501" title="Cigalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha" label="Cigalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q134494" start="3776" end="3780" title="Győr" label="Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q367949" start="3845" end="3862" title="Hafız Ahmet Pasha" label="Hafız Ahmet Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q122482550" start="3870" end="3887" title="Wallachian military forces" label="Wallachian forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q118755" start="3894" end="3911" title="Michael the Brave" label="Michael the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q409102" start="3915" end="3922" title="Nikopol, Bulgaria" label="Nikopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809483" start="3962" end="3981" title="Tiryaki Hasan Pasha" label="Tiryaki Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q14424" start="3991" end="4002" title="Nagykanizsa" label="Nagykanizsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822495" start="4101" end="4121" title="Siege of Nagykanizsa" label="Siege of Nagykanizsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052771" start="4188" end="4202" title="Jelali revolts" label="Jelali revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11929653" start="4216" end="4237" title="Karayazıcı Abdülhalim" label="Karayazıcı Abdülhalim"/>
<link wikidata="Q133118" start="4287" end="4291" title="Urfa" label="Urfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q130602961" start="4502" end="4515" title="Hüseyin Pasha (Celali rebel)" label="Hüseyin Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="4612" end="4618" title="Samsun" label="Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716965" start="4660" end="4683" title="Sokulluzade Hasan Pasha" label="Sokulluzade Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="4701" end="4708" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474454" start="4732" end="4742" title="Deli Hasan" label="Deli Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4816" end="4834" title="Hadım Hüsrev Pasha" label="Hadım Hüsrev Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q188894" start="4858" end="4865" title="Kütahya" label="Kütahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4981" end="4998" title="Queen Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="5116" end="5125" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5270" end="5290" title="Topkapı Palace#Third Courtyard" label="Royal Private Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788819" start="5324" end="5337" title="Thomas Dallam" label="Thomas Dallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="5613" end="5626" title="Safiye Sultan (wife of Murad III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5990" end="5999" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528448" start="6654" end="6668" title="Şehzade Mahmud (son of Mehmed III)" label="Şehzade Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="6817" end="6824" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="6972" end="6985" title="Haseki Sultan" label="Haseki Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682334" start="6989" end="7001" title="Handan Sultan" label="Handan Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="7130" end="7143" title="Valide sultan" label="Valide Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="7159" end="7171" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528448" start="7865" end="7879" title="Şehzade Mahmud (son of Mehmed III)" label="Şehzade Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="8049" end="8056" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="8734" end="8743" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274280" start="9090" end="9099" title="Sanjak-bey" label="sanjakbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809483" start="9136" end="9155" title="Tiryaki Hasan Pasha" label="Tiryaki Hasan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131402" start="9218" end="9235" title="Güzelce Ali Pasha" label="Güzelce Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775651" start="9479" end="9496" title="Gazi Hüsrev Pasha" label="Gazi Hüsrev Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="9531" end="9536" title="türbe" label="türbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="9538" end="9552" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824866" start="9642" end="9659" title="Damat Halil Pasha" label="Damat Halil Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q248058" start="9934" end="9956" title="Cığalazade Yusuf Sinan Pasha" label="Cigalazade Sinan Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043373" start="9993" end="10012" title="Ayşe Hümaşah Sultan" label="Ayşe Hümaşah Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="10038" end="10048" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleyman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="10117" end="10122" title="türbe" label="türbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="10130" end="10144" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367507" start="10276" end="10292" title="Kara Davud Pasha" label="Kara Davud Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="10294" end="10306" title="Grand vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19991" wikidata="Q174798" url="?curid=19991" title="Mustafa I">
<text>Mustafa I (; ‎; 1600/1602 – 20 January 1639), called Mustafa the Saint (Veli Mustafa) during his second reign, and called Mustafa the Mad (Deli Mustafa) by historians, was twice the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 22 November 1617 to 26 February 1618, and from 20 May 1622 to 10 September 1623. He was the son of sultan Mehmed III and Halime Sultan.

== Early life ==
Mustafa was born around 1600/1602 in the Topkapi Palace. He was son of Sultan Mehmed III and Halime Hatun, an Abkhazian concubine.

Before 1603 it was customary for an Ottoman Sultan to have his brothers executed shortly after ascending the throne, (Mustafa&#x27;s father Mehmed III had executed his nineteen half-brothers). But when the thirteen-year-old Ahmed I, Mustafa&#x27;s older half-brother, was enthroned in 1603, he spared the life of Mustafa.

A factor in Mustafa&#x27;s survival is the influence of Kösem Sultan (Ahmed&#x27;s favorite consort), who may have wished to preempt the succession of Sultan Osman II, Ahmed&#x27;s first-born son from another concubine. If Osman became Sultan, he would likely try to execute his half-brothers, the sons of Ahmed and Kösem. (This scenario later became a reality when Osman II executed his half-brother Mehmed, the oldest son of Ahmed and Kösem, in 1621.) Furthermore, when Ahmed ascended the throne, Mustafa was the only possible heir. Had Ahmed executed him and then died sonless, the dynasty would have died out. However, the reports of foreign ambassadors suggest that Ahmed actually liked his half-brother: he had been on good terms with his older half-brother Şehzade Mahmud (full brother of Mustafa, executed by his father Mehmed III and his grandmother Safiye Sultan) and was shocked by his death, and also felt sympathy for Mustafa&#x27;s very young age.

Mustafa lived at first in the Old Palace, along with his mother, and grandmother Safiye Sultan and later in the Kafes until Ahmed&#x27;s death in 1617.

==First reign (1617–1618)==
Ahmed&#x27;s death created a dilemma never before experienced by the Ottoman Empire. Multiple princes were now eligible for the Sultanate, and all of them lived in Topkapı Palace. A court faction headed by the Şeyhülislam Esad Efendi and Sofu Mehmed Pasha (who represented the Grand Vizier when he was away from Constantinople) decided to enthrone Mustafa instead of Ahmed&#x27;s son Osman. Sofu Mehmed argued that Osman was too young to be enthroned without causing adverse comment among the populace. The Chief Black Eunuch Mustafa Agha objected, citing Mustafa&#x27;s mental problems, but he was overruled. Mustafa&#x27;s rise created a new succession principle of seniority that would last until the end of the Empire. It was the first time an Ottoman Sultan was succeeded by his brother instead of his son. His mother Halime Sultan became the Valide sultan, as well as regent, and wielded great power. Due to Mustafa&#x27;s mental conditions, she acted as regent and exercised power more directly.

It was hoped that regular social contact would improve Mustafa&#x27;s mental health, but his behavior remained eccentric. He pulled off the turbans of his viziers and yanked their beards. Others observed him throwing coins to birds and fish. The Ottoman historian İbrahim Peçevi wrote &quot;this situation was seen by all men of state and the people, and they understood that he was mentally disturbed.&quot;

==Deposition==
Mustafa was never more than a tool of court cliques at the Topkapı Palace. In 1618, after a short rule, another palace faction deposed him in favour of his young nephew Osman II (1618–1622), and Mustafa was sent back to the Old Palace. The conflict between the Janissaries and Osman II presented him with a second chance. After a Janissary rebellion led to the deposition and assassination of Osman II in 1622, Mustafa was restored to the throne and held it for another year.

==Alleged mental instability==
Nevertheless, according to Baki Tezcan, there is not enough evidence to properly establish that Mustafa was mentally imbalanced when he came to the throne. Mustafa &quot;made a number of excursions to the arsenal and the navy docks, examining various sorts of arms and taking an active interest in the munitions supply of the army and the navy.&quot; One of the dispatches of Baron de Sancy, the French ambassador, &quot;suggested that Mustafa was interested in leading the Safavid campaign himself and was entertaining the idea of wintering in Konya for that purpose.&quot;

Moreover, one contemporary observer provides an explanation of the coup which does not mention the incapacity of Mustafa. Baron de Sancy ascribes the deposition as a political conspiracy between the grand admiral Ali Pasha and Chief Black Eunuch Mustafa Agha, who were angered by the former&#x27;s removal from office upon Sultan Mustafa&#x27;s accession. They may have circulated rumors of the sultan&#x27;s mental instability subsequent to the coup in order to legitimize it.

==Second reign (1622–1623)==
Mustafa commenced his second reign by executing all those who had taken any part in the murder of Sultan Osman. Hoca Ömer Efendi, the chief of the rebels, the kızlar Agha Suleiman Agha, the vizier Dilaver Pasha, the Kaim-makam Ahmed Pasha, the defterdar Baki Pasha, the segban-bashi Nasuh Agha, and the general of the Janissaries Ali Agha, were executed.

The epithet &quot;Veli&quot; (meaning &quot;saint&quot;) was used in reference to him during his reign.

His mental condition unimproved, Mustafa was a puppet controlled by his mother and brother-in-law, the grand vizier Kara Davud Pasha. He believed that Osman II was still alive and was seen searching for him throughout the palace, knocking on doors and crying out to his nephew to relieve him from the burden of sovereignty. &quot;The present emperor being a fool&quot; (according to English Ambassador Sir Thomas Roe), he was compared unfavorably with his predecessor. In fact, it was his mother Halime Sultan the de facto-co-ruler as Valide Sultan of the Ottoman Empire.

==Deposition and last years==
Political instability was generated by conflict between the Janissaries and the sipahis (Ottoman cavalry), followed by the Abaza rebellion, which occurred when the governor-general of Erzurum, Abaza Mehmed Pasha, decided to march on Istanbul to avenge the murder of Osman II. The regime tried to end the conflict by executing Kara Davud Pasha, but Abaza Mehmed continued his advance. Clerics and Kemankeş Kara Ali Pasha prevailed upon Mustafa&#x27;s mother to allow the deposition of her son. She agreed, on the condition that Mustafa&#x27;s life would be spared.

The 11-year-old Murad IV, son of Ahmed I and Kösem, was enthroned on 10 September 1623. In return for her consent to his deposition, the request of Mustafa&#x27;s mother that he be spared execution was granted. Mustafa was sent in the Kafes for the rest of his life, while his mother was sent to the Old Palace, where she died.

==Death==
Mustafa died in the Kafes on 20 January 1639. One source states that he died of epilepsy which was caused by being imprisoned for majority of his life. Another source states that he was executed by the orders of Sultan Murad IV, who was on his death bed, and rumors say that he wanted to end the lineage. He is buried in the courtyard of the Haghia Sophia.

== In popular culture ==
In the 2015 Turkish television series &quot;Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem&quot;, Mustafa was portrayed by several actors:
*Alihan Türkdemir, when Mustafa is a young prince;
*Boran Kuzum, when Mustafa is Sultan; 
*Cüneyt Uzunlar, when Mustafa is old and he is imprisoned in the Kafes.

==See also==
*Transformation of the Ottoman Empire

==Notes==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="0" end="9" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="53" end="70" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa the Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="122" end="137" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa the Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="182" end="210" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="322" end="332" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="337" end="350" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="411" end="425" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapi Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="448" end="458" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="463" end="475" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q171465" start="642" end="652" title="Mehmed III" label="Mehmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="726" end="733" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="881" end="893" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172056" start="983" end="991" title="Osman II" label="Osman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q172056" start="1191" end="1199" title="Osman II" label="Osman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528449" start="1226" end="1232" title="Şehzade Mehmed (son of Ahmed I)" label="Mehmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528448" start="1589" end="1603" title="Şehzade Mahmud (son of Mehmed III)" label="Şehzade Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="1684" end="1697" title="Safiye Sultan (mother of Mehmed III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q437197" start="1869" end="1882" title="Safiye Sultan (wife of Murad III)" label="Safiye Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721042" start="1900" end="1905" title="Kafes" label="Kafes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410729" start="2179" end="2190" title="Şeyhülislam" label="Şeyhülislam"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2281" end="2295" title="Istanbul" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896780" start="2476" end="2494" title="Chief Black Eunuch" label="Chief Black Eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="2792" end="2805" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="2817" end="2830" title="Valide sultan" label="Valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q694908" start="3237" end="3251" title="İbrahim Peçevi" label="İbrahim Peçevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="3457" end="3471" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q172056" start="3567" end="3575" title="Osman II" label="Osman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="3659" end="3670" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578094" start="4380" end="4396" title="Ottoman–Safavid War (1603–18)" label="Safavid campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896780" start="4709" end="4727" title="Chief Black Eunuch" label="Chief Black Eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367507" start="5567" end="5583" title="Kara Davud Pasha" label="Kara Davud Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q983131" start="5853" end="5867" title="Sir Thomas Roe" label="Sir Thomas Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="5947" end="5960" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193875" start="6134" end="6141" title="sipahis" label="sipahis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15094110" start="6177" end="6192" title="Abaza rebellion" label="Abaza rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q122803" start="6238" end="6245" title="Erzurum" label="Erzurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981307" start="6247" end="6265" title="Abaza Mehmed Pasha" label="Abaza Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584127" start="6450" end="6473" title="Kemankeş Kara Ali Pasha" label="Kemankeş Kara Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="6635" end="6643" title="Murad IV" label="Murad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000313" start="6919" end="6929" title="Eski Saray" label="Old Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="7177" end="7185" title="Murad IV" label="Murad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="7300" end="7313" title="Haghia Sophia" label="Haghia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7385" end="7407" title="Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem" label="Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem"/>
<link wikidata="Q388715" start="7499" end="7505" title="Şehzade" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q28736630" start="7508" end="7519" title="Boran Kuzum" label="Boran Kuzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220521" start="7633" end="7669" title="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire" label="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19992" wikidata="Q174762" url="?curid=19992" title="Murad IV">
<text>Murad IV (, &quot;Murād-ı Rābiʿ&quot;; , 27 July 1612 – 8  February 1640) was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1623 to 1640, known both for restoring the authority of the state and for the brutality of his methods. Murad IV was born in Constantinople, the son of Sultan Ahmed I (r. 1603–17) and Kösem Sultan. He was brought to power by a palace conspiracy when he was just 11 years old, and he succeeded his uncle Mustafa I (r. 1617–18, 1622–23). Until he assumed absolute power on 18 May 1632, the empire was ruled by his mother, Kösem Sultan, as &quot;nāʾib-i salṭanat&quot; (regent). His reign is most notable for the Ottoman–Safavid War, of which the outcome would partition the Caucasus between the two Imperial powers for around two centuries, while it also roughly laid the foundation for the current Turkey–Iran–Iraq borders.

== Early life ==
Murad IV was born on 27 July 1612 to Ahmed I (reign 16031617) and his consort and later wife Kösem Sultan, an ethnic Greek. After his father&#x27;s death when he was six years old, he was confined in the Kafes with his brothers, Suleiman, Kasim, Bayezid and Ibrahim.

Grand Vizier Kemankeş Ali Pasha and Şeyhülislam Yahya Efendi were deposed from their position. The next day, the child of the age of six was taken to the Eyüp Sultan Mausoleum. The swords of Muhammad and Yavuz Sultan Selim were bequeathed to him. Five days later he was circumcised.

== Reign ==

=== Early reign (1623–1632) ===

Murad IV was for a long time under the control of his relatives and during his early years as Sultan; his mother, Kösem Sultan, essentially ruled through him. In this period, the Safavid Empire invaded Iraq, Northern Anatolia erupted in revolts, and in 1631 the Janissaries stormed the palace and killed the Grand Vizier, among others.

At the age of 16 in 1628, he had his brother-in-law (his sister Fatma Sultan&#x27;s husband, who was also the former governor of Egypt), Kara Mustafa Pasha, executed for a claimed action &quot;against the law of God&quot;.

After the death of the Grand Vizier Çerkes Mehmed Pasha in the winter of Tokat, Diyarbekir Beylerbeyi Hafiz Ahmed Pasha became a vizier on 8 February 1625.

An epidemic, which started in the summer of 1625 and was called the plague of Bayrampaşa, spread to threaten the population of Constantinople (present day Istanbul). On average, a thousand people died every day. The people fled to the Okmeydanı to escape the plague. The situation was worse in the countryside outside of Constantinople.

=== Absolute rule and imperial policies (1632–1640) ===
In 1632, Murad IV banned the smoking of tobacco and opium and closed coffeehouses, which were believed to be centers of sedition. Also in the same year as noted by Dimitrie Cantemir, he legalized the selling and drinking of alcohol even for Muslims, an act which had no precedent at the time. Previously known to be fond of drinking, in 1634 he realized the dangers of wine, and banned both the sale and drinking of alcohol and ordered taverns to close. He ordered execution for breaking this ban and restored the judicial regulations by very strict punishments, including execution; he once strangled a grand vizier for the reason that the official had beaten his mother-in-law.

=== Fire of 1633 ===
On 2 September 1633, the Cibali fire broke out, burning a fifth of the city. The fire started during the day when a caulker burned a shrub and a ship caulked into the walls. The fire spread in three branches to the city. One arm lowered towards the sea. It returned from Zeyrek and walked to Atpazan. The most beautiful districts of Constantinople were ruined, from the Yeniodas, Mollagürani districts, Fener gate to Sultanselim, Mesihpaşa, Bali Pasha and Lutfi Pasha mosques, Şahı buhan Palace, Unkapanı to Atpazarı, Bostanzade houses, and Sofular Bazaar. The fire that lasted for 30 hours was only extinguished after the wind stopped.

=== War against Safavid Iran ===
Murad IV&#x27;s reign is most notable for the Ottoman–Safavid War (1623–39) against Persia (today Iran) in which Ottoman forces managed to conquer Azerbaijan, occupying Tabriz, Hamadan, and capturing Baghdad in 1638. The Treaty of Zuhab that followed the war generally reconfirmed the borders as agreed by the Peace of Amasya, with Eastern Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Dagestan staying Persian, Western Georgia stayed Ottoman. Mesopotamia was irrevocably lost for the Persians. The borders fixed as a result of the war, are more or less the same as the present border line between Iraq and Iran.

During the siege of Baghdad in 1638, the city held out for forty days but was compelled to surrender.

Murad IV himself commanded the Ottoman Army in the last years of the war.

=== Relations with the Mughal Empire ===
While he was encamped in Baghdad, Murad IV is known to have met ambassadors of the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, Mir Zarif and Mir Baraka, who presented 1000 pieces of finely embroidered cloth and even armor. Murad IV gave them the finest weapons, saddles and Kaftans and ordered his forces to accompany the Mughals to the port of Basra, where they set sail to Thatta and finally Surat.

== Architecture ==
Murad IV put emphasis on architecture and in his period many monuments were erected. The Baghdad Kiosk, built in 1635, and the Revan Kiosk, built in 1638 in Yerevan, were both built in the local styles. Some of the others include the Kavak Sarayı pavilion; the Meydanı Mosque; the Bayram Pasha Dervish Lodge, Tomb, Fountain, and Primary School; and the Şerafettin Mosque in Konya.

== Music and poetry ==
Murad IV wrote many poems. He used the &quot;Muradi&quot; penname for his poems. He also liked testing people with riddles. Once he wrote a poetic riddle and announced that whoever came with the correct answer would get a generous reward. Cihadi Bey, a poet from Enderun School, gave the correct answer and was promoted.

Murad IV was also a composer. He has a composition called &quot;Uzzal Peshrev&quot;.

== Family ==
Due to the prominence of his mother Kösem Sultan during his reign and the fact that all of his sons died in infancy, Murad IV&#x27;s family is not well known.

Only few of his many concubines are known and of the thirty-two children that Evliya Çelebi said that Murad IV had, five have not yet been identified, and the name of some of others is still unknown.

Furthermore, no child had a certain nominated mother.

=== Consorts ===

Murad IV had several consorts and concubines, but only few are known and some of them are disputed:
*Ayşe Sultan. First Haseki of Murad IV and the only one whose title is confirmed.
*Şemsişah (Şemsperi) &quot;Sultan&quot; (?). According to L. Pierce, Murad IV had a second Haseki in the last years of his reign. The identity and title of this concubine are however disputed, but some have proposed Şemsişah as a probable identity. She started with a salary of 2,751 daily asprons, the highest ever recorded for a concubine, but after seven months it was reduced to 2,000 daily asprons, on par with Ayşe Sultan. She disappears from the records soon after Murad IV&#x27;s death.
*Sanavber Hatun. She founded a charity in the capital in 1628. Since this required high wealth and Murad&#x27;s first children were born in 1627, she was likely one of his first concubines and the mother of at least one of Murad&#x27;s older children.
*Safiye Hatun.
*Şemsperi Hatun (disputed). Maybe only another name of Şemsişah.
*Emirgün&#x27;s sister (disputed). Her brother, the governor of Yerevan, would offer her to Murad IV to earn his favors. Being beautiful, the sultan fell in love with her, but later left her in Damascus instead of taking her to the capital.
*Rosana Sultan (existence disputed, also called Rossana, Roxana or Roxane): according to the sources, she was the favorite of Murad IV, and she was tall, blonde and extremely pale. She had a bad temper and even the sultan feared her. She had followed him to war in 1635, but was sent back to Constantinople when Murad fell in love with Emirgün&#x27;s sister. In the capital she was received with every honor, but jealousy for the new concubine led her to issue an imperial order to execute Murad IV&#x27;s brothers, who hated her. When Murad returned, one of his sisters tried to accuse her, but he didn&#x27;t believe her and furiously hit her. Eventually his mother Kösem Sultan managed to find evidence and witnesses against Rosana and Murad IV stabbed her himself. From that moment on, the sultan swore never to favor another woman. Although the story has spread widely in European sources (she in a main character of the play &quot;Bajazet&quot;), most historians dismiss it as a romantic legend or a fictionalized and more dramatic version of Ayşe Sultan&#x27;s story.

=== Sons ===
Murad IV had at least fifteen sons, but none of them survived infancy and all of them died before their father (who died in February 1640):
* Şehzade Ahmed (Constantinople, 21 December 1627 - Constantinople, 1637).
* Şehzade &quot;Fülan&quot; (Constantinople, March 1631 - Constantinople, March 1631). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Süleyman (Constantinople, February 1632 - Constantinople, 1632). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Mehmed (Constantinople, 8 August 1633 - Constantinople, 1638). Born in the Pavilion of the Kandilli Garden, buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade &quot;Fülan&quot; (Constantinople, February 1634 - Constantinople, March 1634).
* Şehzade &quot;Fülan&quot; (Constantinople, 10 March 1634 - Constantinople, March 1634).
* Şehzade Alaeddin (Constantinople, 16 August 1635 - Constantinople, 1637). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Ahmed (Izmit, 15 May 1638 - 1639). He is referred to as &quot;son of Haseki&quot;.
* Şehzade Abdülhamid (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Selim (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Orhan (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Numan (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Hasan (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Mahmud (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Şehzade Osman (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.

=== Daughters ===
Murad IV had at least thirteen daughters.

Unlike their brothers, at least eight of them survived at least to the age of marriage:
* &quot;Fülane&quot; Sultan (Constantinople, 1627 - ?). She married Tüccarzade Mustafa Paşa in 1640.
* Gevherhan Sultan (Constantinople, February 1630 - ?). She married Haseki Mehmed Pasha.
* Hanzade Sultan (Constantinople, 1631 - ?, after 1657). She married Nakkaş Mustafa Pasha and she was widowed in 1657.
* Ismihan Sultan (Constantinople, 1632 - Constantinople, 1632). Called also Esmihan Sultan.
* Ismihan Kaya Sultan (Constantinople, 1630/1633 - Constantinople, 28 February 1658). She married Melek Ahmed Paşah and she died in childbirth.
* Rabia Sultan (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). She lived to adulthood, although no marriages are known. Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Fatma Sultan (Constantinople, ? - Constantinople, ?). Buried in the Ahmed I mausoleum in the Blue Mosque.
* Bedia Sultan (Constantinople, ? - ?).
* Bedia Ayşe Sultan (Constantinople, ? - ?). She married Malatuk Süleyman Paşa before 1655.
* Hafsa Sultan (Constantinople, ? - ?). She married Ammarzade Mehmed Paşah.
* Safiye Sultan (Constantinople, after 1634 - Constantinople, ). She married firstly on 27 August 1649 to Hayderağazade Mehmed Pasha, married secondly Sarı Abaza Hüseyin Paşah (brother or son of Grand Vizier Siyavuş Paşah) in 1659. She had three sons and a daughter: Sultanzade Abubekr Bey, Sultanzade Mehmed Remzi Paşah (d. 21 November 1719), Sultanzade Abdüllah Bey (stillborn, ) and Rukiye Hanımsultan (died January 1697). She died to give birth to Abdüllah.
* Rukiye Sultan (Constantinople, 1640 - 1696). She married Şeytân Melek İbrâhîm Pasha and was widowed in 1685. She had two daughters: Fatma Hanımsultan (1677 - 1727) and Ayşe Hanımsultan (1680 - 1717). She was buried in the Şehzade Mosque.
*Esma Sultan (? - ?). She died in infancy.

== Death ==
Murad IV died from cirrhosis in Constantinople at the age of 27 in 1640.

Rumours had circulated that on his deathbed, Murad IV ordered the execution of his mentally disabled brother, Ibrahim (reigned 1640–48), which would have meant the end of the Ottoman line. However, the order was not carried out.

== Popular culture ==
* In the TV series &quot;Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem&quot;, Murad IV is portrayed by Cağan Efe Ak as a child, and Metin Akdülger as the Sultan.
* In the film &quot;Three Thousand Years of Longing&quot; (2022), Murad IV is portrayed by Ogulcan Arman Uslu, with Kaan Guldur playing him as a child.

== See also ==
* Transformation of the Ottoman Empire
* Polish–Ottoman War (1633–34)
* Koçi Bey

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 

== External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="0" end="8" title="Murad IV" label="Murad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="82" end="110" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="241" end="255" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="275" end="282" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="300" end="312" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="419" end="428" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="536" end="548" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163476" start="626" end="645" title="Ottoman–Safavid War (1623–1639)" label="Ottoman–Safavid War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060524" start="660" end="667" title="Treaty of Zuhab" label="outcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="688" end="696" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="813" end="819" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="820" end="824" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="825" end="829" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="894" end="901" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="950" end="962" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="967" end="979" title="Greeks" label="ethnic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721042" start="1061" end="1066" title="Kafes" label="Kafes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21523792" start="1086" end="1094" title="Şehzade Süleyman" label="Suleiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21523791" start="1096" end="1101" title="Şehzade Kasım" label="Kasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722902" start="1103" end="1110" title="Şehzade Bayezid (son of Ahmed I)" label="Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q168776" start="1115" end="1122" title="Ibrahim of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410729" start="1161" end="1172" title="Şeyhülislam" label="Şeyhülislam"/>
<link wikidata="Q956677" start="1279" end="1300" title="Eyüp Sultan Mosque" label="Eyüp Sultan Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="1316" end="1324" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="1329" end="1347" title="Selim I" label="Yavuz Sultan Selim"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="1569" end="1581" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="1634" end="1648" title="Safavid Empire" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828224" start="1657" end="1661" title="Baghdad Eyalet" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331869" start="1672" end="1680" title="Anatolia Eyalet" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="1717" end="1728" title="Janissary" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911421" start="1856" end="1868" title="Fatma Sultan (daughter of Ahmed I)" label="Fatma Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203669" start="1929" end="1947" title="Kara Mustafa Pasha (governor of Egypt)" label="Kara Mustafa Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q183651" start="2089" end="2094" title="Tokat" label="Tokat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="2241" end="2247" title="plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2300" end="2314" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2328" end="2336" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627994" start="2636" end="2648" title="Ottoman coffeehouse" label="coffeehouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q159933" start="2731" end="2748" title="Dimitrie Cantemir" label="Dimitrie Cantemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="3171" end="3183" title="Grand Vizier" label="grand vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q163476" start="3986" end="4015" title="Ottoman–Safavid War (1623–39)" label="Ottoman–Safavid War (1623–39)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="4109" end="4115" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28587" start="4117" end="4124" title="Hamadan" label="Hamadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="4140" end="4147" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060524" start="4161" end="4176" title="Treaty of Zuhab" label="Treaty of Zuhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119319" start="4250" end="4265" title="Peace of Amasya" label="Peace of Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="4517" end="4521" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4526" end="4530" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="4553" end="4560" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036981" start="4611" end="4633" title="Capture of Baghdad (1638)" label="compelled to surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="4667" end="4679" title="Ottoman Army" label="Ottoman Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="4777" end="4784" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="4850" end="4860" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="4997" end="5003" title="saddle" label="saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932927" start="5009" end="5015" title="Kaftan" label="Kaftan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="5057" end="5064" title="Mughals" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="5080" end="5085" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27212" start="5110" end="5116" title="Thatta" label="Thatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="5129" end="5134" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="5313" end="5320" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="5530" end="5535" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q61127" start="6018" end="6030" title="Kösem Sultan" label="Kösem Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="6220" end="6233" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16166921" start="6517" end="6528" title="Ayşe Sultan (Haseki of Murad IV)" label="Ayşe Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="6536" end="6542" title="Haseki sultan" label="Haseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q738051" start="6888" end="6894" title="aspron" label="aspron"/>
<link wikidata="Q788676" start="8603" end="8610" title="Bajazet (play)" label="Bajazet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="8912" end="8926" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="9096" end="9107" title="Blue Mosque, Istanbul" label="Blue Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q129649" start="9731" end="9736" title="İzmit" label="Izmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="10755" end="10769" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933099" start="10895" end="10914" title="Haseki Mehmed Pasha" label="Haseki Mehmed Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380345" start="11129" end="11148" title="Kaya Sultan" label="Ismihan Kaya Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812170" start="11225" end="11242" title="Melek Ahmed Pasha" label="Melek Ahmed Paşah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774481" start="11960" end="11973" title="Abaza Siyavuş Pasha" label="Siyavuş Paşah"/>
<link wikidata="Q644677" start="12438" end="12452" title="Şehzade Mosque" label="Şehzade Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="12529" end="12538" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q168776" start="12694" end="12701" title="Ibrahim of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12861" end="12883" title="Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem" label="Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23920546" start="12945" end="12959" title="Metin Akdülger" label="Metin Akdülger"/>
<link wikidata="Q94525569" start="12995" end="13026" title="Three Thousand Years of Longing" label="Three Thousand Years of Longing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220521" start="13145" end="13181" title="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire" label="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q74302" start="13184" end="13212" title="Polish–Ottoman War (1633–34)" label="Polish–Ottoman War (1633–34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q256724" start="13215" end="13223" title="Koçi Bey" label="Koçi Bey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19994" wikidata="Q442602" url="?curid=19994" title="Masamune Shirow">
<text>, better known by his pen name , is a Japanese manga artist. Shirow is best known for the manga &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, which has since been turned into three theatrical anime films, two anime television series, an anime television film, an anime ONA series, a theatrical live action film, and several video games. As well as being a key figure in the development of cyberpunk aesthetics and themes in Japan during the 1980s and 1990s.

==Life and career==
Born in the Hyōgo Prefecture capital city of Kobe, he studied oil painting at Osaka University of Arts. While in college, he developed an interest in manga, which led him to create his own complete work, &quot;Black Magic&quot;, which was published in the manga &quot;dōjinshi&quot; &quot;Atlas&quot;. His work caught the eye of President Harumichi Aoki, who offered to publish him.

The result was best-selling manga &quot;Appleseed&quot;, a full volume of densely plotted drama taking place in an ambiguous future. The story was a sensation, and won the 1986 Seiun Award for Best Manga. After a professional reprint of &quot;Black Magic&quot; and a second volume of &quot;Appleseed&quot;, he released &quot;Dominion&quot; in 1986. Two more volumes of &quot;Appleseed&quot; followed before he began work on &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;. His work has been cited as an influence on The Wachowskis and the development of the popular Matrix film series. 

In 2007, he collaborated again with Production I.G to co-create the original concept for the anime television series &quot;Ghost Hound&quot;, Production I.G&#x27;s 20th anniversary project. A further original collaboration with Production I.G began airing in April 2008, titled &quot;Real Drive&quot;. His work often explores the philosophical themes of cyberpunk such as the nature of post-human existence, AI and the ethics of biotechnology, human–machine relations, multiculturalism, and globalism. 

==Bibliography==
===Manga===
 series:
# (1985–1986)
# &quot;Dominion: Phantom of the Audience&quot; (1988), short story
# (1995)

 series:
# (1989–1990)
# (1991–1996)
# (1997)

Stand-alones:

* (1983)
* (1985–1989)
* (1986)
* (1987)
* (1990–1991)
* &quot;Exon Depot&quot; (1992)
* (1992–1994)
* (2007–2008)
* (2008)

===Art books===
A substantial amount of Shirow&#x27;s work has been released in art book or poster book format, some being hentai. The following is an incomplete list.

* &quot;Intron Depot 1&quot; (1992) (science fiction–themed color illustration art book collecting his work from 1981 to 1991)
* &quot;Intron Depot 2: Blades&quot; (1998) (fantasy-themed color illustration art book featuring female characters with armor and edged weapons)
* &quot;Cybergirls Portfolio&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Intron Depot 3: Ballistics&quot; (2003) (military-themed color illustration and CG art book featuring female characters with guns)
* &quot;Intron Depot 4: Bullets&quot; (2004) (color illustration art book collecting his work between 1995 and 1999)
* &quot;Intron Depot 5: Battalion&quot; (2012) (game &amp; animation artwork covering the period 2001–2009)
* &quot;Intron Depot 6: Barb Wire 01&quot; (2013) (illustrations for novels 2007–2010)
* &quot;Intron Depot 7: Barb Wire 02&quot; (2013) (illustrations for novels 2007–2010)
* &quot;Intron Depot 8: Bomb Bay&quot; (2018) (illustrations 1992–2009)
* &quot;Intron Depot 9: Barrage Fire&quot; (2019) (illustrations 1998–2017)
* &quot;Intron Depot 10: Bloodbard&quot; (2020) (illustrations 2004–2019)
* &quot;Intron Depot 11: Bailey Bridge&quot; (2020) (illustrations 2012–2014)
* &quot;Intron Depot 12: Burnout Velocity&quot; (2024) (illustrations 2015)
* &quot;Kokin Toguihime Zowshi Shu&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Pieces 1&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Pieces 2: Phantom Cats&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Pieces 3: Wild Wet Quest&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Pieces 4: Hell Hound 01&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Pieces 5: Hell Hound 02&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Pieces 6: Hell Cat&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Pieces 7: Hell Hound 01 &amp; 02 Miscellaneous Work + α&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Pieces 8: Wild Wet West&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Pieces 9: Kokon Otogizoshi Shu Hiden&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Pieces GEM 01: The Ghost in The Shell Data + α&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Pieces GEM 02: Neuro Hard Bee Planet&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Pieces GEM 03: Appleseed Drawings&quot; (2016)
* &quot;W-Tails Cat 1&quot; (2012)
* &quot;W-Tails Cat 2&quot; (2013)
* &quot;W-Tails Cat 3&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Greaseberries 1&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Greaseberries 2&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Greaseberries 3&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Greaseberries 4&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Greaseberries Rough&quot; (2019)

===Galgrease===
&quot;Galgrease&quot; (published in &quot;Uppers Magazine&quot;, 2002) is the collected name of several hentai manga and poster books by Shirow. The name comes from the fact that the women depicted often look &quot;greased&quot;.

The first series of &quot;Galgrease&quot; booklets included four issues each in the following settings:

* &quot;Wild Wet West&quot; (Wild West-themed)
* &quot;Hellhound&quot; (Horror-themed)
* &quot;Galhound&quot; (Near-future science fiction–themed)

The second series included another run of 12 booklets in the following worlds:

* &quot;Wild Wet Quest&quot; (A &quot;Tomb Raider&quot; or &quot;Indiana Jones&quot;–style sequel to &quot;Wild Wet West&quot;)
* &quot;Hellcat&quot; (Pirate-themed)
* &quot;Galhound 2&quot; (Near-future science fiction–themed)

After each regular series, there were one or more bonus poster books that revisited the existing characters and settings.

===Minor works===
* &quot;Areopagus Arther&quot; (1980), published in &quot;ATLAS&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Yellow Hawk&quot; (1981), published in &quot;ATLAS&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Colosseum Pick&quot; (1982), published in &quot;Funya&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Pursuit (Manga)&quot; (1982), published in &quot;Kintalion&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Opional Orientation&quot; (1984), published in &quot;ATLAS&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Battle on Mechanism&quot; (1984), published in &quot;ATLAS&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Metamorphosis in Amazoness&quot; (1984), published in &quot;ATLAS&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Arice in Jargon&quot; (1984), published in &quot;ATLAS&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Bike Nut&quot; (1985), published in &quot;Dorothy&quot; (dōjinshi)
* &quot;Gun Dancing&quot; (1986), published in &quot;Young Magazine Kaizokuban&quot;
* &quot;Colosseum Pick&quot; (1990), published in &quot;Comic Fusion Atpas&quot; (dōjinshi)

===Other===
* Design of the MAPP1-SM mouse series (2002, commissioned by Elecom)
* &quot;Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn&quot; (2012–2024), original concept
* Design of the EHP-SH1000 and EHP-SL100 headphones (2016, commissioned by Elecom)

==Adaptations==
===Anime===

====Film====
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; (1995) by Mamoru Oshii
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence&quot; (2004) by Mamoru Oshii
* &quot;Appleseed&quot; (2004) by Shinji Aramaki
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - Solid State Society&quot; (2006) by Kenji Kamiyama
* &quot;Appleseed Ex Machina&quot; (2007) by Shinji Aramaki and John Woo
* &quot;Appleseed Alpha&quot; (2014) by Shinji Aramaki and Joseph Chou
* &quot;Kōkaku no Pandora - Ghost Urn&quot; (2015) by Munenori Nawa
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: The New Movie&quot; (2016) by 

====OVAs and ONAs====
* &quot;Black Magic M-66&quot; (1987) by Hiroyuki Kitakubo and Shirow Masamune (this is the only anime in which Shirow played a direct role in the production)
* &quot;Appleseed&quot; (1988) by Kazuyoshi Katayama
* &quot;Dominion&quot; (1988) by Takaaki Ishiyama and Kôichi Mashimo
* &quot;New Dominion Tank Police&quot; (1990) by Noboru Furuse and Junichi Sakai
* &quot;Landlock&quot; (1995) by Yasuhiro Matsumura (character and mecha designs only)
* &quot;Gundress&quot; (1999) by Junichi Sakai (character and mecha designs only)
* &quot;Tank Police Team: Tank S.W.A.T. 01&quot; (2006) by Romanov Higa
* &quot;W Tails Cat: A Strange Presence&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Arise&quot; (2013) by Kazuchika Kise
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045&quot; (2020) by Shinji Aramaki and Kenji Kamiyama

====Television====
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&quot; (2003) by Kenji Kamiyama (also called &quot;Alone on Earth&quot; or &quot;GitS:SAC&quot;)
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: S.A.C. 2nd GIG&quot; (2004) by Kenji Kamiyama (second season of &quot;GitS:SAC&quot;)
* &quot;Ghost Hound&quot; (2007) by Ryūtarō Nakamura; original concept in collaboration with Production I.G
* &quot;Real Drive&quot; (2008) by Kazuhiro Furuhashi; original concept in collaboration with Production I.G
* &quot;Appleseed XIII&quot; (2011) by Takayuki Hamana
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Arise - Alternative Architecture&quot; (2015) by Kazuchika Kise
* &quot;Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn&quot; (2016) by Munenori Nawa, original concept for the source manga

===Live action===
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; (2017) by Rupert Sanders

===Video games===

====PC Engine====
* &quot;Toshi Tensou Keikaku: Eternal City&quot; (action platformer)

====Super Famicom====
* &quot;Appleseed: Oracle of Prometheus&quot;

====Nintendo DS====
* &quot;Fire Emblem: Shadow Dragon&quot; (strategy RPG)

====PlayStation====
* &quot;Project Horned Owl&quot;
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;
* &quot;Yarudora Series Vol. 3: Sampaguita&quot;
* &quot;GunDress&quot;

====PlayStation 2====
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&quot;
*&quot;Appleseed EX&quot;

====PlayStation Portable====
* &quot;Yarudora Series Vol. 3: Sampaguita&quot;
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex&quot;

====Microsoft Windows====
* &quot;Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - First Assault Online&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*
*Masamune Shirow at Media Arts Database 
*Masamune Shirow at Baka-Updates Manga</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="22" end="30" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q191633" start="47" end="59" title="manga artist" label="manga artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q92582" start="102" end="120" title="Ghost in the Shell (manga)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="178" end="183" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="255" end="258" title="Original net animation" label="ONA"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="280" end="291" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="310" end="320" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="375" end="384" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130290" start="477" end="493" title="Hyōgo Prefecture" label="Hyōgo Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="510" end="514" title="Kobe, Hyogo" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030172" start="543" end="567" title="Osaka University of Arts" label="Osaka University of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="615" end="620" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q584640" start="675" end="686" title="Black Magic M-66" label="Black Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q668711" start="733" end="741" title="dōjinshi" label="dōjinshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q91499" start="889" end="898" title="Appleseed (manga)" label="Appleseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q145234" start="1026" end="1037" title="Seiun Award" label="Seiun Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238117" start="1174" end="1182" title="Dominion (manga)" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q92580" start="1279" end="1297" title="Ghost in the Shell" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="1348" end="1362" title="The Wachowskis" label="The Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014087" start="1398" end="1416" title="The Matrix (franchise)" label="Matrix film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q735670" start="1456" end="1470" title="Production I.G" label="Production I.G"/>
<link wikidata="Q613823" start="1543" end="1554" title="Ghost Hound" label="Ghost Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q507531" start="1704" end="1714" title="Real Drive" label="Real Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="1774" end="1783" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119946" start="1806" end="1816" title="Posthumanism" label="post-human"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="1828" end="1830" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="1889" end="1905" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167348" start="1911" end="1920" title="globalism" label="globalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062404" start="2321" end="2329" title="art book" label="art book"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287669" start="2418" end="2432" title="Intron Depot 1" label="Intron Depot 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q172067" start="4713" end="4719" title="hentai" label="hentai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="4974" end="4983" title="Wild West" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="5017" end="5023" title="Horror (genre)" label="Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="5068" end="5083" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q270503" start="5211" end="5222" title="Tomb Raider" label="Tomb Raider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="5238" end="5251" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="5324" end="5330" title="Pirate" label="Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="5377" end="5392" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354491" start="6528" end="6534" title="Elecom" label="Elecom"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6544" end="6583" title="Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn" label="Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="6754" end="6772" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q285084" start="6789" end="6801" title="Mamoru Oshii" label="Mamoru Oshii"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6810" end="6841" title="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence" label="Ghost in the Shell 2: Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230691" start="6879" end="6888" title="Appleseed (2004 film)" label="Appleseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482244" start="6905" end="6919" title="Shinji Aramaki" label="Shinji Aramaki"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6928" end="6989" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - Solid State Society" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - Solid State Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518786" start="7006" end="7020" title="Kenji Kamiyama" label="Kenji Kamiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704502" start="7029" end="7049" title="Appleseed Ex Machina" label="Appleseed Ex Machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="7085" end="7093" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17191449" start="7102" end="7117" title="Appleseed Alpha" label="Appleseed Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7173" end="7202" title="Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn" label="Kōkaku no Pandora - Ghost Urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935942" start="7219" end="7232" title="Munenori Nawa" label="Munenori Nawa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7241" end="7274" title="Ghost in the Shell: The New Movie" label="Ghost in the Shell: The New Movie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7323" end="7339" title="Black Magic (manga)#OVA" label="Black Magic M-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136396" start="7356" end="7373" title="Hiroyuki Kitakubo" label="Hiroyuki Kitakubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858749" start="7482" end="7491" title="Appleseed (1988 film)" label="Appleseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381790" start="7508" end="7526" title="Kazuyoshi Katayama" label="Kazuyoshi Katayama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7535" end="7543" title="Dominion (manga)#Original video animations" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q426822" start="7581" end="7595" title="Kôichi Mashimo" label="Kôichi Mashimo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7604" end="7628" title="Dominion (manga)#Original video animations" label="New Dominion Tank Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="7744" end="7749" title="mecha" label="mecha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7854" end="7888" title="Dominion (manga)#Original video animations" label="Tank Police Team: Tank S.W.A.T. 01"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7979" end="8004" title="Ghost in the Shell: Arise" label="Ghost in the Shell: Arise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11677791" start="8021" end="8035" title="Kazuchika Kise" label="Kazuchika Kise"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8044" end="8072" title="Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045" label="Ghost in the Shell: SAC_2045"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482244" start="8089" end="8103" title="Shinji Aramaki" label="Shinji Aramaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518786" start="8108" end="8122" title="Kenji Kamiyama" label="Kenji Kamiyama"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8151" end="8190" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518786" start="8207" end="8221" title="Kenji Kamiyama" label="Kenji Kamiyama"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8295" end="8329" title="Ghost in the Shell: S.A.C. 2nd GIG" label="Ghost in the Shell: S.A.C. 2nd GIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q613823" start="8409" end="8420" title="Ghost Hound" label="Ghost Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454103" start="8437" end="8453" title="Ryūtarō Nakamura" label="Ryūtarō Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q735670" start="8494" end="8508" title="Production I.G" label="Production I.G"/>
<link wikidata="Q507531" start="8517" end="8527" title="Real Drive" label="Real Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q377730" start="8544" end="8562" title="Kazuhiro Furuhashi" label="Kazuhiro Furuhashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q635470" start="8626" end="8640" title="Appleseed XIII" label="Appleseed XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677497" start="8657" end="8672" title="Takayuki Hamana" label="Takayuki Hamana"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8681" end="8733" title="List of Ghost in the Shell: Arise - Alternative Architecture episodes" label="Ghost in the Shell: Arise - Alternative Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8773" end="8812" title="Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn" label="Pandora in the Crimson Shell: Ghost Urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935942" start="8829" end="8842" title="Munenori Nawa" label="Munenori Nawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22575835" start="8903" end="8933" title="Ghost in the Shell (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;Ghost in the Shell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q175062" start="8944" end="8958" title="Rupert Sanders" label="Rupert Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9005" end="9039" title="Toshi Tensou Keikaku: Eternal City" label="Toshi Tensou Keikaku: Eternal City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9097" end="9128" title="Appleseed (manga)#Games" label="Appleseed: Oracle of Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9164" end="9190" title="Fire Emblem: Shadow Dragon" label="Fire Emblem: Shadow Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785042" start="9241" end="9259" title="Project Horned Owl" label="Project Horned Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q259804" start="9274" end="9292" title="Ghost in the Shell (video game)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9307" end="9341" title="Yarudora Series Vol. 3: Sampaguita" label="Yarudora Series Vol. 3: Sampaguita"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9402" end="9441" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex (2004 video game)" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230691" start="9455" end="9467" title="Appleseed EX" label="Appleseed EX"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9512" end="9546" title="Yarudora Series Vol. 3: Sampaguita" label="Yarudora Series Vol. 3: Sampaguita"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9561" end="9600" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex (2005 video game)" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9642" end="9704" title="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - First Assault Online" label="Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex - First Assault Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19995" wikidata="Q1144761" url="?curid=19995" title="Musical saw">
<text>A musical saw, also called a singing saw, is a hand saw used as a musical instrument. Capable of continuous glissando (portamento), the sound creates an ethereal tone, very similar to the theremin. The musical saw is classified as a plaque friction idiophone with direct friction (132.1) under the Hornbostel-Sachs system of musical instrument classification, and as a metal sheet played by friction (151) under the revision of the Hornbostel-Sachs classification by the MIMO Consortium.

==Playing==
The saw is generally played seated with the handle squeezed between the legs, and the far end held with one hand. Some sawists play standing, either with the handle between the knees and the blade sticking out in front of them. The saw is usually played with the serrated edge, or &quot;teeth&quot;, facing the body, though some players face them away. Some saw players file down the teeth, which makes no discernable difference to the sound. Manyespecially professionalsaw players use a handle, called a Tip-Handle or a Cheat, at the tip of the saw for easier bending and higher virtuosity.

To sound a note, a sawist first bends the blade into an S-curve. The parts of the blade that are curved are damped from vibration, and do not sound. At the center of the S-curve a section of the blade remains relatively flat. This section, the &quot;sweet spot&quot;, can vibrate across the width of the blade, producing a distinct pitch: the wider the section of blade, the lower the sound. Sound is usually created by drawing a bow across the back edge of the saw at the sweet spot, or sometimes by striking the sweet spot with a mallet.

The sawist controls the pitch by adjusting the S-curve, making the sweet spot travel up the blade (toward a thinner width) for a higher pitch, or toward the handle for a lower pitch. Harmonics can be created by playing at varying distances on either side of the sweet spot. Sawists can add vibrato by shaking one of their legs or by wobbling the hand that holds the tip of the blade. Once a sound is produced, it will sustain for quite a while, and can be carried through several notes of a phrase.

On occasion the musical saw is called for in orchestral music, but orchestral percussionists are seldom also sawists. If a note outside of the saw&#x27;s range is called for, an electric guitar with a slide can be substituted.

==Types==

Sawists often use standard wood-cutting saws, although special musical saws are also made. As compared with wood-cutting saws, the blades of musical saws are generally wider, for range, and longer, for finer control. They do not have set or sharpened teeth, and may have grain running parallel to the back edge of the saw, rather than parallel to the teeth. Some musical saws are made with thinner metal, to increase flexibility, while others are made thicker, for a richer tone, longer sustain, and stronger harmonics.

A typical musical saw is wide at the handle end and wide at the tip. Such a saw will generally produce about two octaves, regardless of length. A bass saw may be over at the handle and produce about two-and-a-half octaves. There are also musical saws with 3–4 octaves range, and new improvements have resulted in as much as 5 octaves note range. Two-person saws, also called &quot;misery whips&quot;, can also be played, though with less virtuosity, and they produce an octave or less of range.

Most sawists use cello or violin bows, using violin rosin, but some may use improvised home-made bows, such as a wooden dowel.

==Producers==
Musical saws have been produced for over a century, primarily in the United States, but also in Scandinavia, Germany, France (Lame sonore) and Asia.

=== United States ===
In the early 1900s, there were at least ten companies in the United States manufacturing musical saws. These saws ranged from: familiar steel varieties or premium, gold-plated saws worth hundreds of dollars. However, with the start of World War II the demand for metals made the manufacture of saws too expensive and many of these companies went out of business. By the year 2000, only three companies in the United StatesMussehl &amp; Westphal, Charlie Blacklock, and Wentworthwere making saws. In 2012, a company called Index Drums started producing a saw that had a built-in transducer in the handle, called the &quot;JackSaw&quot;.

===Outside the United States===
Outside the United States, makers of musical saws include Bahco, makers of the limited edition Stradivarius, Alexis in France, Feldmann and Stövesandt in Germany, Music Blade in Greece and Thomas Flinn &amp; Company in the United Kingdom, based in Sheffield, who produce three different sized musical saws, as well as accessories.

==Events, championships and world records==
The International Musical Saw Association (IMSA) produces an annual International Musical Saw Festival (including a &quot;Saw-Off&quot; competition) every August in Santa Cruz and Felton, California. An International Musical Saw Festival is held every other summer in New York City, produced by Natalia Paruz. Paruz also produced a musical saw festival in Israel. There are also annual saw festivals in Japan and China.

A Guinness World Record for the largest musical-saw ensemble was established July 18, 2009, at the annual NYC Musical Saw Festival. Organized by Paruz, 53 musical saw players performed together.

In 2011 a World Championship took place in Jelenia Góra/Poland. Winners: 1. Gladys Hulot (France), 2. Katharina Micada (Germany), 3. Tom Fink (Germany).

Caroline McCaskey became the first person to play the American National Anthem with a saw at a Major League Baseball game (Oakland Athletics’ Coliseum) on June 6, 2022.

==Performers==
People notable for playing the musical saw. 

* Natalia Paruz, also known as the &quot;Saw Lady&quot;, plays the musical saw in movie soundtracks, in television commercials, with orchestras internationally, and is the organizer of international musical saw festivals in New York City and Israel. She was a judge at the musical saw festival in France and she played the saw in the off-Broadway show &#x27;Sawbones&#x27;. The December 3, 2011, crossword puzzle of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; had Paruz as a question: Down 5Instrument played by Natalia Paruz.
* Mara Carlyle, a London based singer/songwriter who often performs using the musical saw, and the instrument features on her albums &quot;The Lovely&quot; and &quot;Floreat&quot;.
* David Coulter, multi-instrumentalist, producer and music supervisor; ex-member of Test Dept and The Pogues, has played musical saw live, in films, on tv and stages around the world and on numerous albums with: Damon Albarn, Gorillaz, and Tom Waits, among others. He has played on many film scores, including &quot;Is Anybody There?&quot; (2008) and &quot;It&#x27;s a Boy Girl Thing&quot; (2006), and has featured on TV soundtrack and themes tunes, most recently for &quot;Psychoville&quot; and episodes of &quot;Wallander&quot;.
* Janeen Rae Heller played the saw in four television guest appearances: &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot; (1989), &quot;Quantum Leap&quot; (1990), and &quot;Home Improvement&quot; (1992 and 1999). She has also performed on albums such as Michael Hedges&#x27; &quot;The Road to Return&quot; in 1994 and Rickie Lee Jones&#x27;s &quot;Ghostyhead&quot; in 1997.
* Mio Higashino, based in Osaka, Japan, won first place in the 42nd International Musical Saw Festival. Mio performs in Japan as part of the two-member group Mollen.
*Charles Hindmarsh, The Yorkshire Musical Saw Player, has played the musical saw throughout the UK.
* Kev Hopper, formerly the bass guitarist in the 1980s band Stump, made an EP titled &quot;Saurus&quot; in 2002 featuring six original saw tunes.
* Christine Johnston (under the stage name Eve Kransky) of The Kransky Sisters plays the musical saw alongside other traditional and improvised instruments.
* Julian Koster of the band Neutral Milk Hotel played the singing saw, along with other instruments, in the band and also plays the saw in his solo project, The Music Tapes. In 2008, he released &quot;The Singing Saw at Christmastime&quot;. He also writes and co-directs the podcast The Orbiting Human Circus (of the Air) which prominently features singing saws in the story.
* Katharina Micada plays the musical saw on cabaret stages and with different Symphony Orchestras like Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra and London Philharmonic Orchestra. A singer, she is one of the few players, who can sing and play the saw simultaneously and in pitch. She has played in TV- and Radio shows and for film and CD recordings.
* Jamie Muir of the progressive rock band King Crimson briefly uses a musical saw on the song &quot;Easy Money&quot; from the album Larks&#x27; Tongues in Aspic. 
* Bonnie Paine, singer and multi-instrumentalist from Talequah, Oklahoma, co-founder of Colorado folk-rock group Elephant Revival has performed on the musical saw as a member of the band.
* Angela Perley and the Howlin&#x27; Moons, an American rock band from Columbus, Ohio, features singer/guitarist Angela Perley who performs the musical saw on their recorded albums and at their live shows.
* Quinta (a.k.a. Kath Mann), London-based multi-instrumentalist and composer, has collaborated with many artists on the musical saw, including Bat for Lashes, Radiohead&#x27;s Philip Selway, and The Paper Cinema.
* Thomas Jefferson Scribner was a familiar figure on the streets of Santa Cruz, California during the 1970s playing the musical saw. He performed on a variety of recordings and appeared in folk music festivals in the United States and Canada during the 1970s. His work as labour organizer and member of the Industrial Workers of the World is documented in the 1979 film &quot;The Wobblies&quot;. Canadian composer/saw player Robert Minden pays tribute to him on his Web site. Musician and songwriter Utah Phillips has recorded a song referencing Scribner, &quot;The Saw Playing Musician&quot; on the album &quot;Fellow Workers&quot; with Ani DiFranco. Artist Marghe McMahon was inspired in 1978 to create a bronze statue of Tom playing the musical saw which sits in downtown Santa Cruz.
* That 1 Guy, an American based musician who performs using homemade instruments.
* Jim Turner released &quot;The Well-Tempered Saw&quot; on Owl Records in 1971
* Victor Victoria (Victoria Falconer) of the musical cabaret troupe Fringe Wives Club and dark cabaret comedy duo EastEnd Cabaret plays the musical saw as part of their live shows, amongst other instruments.
* Liu Ya from China is a professional violinist and saw player and is famous for her interpretation of the &quot;Bird song&quot;, which she performed in Chinese TV.

===Marlene Dietrich===
German actress and singer Marlene Dietrich, who lived and worked in the United States for a long time, is probably the most famous person who played the musical saw. When she studied the violin for one year in Weimar in her early twenties, her musical skills were already evident. Some years later she learned to play the musical saw while she was shooting the film &quot;Café Elektric&quot; in Vienna in 1927. Her colleague, the actor and musician Igo Sym, taught her how to play. In the shooting breaks and at weekends both performed romantic duets, he at the piano and she at the musical saw.

Sym gave his saw to her as a farewell gift. The following words are engraved on the saw: &quot;Now Suidy is gone / the sun d’ont [sic!] / shine… / Igo / Vienna 1927&quot;
She took the saw with her, when she left for Hollywood in 1929 and played there in the following years at film sets and Hollywood parties.
When she participated in the United Service Organizations (USO) shows for the US troops in 1944, she also played on the saw. Some of these shows were broadcast on radio, so there exist two rare recordings of her saw playing, embedded in entertaining interviews. 1. Aloha Oe 2. other song

===In fiction===

* In the 1940 animated film &quot;Pinocchio&quot;, Jiminy Cricket bounced on the saw for the song, &quot;Give a Little Whistle&quot;, the saw is whistling like the musical saw, whistling effects by Marion Darlington. (1940)
* The Theme song of the movie &quot;One Flew Over The Cuckoo&#x27;s Nest&quot; is played on a musical saw.
* &quot;Delicatessen&quot; is directed by Jean Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro and includes an impressing duet for violoncello and musical saw, which is performed on a roof. (1991)
* &quot;Dummy&quot;, directed by Greg Pritikin, starring Adrien Brody has an audition scene with a musical saw player (portrayed by Natalia Paruz) (2002)
* In 2002, an orchestra of 30 musical saws appeared in Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington&#x27;s five-hundredth Deathday Party in the &quot;Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets&quot; book. For context, in the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series, ghosts hold &quot;deathday parties&quot; to commemorate the anniversary of their death.
* In the 2011 movie &quot;Another Earth&quot; the character of the composer plays the saw (on the soundtrack is Natalia Paruz). 
* In the 2014 animated film &quot;My Little Pony: Equestria Girls — Rainbow Rocks&quot;, one of the film&#x27;s background characters, Derpy Hooves, plays the musical saw in her band.
* In the 2014 stop-motion animated film &quot;The Boxtrolls&quot;, one of the main Boxtrolls who took care of Eggs, Fish, plays the musical saw with Eggs in their cave.
* In the film &quot;Mr. Peabody &amp; Sherman&quot;, Mr. Peabody plays a musical saw. (2014)
* In the 8th episode of season 3 of the TV series &quot;Hilda&quot;, Victoria Van Gale is seen playing a musical saw in the tower in Fairy Country.

==Composers and compositions==

Beginning from the early 1920s composers of both contemporary and popular music wrote for the musical saw.
One of the first was Franz Schreker who included the musical saw in his opera &quot;Christophorus&quot; (1925–29) where it is used in the séance scene of the second act. Other early examples include Dmitri Shostakovich: he included the musical saw, e.g., in the film music for &quot;The New Babylon&quot; (1929), in &quot;The Nose&quot; (1928), and in &quot;Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District&quot; (1934).
Shostakovich and other composers of his time used the term &quot;Flexaton&quot; to mark the musical saw. &quot;Flexaton&quot; just means &quot;to flex a tone&quot;, in which the saw is flexed to change the pitch. Unfortunately, there exists another instrument called Flexatone, so there has been confusion for a long time. Aram Khachaturian, who knew Shostakovich&#x27;s music, included the musical saw in his Piano Concerto (1936) in the second movement. Another composer was the Swiss Arthur Honegger, who included the saw in his opera &quot;Antigone&quot; in 1924. 
The Romanian composer George Enescu used the musical saw at the end of the second act of his opera &quot;Œdipe&quot; (1931) to show in an extensive glissandowhich begins with the mezzo-soprano and is continued by the sawthe death and ascension of the sphinx killed by Oedipus.

The Italian composer Giacinto Scelsi wrote a part for the saw in his quarter-tone piece &quot;Quattro pezzi per orchestra&quot; (1959). German composer Hans Werner Henze took the saw to characterize the mean hero of his tragical opera &quot;Elegy for young lovers&quot; (1961).

Other composers were Krysztof Penderecki with &quot;Fluorescences&quot; (1961), &quot;De natura sonoris Nr. 2&quot; (1971) and the opera &quot;Ubu Rex&quot; (1990), Bernd Alois Zimmermann with &quot;Stille und Umkehr&quot; (1970), George Crumb with &quot;Ancient voices of children&quot; (1970), John Corigliano with &quot;The Mannheim Rocket&quot; (2001).

Composer Scott Munson wrote &quot;Clover Hill&quot; (2007) for saw and orchestra, Quintet for saw and strings (2009), &quot;The World Is Too Much with Us&quot; for soprano singer, saw and strings (2009), &quot;Ars longa vitas brevis&quot; for saw and string quartet (2010), &#x27;Bend&#x27; for saw and string quartet (2011) many pieces for jazz band and saw (2010–2013), &quot;Lullaby for the Forgotten&quot; for saw and piano (2015), and many movie and theater scores containing the saw.

Chaya Czernowin used the saw in her opera &quot;PNIMA...Ins Innere&quot; (2000) to represent the character of the grandfather, who is traumatized by the Holocaust.

There are further Leif Segerstam, Hans Zender (orchestration of &quot;5 préludes&quot; by Claude Debussy), and Oscar Strasnoy (opera &quot;Le bal&quot;).

Russian composer Lera Auerbach wrote for the saw in her ballet &quot;The Little Mermaid&quot; (2005), in her symphonic poem &quot;Dreams and Whispers of Poseidon&quot; (2005), in her oratorio &quot;Requiem Dresden – Ode to Peace&quot; (2012), in her Piano Concerto No.1 (2015), in her comic oratorio &quot;The Infant Minstrel and His Peculiar Menagerie&quot; (2016) and in her violin concerto Nr.4 &quot;NyX – Fractured dreams&quot; (2017).

Canadian composer Robert Minden has written extensively for the musical saw. Michael A. Levine composed &quot;Divination By Mirrors&quot; for musical saw soloist and two string ensembles tuned a quarter tone apart, taking advantage of the saws ability to play in both tunings.

Other composers for chamber music with musical saw are Jonathan Rutherford (&quot;An Intake of Breath&quot;), Dana Wilson (&quot;Whispers from Another Time&quot;), Heinrich Gattermeyer (&quot;Elegie für Singende Säge, Cembalo (oder Klavier)&quot;, Vito Zuraj (&quot;Musica di camera&quot; (2001)) and Britta-Maria Bernhard (&quot;Tranquillo&quot;).

==See also==
* Flexatone
* Wobble board
* Daxophone

==References==
==External links==

* The Musical Saw forum on Facebook
* The annual NYC Musical Saw Festival
* History of the musical saw, saws made for music, poetry mentioning musical saw, movies with musical saw, etc.
* Brief History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1144761" start="2" end="13" title="Musical saw" label="musical saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144761" start="29" end="40" title="Musical saw" label="singing saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750929" start="47" end="55" title="hand saw" label="hand saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="66" end="84" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="108" end="117" title="glissando" label="glissando"/>
<link wikidata="Q263934" start="119" end="129" title="portamento" label="portamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="188" end="196" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12639" start="249" end="258" title="idiophone" label="idiophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q496327" start="298" end="314" title="Hornbostel-Sachs" label="Hornbostel-Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748242" start="325" end="358" title="musical instrument classification" label="musical instrument classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="1426" end="1431" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="1524" end="1527" title="Bow (music)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="1818" end="1826" title="Harmonic" label="Harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="1925" end="1932" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q290667" start="2053" end="2060" title="sustain" label="sustain"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="2115" end="2119" title="Musical note" label="note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459435" start="2126" end="2132" title="phrase (music)" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="2336" end="2341" title="Slide guitar" label="slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042979" start="2553" end="2558" title="range (music)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="2848" end="2852" title="timbre" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="3008" end="3014" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="3443" end="3448" title="rosin" label="rosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215928" start="4283" end="4293" title="transducer" label="transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="4915" end="4925" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495480" start="4930" end="4948" title="Felton, California" label="Felton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968061" start="5045" end="5058" title="Natalia Paruz" label="Natalia Paruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="5106" end="5112" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="5173" end="5194" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344963" start="5377" end="5395" title="World Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="5616" end="5637" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968061" start="5754" end="5767" title="Natalia Paruz" label="Natalia Paruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6174" end="6193" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754483" start="6269" end="6281" title="Mara Carlyle" label="Mara Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502233" start="6532" end="6541" title="Test Dept" label="Test Dept"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="6546" end="6556" title="The Pogues" label="The Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q272069" start="6660" end="6672" title="Damon Albarn" label="Damon Albarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="6674" end="6682" title="Gorillaz" label="Gorillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="6688" end="6697" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177246" start="6764" end="6781" title="Is Anybody There?" label="Is Anybody There?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290094" start="6805" end="6831" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Boy Girl Thing" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Boy Girl Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107270" start="6922" end="6933" title="Psychoville" label="Psychoville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041885" start="6962" end="6971" title="Wallander (British TV series)" label="Wallander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144761" start="6981" end="6998" title="Janeen Rae Heller" label="Janeen Rae Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="7058" end="7080" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="The Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q230506" start="7101" end="7113" title="Quantum Leap (1989 TV series)" label="Quantum Leap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337212" start="7138" end="7154" title="Home Improvement (TV series)" label="Home Improvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q206802" start="7219" end="7233" title="Michael Hedges" label="Michael Hedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761142" start="7246" end="7264" title="The Road to Return" label="The Road to Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q258846" start="7283" end="7299" title="Rickie Lee Jones" label="Rickie Lee Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838938" start="7313" end="7323" title="Ghostyhead" label="Ghostyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776723" start="7525" end="7557" title="The Yorkshire Musical Saw Player" label="The Yorkshire Musical Saw Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395647" start="7607" end="7617" title="Kev Hopper" label="Kev Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501119" start="7665" end="7670" title="Stump (band)" label="Stump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744948" start="7810" end="7829" title="The Kransky Sisters" label="The Kransky Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307327" start="7910" end="7923" title="Julian Koster" label="Julian Koster"/>
<link wikidata="Q849875" start="7936" end="7954" title="Neutral Milk Hotel" label="Neutral Milk Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752757" start="8065" end="8080" title="The Music Tapes" label="The Music Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764427" start="8109" end="8141" title="The Singing Saw at Christmastime" label="The Singing Saw at Christmastime"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097940" start="8191" end="8229" title="The Orbiting Human Circus (of the Air)" label="The Orbiting Human Circus (of the Air)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="8387" end="8416" title="Berlin Philharmonic" label="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="8421" end="8450" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q714309" start="8624" end="8634" title="Jamie Muir" label="Jamie Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="8642" end="8658" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="8664" end="8676" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725114" start="8754" end="8782" title="Larks&amp;#x27; Tongues in Aspic" label="Larks&amp;#x27; Tongues in Aspic"/>
<link wikidata="Q736809" start="8839" end="8857" title="Talequah, Oklahoma" label="Talequah, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359354" start="8898" end="8914" title="Elephant Revival" label="Elephant Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095377" start="8975" end="9015" title="Angela Perley and the Howlin&amp;#x27; Moons" label="Angela Perley and the Howlin&amp;#x27; Moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="9044" end="9058" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272361" start="9181" end="9187" title="Quinta (musician)" label="Quinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q159232" start="9460" end="9482" title="Santa Cruz, California" label="Santa Cruz, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="9699" end="9730" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q366306" start="9892" end="9905" title="Utah Phillips" label="Utah Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442480" start="10004" end="10018" title="Fellow Workers" label="Fellow Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q232462" start="10030" end="10042" title="Ani DiFranco" label="Ani DiFranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q376790" start="10181" end="10191" title="That 1 Guy" label="That 1 Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936037" start="10342" end="10357" title="Victor Victoria" label="Victor Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166158" start="10430" end="10442" title="dark cabaret" label="dark cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327581" start="10454" end="10469" title="EastEnd Cabaret" label="EastEnd Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006334" start="10550" end="10556" title="Liu Ya" label="Liu Ya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="10763" end="10779" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="10947" end="10953" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q488496" start="11109" end="11122" title="Café Elektric" label="Café Elektric"/>
<link wikidata="Q84946" start="11186" end="11193" title="Igo Sym" label="Igo Sym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="11673" end="11701" title="United Service Organizations" label="United Service Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="11985" end="11994" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q171669" start="12211" end="12247" title="One Flew Over the Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest (film)" label="One Flew Over The Cuckoo&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q827105" start="12290" end="12302" title="Delicatessen (1991 film)" label="Delicatessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q787730" start="12467" end="12472" title="Dummy (2002 film)" label="Dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104514" start="12516" end="12528" title="Adrien Brody" label="Adrien Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968061" start="12591" end="12604" title="Natalia Paruz" label="Natalia Paruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q102244" start="12747" end="12786" title="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q567996" start="12966" end="12979" title="Another Earth" label="Another Earth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13103" end="13150" title="My Little Pony: Equestria Girls — Rainbow Rocks" label="My Little Pony: Equestria Girls — Rainbow Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103758" start="13299" end="13312" title="The Boxtrolls" label="The Boxtrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929072" start="13442" end="13467" title="Mr. Peabody &amp;amp; Sherman" label="Mr. Peabody &amp;amp; Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48813549" start="13565" end="13582" title="Hilda (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Hilda&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q78528" start="13824" end="13838" title="Franz Schreker" label="Franz Schreker"/>
<link wikidata="Q54912213" start="13887" end="13900" title="Christophorus oder Die Vision einer Oper" label="Christophorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="14002" end="14021" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Dmitri Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211125" start="14086" end="14101" title="The New Babylon" label="The New Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367888" start="14125" end="14133" title="The Nose (opera)" label="The Nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q48614" start="14161" end="14197" title="Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District (opera)" label="Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426827" start="14479" end="14488" title="Flexatone" label="Flexatone"/>
<link wikidata="Q152293" start="14535" end="14552" title="Aram Khachaturian" label="Aram Khachaturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689121" start="14622" end="14636" title="Piano Concerto (Khachaturian)" label="Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q123164" start="14699" end="14714" title="Arthur Honegger" label="Arthur Honegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853219" start="14756" end="14764" title="Antigone (Honegger)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q77177" start="14803" end="14816" title="George Enescu" label="George Enescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107460" start="14886" end="14891" title="Œdipe (opera)" label="Œdipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q456751" start="15080" end="15095" title="Giacinto Scelsi" label="Giacinto Scelsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="15211" end="15228" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050642" start="15300" end="15322" title="Elegy for young lovers" label="Elegy for young lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q153469" start="15359" end="15378" title="Krysztof Penderecki" label="Krysztof Penderecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876599" start="15481" end="15488" title="Ubu Rex" label="Ubu Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q312582" start="15503" end="15525" title="Bernd Alois Zimmermann" label="Bernd Alois Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q356804" start="15569" end="15581" title="George Crumb" label="George Crumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752931" start="15593" end="15619" title="Ancient voices of children" label="Ancient voices of children"/>
<link wikidata="Q450620" start="15634" end="15649" title="John Corigliano" label="John Corigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807580" start="15661" end="15680" title="The Mannheim Rocket" label="The Mannheim Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q450870" start="16187" end="16202" title="Chaya Czernowin" label="Chaya Czernowin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381726" start="16370" end="16384" title="Leif Segerstam" label="Leif Segerstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q64789" start="16386" end="16397" title="Hans Zender" label="Hans Zender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799625" start="16463" end="16477" title="Oscar Strasnoy" label="Oscar Strasnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241503" start="16524" end="16537" title="Lera Auerbach" label="Lera Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828073" start="17026" end="17043" title="Michael A. Levine" label="Michael A. Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284066" start="17059" end="17080" title="Divination By Mirrors for Saw and Strings" label="Divination By Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326914" start="17144" end="17156" title="quarter tone" label="quarter tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597307" start="17391" end="17411" title="Heinrich Gattermeyer" label="Heinrich Gattermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937183" start="17475" end="17485" title="Vito Zuraj" label="Vito Zuraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426827" start="17592" end="17601" title="Flexatone" label="Flexatone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010762" start="17604" end="17616" title="Wobble board" label="Wobble board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179017" start="17619" end="17628" title="Daxophone" label="Daxophone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19996" wikidata="Q80535" url="?curid=19996" title="MIDI">
<text>MIDI (; Musical Instrument Digital Interface) is a technical standard that describes a communication protocol, digital interface, and electrical connectors that connect a wide variety of electronic musical instruments, computers, and related audio devices for playing, editing, and recording music.

A single MIDI cable can carry up to sixteen channels of MIDI data, each of which can be routed to a separate device. Each interaction with a key, button, knob or slider is converted into a MIDI event, which specifies musical instructions, such as a note&#x27;s pitch, timing and velocity. One common MIDI application is to play a MIDI keyboard or other controller and use it to trigger a digital sound module (which contains synthesized musical sounds) to generate sounds, which the audience hears produced by a keyboard amplifier. MIDI data can be transferred via MIDI or USB cable, or recorded to a sequencer or digital audio workstation to be edited or played back.

MIDI also defines a file format that stores and exchanges the data. Advantages of MIDI include small file size, ease of modification and manipulation and a wide choice of electronic instruments and synthesizer or digitally sampled sounds. A MIDI recording of a performance on a keyboard could sound like a piano or other keyboard instrument; however, since MIDI records the messages and information about their notes and not the specific sounds, this recording could be changed to many other sounds, ranging from synthesized or sampled guitar or flute to full orchestra.

Before the development of MIDI, electronic musical instruments from different manufacturers could generally not communicate with each other. This meant that a musician could not, for example, plug a Roland keyboard into a Yamaha synthesizer module. With MIDI, any MIDI-compatible keyboard (or other controller device) can be connected to any other MIDI-compatible sequencer, sound module, drum machine, synthesizer, or computer, even if they are made by different manufacturers.

MIDI technology was standardized in 1983 by a panel of music industry representatives and is maintained by the MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA). All official MIDI standards are jointly developed and published by the MMA in Los Angeles, and the MIDI Committee of the Association of Musical Electronics Industry (AMEI) in Tokyo. In 2016, the MMA established The MIDI Association (TMA) to support a global community of people who work, play, or create with MIDI.

==History==
In the early 1980s, there was no standardized means of synchronizing electronic musical instruments manufactured by different companies. Manufacturers had their own proprietary standards to synchronize instruments, such as CV/gate, DIN sync and Digital Control Bus (DCB). Ikutaro Kakehashi, the president of Roland, felt the lack of standardization was limiting the growth of the electronic music industry. In June 1981, he proposed developing a standard to the Oberheim Electronics founder Tom Oberheim, who had developed his own proprietary interface, the Oberheim Parallel Bus.

Kakehashi felt that Oberheim&#x27;s system was too cumbersome, and spoke to Dave Smith, the president of Sequential Circuits, about creating a simpler, cheaper alternative. While Smith discussed the concept with American companies, Kakehashi discussed it with Japanese companies Yamaha, Korg and Kawai. Representatives from all companies met to discuss the idea in October. Initially, only Sequential Circuits and the Japanese companies were interested. Using Roland&#x27;s DCB as a basis, Smith and Sequential Circuits engineer Chet Wood devised a universal interface to allow communication between equipment from different manufacturers. Smith and Wood proposed this standard in a paper, &quot;Universal Synthesizer Interface,&quot; at the Audio Engineering Society show in October 1981. The standard was discussed and modified by representatives of Roland, Yamaha, Korg, Kawai, and Sequential Circuits. Kakehashi favored the name Universal Musical Interface (UMI), pronounced &quot;you-me&quot;, but Smith felt this was &quot;a little corny&quot;. However, he liked the use of &quot;instrument&quot; instead of &quot;synthesizer&quot;, and proposed &quot;Musical Instrument Digital Interface&quot; (MIDI). Robert Moog, the president of Moog Music, announced MIDI in the October 1982 issue of &quot;Keyboard&quot;.

At the 1983 Winter NAMM Show, Smith demonstrated a MIDI connection between Prophet 600 and Roland JP-6 synthesizers. The MIDI specification was published in August 1983. The MIDI standard was unveiled by Kakehashi and Smith, who received Technical Grammy Awards in 2013 for their work. In 1983, the first instruments were released with MIDI, the Roland Jupiter-6 and the Prophet 600. In 1983, the first MIDI drum machine, the Roland TR-909, and the first MIDI sequencer, the Roland MSQ-700, were released.

The MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA) was formed following a meeting of &quot;all interested companies&quot; at the 1984 Summer NAMM Show in Chicago. The MIDI 1.0 Detailed Specification was published at the MMA&#x27;s second meeting at the 1985 Summer NAMM Show. The standard continued to evolve, adding standardized song files in 1991 (General MIDI) and adapted to new connection standards such as USB and FireWire. In 2016, the MIDI Association was formed to continue overseeing the standard. In 2017, an abridged version of MIDI 1.0 was published as an international standard IEC 63035. An initiative to create a 2.0 standard was announced in January 2019. The MIDI 2.0 standard was introduced at the 2020 Winter NAMM Show.

The BBC cited MIDI as an early example of open-source technology. Smith believed MIDI could only succeed if every manufacturer adopted it, and so &quot;we had to give it away&quot;.

=== Impact ===
MIDI&#x27;s appeal was originally limited to professional musicians and record producers who wanted to use electronic instruments in the production of popular music. The standard allowed different instruments to communicate with each other and with computers, and this spurred a rapid expansion of the sales and production of electronic instruments and music software. This interoperability allowed one device to be controlled from another, which reduced the amount of hardware musicians needed. MIDI&#x27;s introduction coincided with the dawn of the personal computer era and the introduction of samplers and digital synthesizers. The creative possibilities brought about by MIDI technology are credited for helping revive the music industry in the 1980s.

MIDI introduced capabilities that transformed the way many musicians work. MIDI sequencing makes it possible for a user with no notation skills to build complex arrangements. A musical act with as few as one or two members, each operating multiple MIDI-enabled devices, can deliver a performance similar to that of a larger group of musicians. The expense of hiring outside musicians for a project can be reduced or eliminated, and complex productions can be realized on a system as small as a synthesizer with integrated keyboard and sequencer.

MIDI also helped establish home recording. By performing preproduction in a home environment, an artist can reduce recording costs by arriving at a recording studio with a partially completed song. In 2022, the &quot;Guardian&quot; wrote that MIDI remained as important to music as USB was to computing, and represented &quot;a crucial value system of cooperation and mutual benefit, one all but thrown out by today&#x27;s major tech companies in favour of captive markets&quot;. In 2005, Smith&#x27;s MIDI Specification was inducted into the TECnology Hall of Fame, an honor given to &quot;products and innovations that have had an enduring impact on the development of audio technology.&quot; As of 2022, Smith&#x27;s original MIDI design was still in use.

==Applications==

===Instrument control===
MIDI was invented so that electronic or digital musical instruments could communicate with each other and so that one instrument can control another. For example, a MIDI-compatible sequencer can trigger beats produced by a drum sound module. Analog synthesizers that have no digital component and were built prior to MIDI&#x27;s development can be retrofitted with kits that convert MIDI messages into analog control voltages. When a note is played on a MIDI instrument, it generates a digital MIDI message that can be used to trigger a note on another instrument. The capability for remote control allows full-sized instruments to be replaced with smaller sound modules, and allows musicians to combine instruments to achieve a fuller sound, or to create combinations of synthesized instrument sounds, such as acoustic piano and strings. MIDI also enables other instrument parameters (volume, effects, etc.) to be controlled remotely.

Synthesizers and samplers contain various tools for shaping an electronic or digital sound. Filters adjust timbre, and envelopes automate the way a sound evolves over time after a note is triggered. The frequency of a filter and the envelope attack (the time it takes for a sound to reach its maximum level), are examples of synthesizer parameters, and can be controlled remotely through MIDI. Effects devices have different parameters, such as delay feedback or reverb time. When a MIDI continuous controller number (CCN) is assigned to one of these parameters, the device responds to any messages it receives that are identified by that number. Controls such as knobs, switches, and pedals can be used to send these messages. A set of adjusted parameters can be saved to a device&#x27;s internal memory as a &quot;patch&quot;, and these patches can be remotely selected by MIDI program changes.

===Composition===
MIDI events can be sequenced with computer software, or in specialized hardware music workstations. Many digital audio workstations (DAWs) are specifically designed to work with MIDI as an integral component. MIDI piano rolls have been developed in many DAWs so that the recorded MIDI messages can be easily modified. These tools allow composers to audition and edit their work much more quickly and efficiently than did older solutions, such as multitrack recording. Compositions can be programmed for MIDI that are impossible for human performers to play.

Because a MIDI performance is a sequence of commands that create sound, MIDI recordings can be manipulated in ways that audio recordings cannot. It is possible to change the key, instrumentation or tempo of a MIDI arrangement, and to reorder its individual sections, or even edit individual notes. The ability to compose ideas and quickly hear them played back enables composers to experiment.

Algorithmic composition programs provide computer-generated performances that can be used as song ideas or accompaniment.

Some composers may take advantage of the standard, portable set of commands and parameters in MIDI 1.0 and General MIDI (GM) to share musical data files among various electronic instruments. The data composed via the sequenced MIDI recordings can be saved as a &quot;standard MIDI file&quot; (SMF), digitally distributed, and reproduced by any computer or electronic instrument that also adheres to the same MIDI, GM, and SMF standards. MIDI data files are much smaller than corresponding recorded audio files.

===Use with computers===
The personal computer market stabilized at the same time that MIDI appeared, and computers became a viable option for music production. In 1983 computers started to play a role in mainstream music production. In the years immediately after the 1983 ratification of the MIDI specification, MIDI features were adapted to several early computer platforms. The Yamaha CX5M introduced MIDI support and sequencing in an MSX system in 1984.

The spread of MIDI on home computers was largely facilitated by Roland Corporation&#x27;s MPU-401, released in 1984, as the first MIDI-equipped sound card, capable of MIDI sound processing and sequencing. After Roland sold MPU sound chips to other sound card manufacturers, it established a universal standard MIDI-to-PC interface. The widespread adoption of MIDI led to computer-based MIDI software being developed. Soon after, a number of platforms began supporting MIDI, including the Apple II, Macintosh, Commodore 64, Amiga, Acorn Archimedes, and IBM PC compatibles. The 1985 Atari ST shipped with MIDI ports as part of the base system.

In 2015, Retro Innovations released the first MIDI interface for a VIC-20, making the computer&#x27;s four voices available to electronic musicians and retro-computing enthusiasts for the first time. Retro Innovations also makes a MIDI interface cartridge for Tandy Color Computer and Dragon computers.

Chiptune musicians also use retro gaming consoles to compose, produce and perform music using MIDI interfaces. Custom interfaces are available for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES)/Famicom, Game Boy, Game Boy Advance and Sega Genesis (Mega Drive).

====Computer files====
A MIDI file is not an audio recording. Rather, it is a set of instructionsfor example, for pitch or tempoand can use a thousand times less disk space than the equivalent recorded audio. Due to their tiny filesize, fan-made MIDI arrangements became an attractive way to share music online, before the advent of broadband internet access and multi-gigabyte hard drives. The major drawback to this is the wide variation in quality of users&#x27; audio cards, and in the actual audio contained as samples or synthesized sound in the card that the MIDI data only refers to symbolically. Even a sound card that contains high-quality sampled sounds can have inconsistent quality from one sampled instrument to another. Early budget-priced cards, such as the AdLib and the Sound Blaster and its compatibles, used a stripped-down version of Yamaha&#x27;s frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis) technology played back through low-quality digital-to-analog converters. The low-fidelity reproduction of these ubiquitous cards was often assumed to somehow be a property of MIDI itself. This created a perception of MIDI as low-quality audio, while in reality MIDI itself contains no sound, and the quality of its playback depends entirely on the quality of the sound-producing device.

=====Standard files=====

The Standard MIDI File (SMF) is a file format that provides a standardized way for music sequences to be saved, transported, and opened in other systems. The standard was developed and is maintained by the MMA, and usually uses a codice_1 extension. The compact size of these files led to their widespread use in computers, mobile phone ringtones, webpage authoring and musical greeting cards. These files are intended for universal use and include such information as note values, timing and track names. Lyrics may be included as metadata, and can be displayed by karaoke machines.

SMFs are created as an export format of software sequencers or hardware workstations. They organize MIDI messages into one or more parallel tracks and time-stamp the events so that they can be played back in sequence. A header contains the arrangement&#x27;s track count, tempo and an indicator of which of three SMF formats the file uses. A type 0 file contains the entire performance, merged onto a single track, while type 1 files may contain any number of tracks that are performed synchronously. Type 2 files are rarely used and store multiple arrangements, with each arrangement having its own track and intended to be played in sequence.

=====RMID files=====
Microsoft Windows bundles SMFs together with Downloadable Sounds (DLS) in a Resource Interchange File Format (RIFF) wrapper, as RMID files with a codice_2 extension. RIFF-RMID has been deprecated in favor of Extensible Music Files (XMF).

=====Software=====
The main advantage of the personal computer in a MIDI system is that it can serve a number of different purposes, depending on the software that is loaded. Multitasking allows simultaneous operation of programs that may be able to share data with each other.

=====Sequencers=====

Sequencing software allows recorded MIDI data to be manipulated using standard computer editing features such as cut, copy and paste and drag and drop. Keyboard shortcuts can be used to streamline workflow, and, in some systems, editing functions may be invoked by MIDI events. The sequencer allows each channel to be set to play a different sound and gives a graphical overview of the arrangement. A variety of editing tools are made available, including a notation display or scorewriter that can be used to create printed parts for musicians. Tools such as looping, quantization, randomization, and transposition simplify the arranging process.

Beat creation is simplified, and groove templates can be used to duplicate another track&#x27;s rhythmic feel. Realistic expression can be added through the manipulation of real-time controllers. Mixing can be performed, and MIDI can be synchronized with recorded audio and video tracks. Work can be saved, and transported between different computers or studios.

Sequencers may take alternate forms, such as drum pattern editors that allow users to create beats by clicking on pattern grids, and loop sequencers such as ACID Pro, which allow MIDI to be combined with prerecorded audio loops whose tempos and keys are matched to each other. Cue-list sequencing is used to trigger dialogue, sound effect, and music cues in stage and broadcast production.

=====Notation software=====

With MIDI, notes played on a keyboard can automatically be transcribed to sheet music. Scorewriting software typically lacks advanced sequencing tools and is optimized for the creation of a neat, professional printout designed for live instrumentalists. These programs provide support for dynamics and expression markings, chord and lyric display, and complex score styles. Software is available that can print scores in braille.

Notation programs include Finale, Encore, Sibelius, MuseScore and Dorico. SmartScore software can produce MIDI files from scanned sheet music.

=====Editors and librarians=====
Patch editors allow users to program their equipment through the computer interface. These became essential with the appearance of complex synthesizers such as the Yamaha FS1R, which contained several thousand programmable parameters, but had an interface that consisted of fifteen tiny buttons, four knobs and a small LCD. Digital instruments typically discourage users from experimentation, due to their lack of the feedback and direct control that switches and knobs would provide, but patch editors give owners of hardware instruments and effects devices the same editing functionality that is available to users of software synthesizers. Some editors are designed for a specific instrument or effects device, while other, &quot;universal&quot; editors support a variety of equipment, and ideally can control the parameters of every device in a setup through the use of System Exclusive messages. System Exclusive messages use the MIDI protocol to send information about the synthesizer&#x27;s parameters.

Patch librarians have the specialized function of organizing the sounds in a collection of equipment and exchanging entire banks of sounds between an instrument and a computer. In this way the device&#x27;s limited patch storage is augmented by a computer&#x27;s much greater disk capacity. Once transferred to the computer, it is possible to share custom patches with other owners of the same instrument. Universal editor/librarians that combine the two functions were once common, and included Opcode Systems&#x27; Galaxy, eMagic&#x27;s SoundDiver, and MOTU&#x27;s Unisyn. Although these older programs have been largely abandoned with the trend toward computer-based synthesis using virtual instruments, several editor/librarians remain available, including Coffeeshopped Patch Base, Sound Quest&#x27;s Midi Quest, and several editors from Sound Tower. Native Instruments&#x27; Kore was an effort to bring the editor/librarian concept into the age of software instruments, but was abandoned in 2011.

=====Auto-accompaniment programs=====
Programs that can dynamically generate accompaniment tracks are called &quot;auto-accompaniment&quot; programs. These create a full-band arrangement in a style that the user selects and sends the result to a MIDI sound-generating device for playback. The generated tracks can be used as educational or practice tools, as accompaniment for live performances, or as a songwriting aid.

=====Synthesis and sampling=====

Computers can use software to generate sounds, which are then passed through a digital-to-analog converter (DAC) to a power amplifier and loudspeaker system. The number of sounds that can be played simultaneously (the polyphony) is dependent on the power of the computer&#x27;s CPU, as are the sample rate and bit depth of playback, which directly affect the quality of the sound. Synthesizers implemented in software are subject to timing issues that are not necessarily present with hardware instruments, whose dedicated operating systems are not subject to interruption from background tasks as desktop operating systems are. These timing issues can cause synchronization problems, and clicks and pops when sample playback is interrupted. Software synthesizers also may exhibit additional latency in their sound generation.

The roots of software synthesis go back as far as the 1950s, when Max Mathews of Bell Labs wrote the MUSIC-N programming language, which was capable of non-real-time sound generation. Reality, by Dave Smith&#x27;s Seer Systems was an early synthesizer that ran directly on a host computer&#x27;s CPU. Reality achieved a low latency through tight driver integration, and therefore could run only on Creative Labs soundcards. Syntauri Corporation&#x27;s Alpha Syntauri was another early software-based synthesizer. It ran on the Apple IIe computer and used a combination of software and the computer&#x27;s hardware to produce additive synthesis. Some systems use dedicated hardware to reduce the load on the host CPU, as with Symbolic Sound Corporation&#x27;s Kyma System, and the Creamware/Sonic Core Pulsar/SCOPE systems, which power an entire recording studio&#x27;s worth of instruments, effect units, and mixers. The ability to construct full MIDI arrangements entirely in computer software allows a composer to render a finalized result directly as an audio file.

=====Game music=====
Early PC games were distributed on floppy disks, and the small size of MIDI files made them a viable means of providing soundtracks. Games of the DOS and early Windows eras typically required compatibility with either Ad Lib or Sound Blaster audio cards. These cards used FM synthesis, which generates sound through modulation of sine waves. John Chowning, the technique&#x27;s pioneer, theorized that the technology would be capable of accurate recreation of any sound if enough sine waves were used, but budget computer audio cards performed FM synthesis with only two sine waves. Combined with the cards&#x27; 8-bit audio, this resulted in a sound described as &quot;artificial&quot; and &quot;primitive&quot;.

Wavetable daughterboards that were later available provided audio samples that could be used in place of the FM sound. These were expensive, but often used the sounds from respected MIDI instruments such as the E-mu Proteus. The computer industry moved in the mid-1990s toward wavetable-based soundcards with 16-bit playback but standardized on a 2 MB of wavetable storage, a space too small in which to fit good-quality samples of 128 General MIDI instruments plus drum kits. To make the most of the limited space, some manufacturers stored 12-bit samples and expanded those to 16 bits on playback.

===Other applications===
Despite its association with music devices, MIDI can control any electronic or digital device that can read and process a MIDI command. MIDI has been adopted as a control protocol in a number of non-musical applications. MIDI Show Control uses MIDI commands to direct stage lighting systems and to trigger cued events in theatrical productions. VJs and turntablists use it to cue clips, and to synchronize equipment, and recording systems use it for synchronization and automation. Wayne Lytle, the founder of Animusic, derived a system he dubbed MIDIMotion in order to produce the &quot;Animusic&quot; series of computer-animated music video albums; Animusic would later design its own animation software specifically for MIDIMotion called Animotion. Apple Motion allows for a similar control of animation parameters through MIDI. The 1987 first-person shooter game &quot;MIDI Maze&quot; and the 1990 Atari ST computer puzzle game &quot;Oxyd&quot; used MIDI to network computers together.

==Devices==
===Connectors and interface===

==== DIN connector ====
Per the original MIDI 1.0 standard, cables terminate in a 180° five-pin DIN connector (DIN 41524). Typical applications use only three of the five conductors: a ground wire (pin 2), and a balanced pair of conductors (pins 4 and 5) that carry the MIDI signal as an electric current. This connector configuration can only carry messages in one direction, so a second cable is necessary for two-way communication. Some proprietary applications, such as phantom-powered footswitch controllers, use the spare pins for direct current (DC) power transmission.

Opto-isolators keep MIDI devices electrically separated from their MIDI connections, which prevents ground loops and protects equipment from voltage spikes. There is no error detection capability in MIDI, so the maximum cable length is set at to limit interference.

==== TRS minijack connector ====
To save space, some MIDI devices (smaller ones in particular) started using 3.5 mm TRS phone connectors (also known as audio minijack connectors). This became widespread enough that the MIDI Manufacturers&#x27; Association standardized the wiring. The MIDI-over-minijack standards document also recommends the use of 2.5 mm connectors over 3.5 mm ones to avoid confusion with audio connectors.

=== Thru port ===
Most devices do not copy messages from their input to their output port. A third type of port, the &quot;thru&quot; port, emits a copy of everything received at the input port, allowing data to be forwarded to another instrument in a daisy-chain arrangement. Not all devices feature thru ports, and devices that lack the ability to generate MIDI data, such as effects units and sound modules, may not include out ports.

===Management devices===
Each device in a daisy chain adds delay to the system. This can be avoided by using a MIDI thru box, which contains several outputs that provide an exact copy of the box&#x27;s input signal. A MIDI merger is able to combine the input from multiple devices into a single stream, and allows multiple controllers to be connected to a single device. A MIDI switcher allows switching between multiple devices, and eliminates the need to physically repatch cables. MIDI routers combine all of these functions. They contain multiple inputs and outputs, and allow any combination of input channels to be routed to any combination of output channels. Routing setups can be created using computer software, stored in memory, and selected by MIDI program change commands. This enables the devices to function as standalone MIDI routers in situations where no computer is present. MIDI data processors are used for utility tasks and special effects. These include MIDI filters, which remove unwanted MIDI data from the stream, and MIDI delays, effects that send a repeated copy of the input data at a set time.

===Interfaces===
A computer MIDI interface&#x27;s main function is to synchronize communications between the MIDI device and the computer. Some computer sound cards include a standard MIDI connector, whereas others connect by any of various means that include the D-subminiature DA-15 game port, USB, FireWire, Ethernet or a proprietary connection. The increasing use of USB connectors in the 2000s has led to the availability of MIDI-to-USB data interfaces that can transfer MIDI channels to USB-equipped computers. Some MIDI keyboard controllers are equipped with USB jacks, and can be connected directly to computers that run music software.

MIDI&#x27;s serial transmission leads to timing problems. A three-byte MIDI message requires nearly 1 millisecond for transmission. Because MIDI is serial, it can only send one event at a time. If an event is sent on two channels at once, the event on the second channel cannot transmit until the first one is finished, and so is delayed by 1 ms. If an event is sent on all channels at the same time, the last channel&#x27;s transmission is delayed by as much as 16 ms. This contributed to the rise of MIDI interfaces with multiple in- and out-ports, because timing improves when events are spread between multiple ports as opposed to multiple channels on the same port. The term &quot;MIDI slop&quot; refers to audible timing errors that result when MIDI transmission is delayed.

===Controllers===
There are two types of MIDI controllers: performance controllers that generate notes and are used to perform music, and controllers that may not send notes, but transmit other types of real-time events. Many devices are a combination of the two types.

Keyboards are by far the most common type of MIDI controller. MIDI was designed with keyboards in mind and any controller that is not a keyboard is considered an &quot;alternative&quot; controller. This was seen as a limitation by composers who were not interested in keyboard-based music, but the standard proved flexible, and MIDI compatibility was introduced to other types of controllers, including guitars, and other stringed instruments and drum controllers and wind controllers, which emulate the playing of drum kit and wind instruments, respectively and specialized and experimental controllers. Nevertheless, some features of the keyboard playing for which MIDI was designed do not fully capture other instruments&#x27; capabilities; Jaron Lanier cites the standard as an example of technological &quot;lock-in&quot; that unexpectedly limited what was possible to express. Some of these shortcomings have been addressed in extensions to the protocol.

Software synthesizers offer great power and versatility, but some players feel that division of attention between a MIDI keyboard and a computer keyboard and mouse robs some of the immediacy from the playing experience. Devices dedicated to real-time MIDI control provide an ergonomic benefit and can provide a greater sense of connection with the instrument than an interface that is accessed through a computer. Controllers may be general-purpose devices that are designed to work with a variety of equipment, or they may be designed to work with a specific piece of software. Examples of the latter include Akai&#x27;s APC40 controller for Ableton Live, and Korg&#x27;s MS-20ic controller, a reproduction of the control panel on their MS-20 analog synthesizer. The MS-20ic controller includes patch cables that can be used to control signal routing in their virtual reproduction of the MS-20 synthesizer and can also control third-party devices.

===Instruments===
A MIDI instrument contains ports to send and receive MIDI signals, a CPU to process those signals, an interface that allows user programming, audio circuitry to generate sound, and controllers. The operating system and factory sounds are often stored in a read-only memory (ROM) unit.

A MIDI instrument can also be a stand-alone module (without a piano-style keyboard) consisting of a General MIDI soundboard (GM, GS and XG), onboard editing, including transposing, MIDI instrument selection and adjusting volume, pan, reverb levels and other MIDI controllers. Typically, the MIDI module includes a screen, so the user can view information for the currently selected function.

====Synthesizers====
Synthesizers may employ any of a variety of sound generation techniques. They may include an integrated keyboard or may exist as sound modules that generate sounds when triggered by an external controller, such as a MIDI keyboard. Sound modules are typically designed to be mounted in a 19-inch rack. Manufacturers commonly produce a synthesizer in both standalone and rack-mounted versions, and often offer the keyboard version in a variety of sizes.

====Samplers====
A sampler can record and digitize audio, store it in random-access memory (RAM), and play it back. Samplers typically allow a user to edit a sample and save it to a hard disk, apply effects to it, and shape it with the same tools that subtractive synthesizers use. They also may be available in either keyboard or rack-mounted form. Instruments that generate sounds through sample playback, but have no recording capabilities, are known as &quot;ROMplers&quot;.

Samplers did not become established as viable MIDI instruments as quickly as synthesizers did, due to the expense of memory and processing power at the time. The first low-cost MIDI sampler was the Ensoniq Mirage, introduced in 1984. MIDI samplers are typically limited by displays that are too small to use to edit sampled waveforms, although some can be connected to a computer monitor.

====Drum machines====
Drum machines typically are sample playback devices that specialize in drum and percussion sounds. They commonly contain a sequencer that allows the creation of drum patterns and allows them to be arranged into a song. There often are multiple audio outputs, so that each sound or group of sounds can be routed to a separate output. The individual drum voices may be playable from another MIDI instrument, or from a sequencer.

====Workstations and hardware sequencers====

Sequencer technology predates MIDI. Analog sequencers use CV/Gate signals to control pre-MIDI analog synthesizers. MIDI sequencers typically are operated by transport features modeled after those of tape decks. They are capable of recording MIDI performances and arranging them into individual tracks using a multitrack recording paradigm. Music workstations combine controller keyboards with an internal sound generation and a sequencer. These can be used to build complete arrangements and play them back using their own internal sounds, and function as self-contained music production studios. They commonly include file storage and transfer capabilities.

===Effects units===
Some effects units can be remotely controlled via MIDI. For example, the Eventide H3000 Ultra-harmonizer allows such extensive MIDI control that it is playable as a synthesizer. The Drum Buddy, a pedal-format drum machine, has a MIDI connection so that it can have its tempo synchronized with a looper pedal or time-based effects such as delay.

==Technical specifications==
MIDI messages are made up of 8-bit bytes transmitted at 31,250 (±1%) baud using 8-N-1 asynchronous serial communication as described in the figure. The first bit of each byte identifies whether the byte is a &quot;status&quot; byte or a &quot;data&quot; byte, and is followed by seven bits of information.

A MIDI link can carry sixteen independent channels, numbered 1–16. A device may listen to specific channels and ignore messages on other channels (&quot;omni off&quot; mode), or it can listen to all channels, effectively ignoring the channel address (&quot;omni on&quot;).

A device that is polyphonic can sound multiple notes simultaneously, until the device&#x27;s polyphony limit is reached, or the notes reach the end of their decay envelope, or explicit &quot;note-off&quot; MIDI commands are received. A device that is monophonic instead terminates any previous note when new &quot;note-on&quot; commands arrive.

&quot;Some&quot; receiving devices may be set to all four combinations of &quot;omni off/on&quot; and &quot;mono/poly&quot; modes.

===Messages===
A MIDI message is an instruction that controls some aspect of the receiving device. A MIDI message consists of a status byte, which indicates the type of the message, followed by up to two data bytes that contain the parameters. MIDI messages can be &quot;channel messages&quot; sent on only one of the 16 channels and monitored only by devices on that channel, or &quot;system messages&quot; that all devices receive. Each receiving device ignores data not relevant to its function. There are five types of message: Channel Voice, Channel Mode, System Common, System Real-Time, and System Exclusive.

Channel Voice messages transmit real-time performance data over a single channel. Examples include &quot;note-on&quot; messages which contain a MIDI note number that specifies the note&#x27;s pitch, a velocity value that indicates how forcefully the note was played, and the channel number; &quot;note-off&quot; messages that end a note; program change messages that change a device&#x27;s patch; and control changes that allow adjustment of an instrument&#x27;s parameters. MIDI notes are numbered from 0 to 127 assigned to C−1 to G9. This extends beyond the 88-note piano range from A0 to C8 and corresponds to a frequency range of 8.175799 to 12543.85 Hz.

====System Exclusive messages ====
System Exclusive (SysEx) messages send information about a synthesizer&#x27;s functions, rather than performance data such as which notes are being played and how loud. Because they can include functionality beyond what the MIDI standard provides, they are a major reason for the flexibility and longevity of the MIDI standard. Manufacturers use them to create proprietary messages that control their equipment more thoroughly than the limitations of standard MIDI messages.

The MIDI Manufacturers Association issues a unique identification number to MIDI companies. These are included in SysEx messages, to ensure that only the specifically addressed device responds to the message, while all others know to ignore it. Many instruments also include a SysEx ID setting, so a controller can address two devices of the same model independently.

&quot;Universal&quot; System Exclusive messages are a special class of SysEx messages used for extensions to MIDI that are not intended to be exclusive to one manufacturer.

====Implementation chart====
Devices typically do not respond to every type of message defined by the MIDI specification. The MIDI implementation chart was standardized by the MMA as a way for users to see what specific capabilities an instrument has, and how it responds to messages. A populated MIDI implementation chart is usually published as part of the documentation for MIDI devices.

===Electrical specifications===
MIDI 1.0&#x27;s electrical interface is based around a fully isolated current loop along the red and blue lines in the following schematic:

&quot;DIN / TRS&quot; in this schematic indicates that either a DIN connector or a TRS phone connector may be used.

To transmit a logic 0 and a start bit, the sender&#x27;s UART produces a low voltage. This results in a nominal 5 milliamperes current flow sourced from the sender&#x27;s high voltage supply, which travels rightwards along the red lines though the shielded twisted-pair cable and into the receiver&#x27;s opto-isolator. The current exits the opto-isolator and returns back leftwards along the blue lines into the sender&#x27;s UART, which sinks the current. Resistors R1 and R2 limit the current and are equal to provide a balanced impedance. The diode is for protection. This current turns on the opto-isolator&#x27;s LED and phototransistor, so the receiver&#x27;s UART can read the signal with the help of pull-up resistor R3 to the receiver&#x27;s voltage supply. While the supplies in the original specification are 5 volts, the receiver and sender may use different voltage levels.

To transmit a logic 1, a stop bit, and while idle, the sender&#x27;s UART produces the same high voltage as its voltage supply provides, which results in no current flow. This avoids wasting power when idle.

==Extensions==
MIDI&#x27;s flexibility and widespread adoption have led to many refinements of the standard, and have enabled its application to purposes beyond those for which it was originally intended.

===General MIDI===
MIDI allows the selection of an instrument&#x27;s sounds through program change messages, but there is no guarantee that any two instruments have the same sound at a given program location. Program #0 may be a piano on one instrument, or a flute on another. The General MIDI (GM) standard was established in 1991, and provides a standardized sound bank that allows a Standard MIDI File created on one device to sound similar when played back on another. GM specifies a bank of 128 sounds arranged into 16 families of eight related instruments, and assigns a specific program number to each instrument. Any given program change selects the same instrument sound on any GM-compatible instrument. Percussion instruments are placed on channel 10, and a specific MIDI note value is mapped to each percussion sound. 

The GM standard eliminates variation in note mapping. Some manufacturers had disagreed over what note number should represent middle C, but GM specifies that note number 69 plays A440, which in turn fixes middle C as note number 60.

GM-compliant devices must offer 24-note polyphony. GM-compatible devices are required to respond to velocity, aftertouch, and pitch bend, to be set to specified default values at startup, and to support certain controller numbers such as for sustain pedal, and Registered Parameter Numbers (RPNs).

A simplified version of GM, called &quot;GM Lite&quot;, is used for devices with limited processing power.

===GS, XG, and GM2===

A general opinion quickly formed that the GM&#x27;s 128-instrument sound set was not large enough. Roland&#x27;s General Standard, or Roland GS, included additional sounds, drumkits and effects, provided a &quot;bank select&quot; command that could be used to access them, and used MIDI Non-Registered Parameter Numbers (NRPNs) to access its new features. Yamaha&#x27;s Extended General MIDI, or Yamaha XG, followed in 1994. XG similarly offered extra sounds, drumkits and effects, but used standard controllers instead of NRPNs for editing, and increased polyphony to 32 voices. Both standards feature backward compatibility with the GM specification but are not compatible with each other. Neither standard has been adopted beyond its creator, but both are commonly supported by music software titles.

Member companies of Japan&#x27;s AMEI developed the General MIDI Level 2 specification in 1999. GM2 maintains backward compatibility with GM, but increases polyphony to 32 voices, standardizes several controller numbers such as for sostenuto and soft pedal (&quot;una corda&quot;), RPNs and Universal System Exclusive Messages, and incorporates the MIDI Tuning Standard. GM2 is the basis of the instrument selection mechanism in Scalable Polyphony MIDI (SP-MIDI), a MIDI variant for low-power devices that allows the device&#x27;s polyphony to scale according to its processing power.

===Tuning standard===

Most MIDI synthesizers use equal temperament tuning. The MIDI tuning standard (MTS), ratified in 1992, allows alternate tunings. MTS allows microtunings that can be loaded from a bank of up to 128 patches, and allows real-time adjustment of note pitches. Manufacturers are not required to support the standard. Those who do are not required to implement all of its features.

===Time code===

A sequencer can drive a MIDI system with its internal clock, but when a system contains multiple sequencers, they must synchronize to a common clock. MIDI timecode (MTC), developed by Digidesign, implements SysEx messages developed specifically for timing purposes, and can translate to and from the SMPTE timecode standard. MIDI interfaces such as Mark of the Unicorn&#x27;s MIDI Timepiece can convert SMPTE code to MTC. While MIDI clock is based on tempo, timecode is based on frames and is independent of tempo. MTC, like SMPTE timecode, includes position information and can recover in the event of a dropout.

===Machine control===

MIDI Machine Control (MMC) consists of a set of SysEx commands that operate the transport controls of hardware recording devices. MMC lets a sequencer send &quot;Start&quot;, &quot;Stop&quot;, and &quot;Record&quot; commands to a connected tape deck or hard disk recording system, and to fast-forward or rewind the device to start playback at the same point as the sequencer. No synchronization data is involved, although the devices may synchronize through MTC.

===Show control===
MIDI Show Control (MSC) is a set of SysEx commands for sequencing and remotely cueing show control devices such as lighting, music and sound playback, and motion control systems. Applications include stage productions, museum exhibits, recording studio control systems, and amusement park attractions.

===Timestamping===
One solution to MIDI timing problems is to mark MIDI events with the times they are to be played, transmit them beforehand, and store them in a buffer in the receiving device. Sending data beforehand reduces the likelihood that a busy passage overwhelms the transmission link. Once stored in the receiver, the information is no longer subject to timing issues associated with MIDI or USB interfaces and can be played with a high degree of accuracy. MIDI timestamping only works when both hardware and software support it. MOTU&#x27;s MTS, eMagic&#x27;s AMT, and Steinberg&#x27;s Midex 8 had implementations that were incompatible with each other, and required users to own software and hardware manufactured by the same company to work. Timestamping is built into FireWire MIDI interfaces, Mac OS X Core Audio, and Linux ALSA Sequencer.

===Sample dump standard===
An unforeseen capability of SysEx messages was their use for transporting audio samples between instruments. This led to the development of the sample dump standard (SDS), which established a new SysEx format for sample transmission. SDS was later augmented with a pair of commands that allow the transmission of information about sample loop points, without requiring that the entire sample be transmitted.

===Downloadable Sounds===

The Downloadable Sounds (DLS) specification, ratified in 1997, allows mobile devices and computer sound cards to expand their wave tables with downloadable sound sets. The DLS Level 2 specification followed in 2006, and defined a standardized synthesizer architecture. The Mobile DLS standard calls for DLS banks to be combined with SP-MIDI, as self-contained Mobile XMF files.

===MIDI Polyphonic Expression===
MIDI Polyphonic Expression (MPE) is a method of using MIDI that enables pitch bend, and other dimensions of expressive control, to be adjusted continuously for individual notes. MPE works by assigning each note to its own MIDI channel so that controller messages can be applied to each note individually. The specifications were released in November 2017 by AMEI and in January 2018 by the MMA. Instruments like the Continuum Fingerboard, LinnStrument, ROLI Seaboard, Sensel Morph, and Eigenharp let users control pitch, timbre, and other nuances for individual notes within chords.

==Alternative hardware transports==
In addition to using a 31.25 kbit/s current-loop over a DIN connector, the same data can be transmitted over different hardware transports such as USB, FireWire, and Ethernet.

===USB and FireWire===
Members of the USB-IF in 1999 developed a standard for MIDI over USB, the &quot;Universal Serial Bus Device Class Definition for MIDI Devices&quot;. MIDI over USB has become increasingly common as other interfaces that had been used for MIDI connections (ISA card, game port, etc.) disappeared from personal computers. Linux, Microsoft Windows, Macintosh OS X, and Apple iOS operating systems include standard class drivers to support devices that use the &quot;Universal Serial Bus Device Class Definition for MIDI Devices&quot;.

Apple Computer developed the FireWire interface during the 1990s. It began to appear on digital video (DV) cameras toward the end of the decade, and on G3 Macintosh models in 1999. It was created for use with multimedia applications. Unlike USB, FireWire uses intelligent controllers that can manage their own transmission without attention from the main CPU. As with standard MIDI devices, FireWire devices can communicate with each other with no computer present.

===XLR connectors===
The Octave-Plateau Voyetra-8 synthesizer was an early MIDI implementation using XLR3 connectors in place of the 5-pin DIN. It was released in the pre-MIDI years and later retrofitted with a MIDI interface but kept its XLR connector.

==== Serial parallel, and joystick port ====
As computer-based studio setups became common, MIDI devices that could connect directly to a computer became available. These typically used the 8-pin mini-DIN connector that was used by Apple for serial ports prior to the introduction of the Blue and White G3 models. MIDI interfaces intended for use as the centerpiece of a studio, such as the Mark of the Unicorn MIDI Time Piece, were made possible by a fast transmission mode that could take advantage of these serial ports&#x27; ability to operate at 20 times the standard MIDI speed. Mini-DIN ports were built into some late-1990s MIDI instruments and enabled such devices to be connected directly to a computer. Some devices connected via a PCs&#x27; DB-25 parallel port, or through the DA-15 game port found on many PC sound cards.

====mLAN====
Yamaha introduced the mLAN protocol in 1999. It was conceived as a local area network for musical instruments using FireWire as the transport and was designed to carry multiple MIDI channels together with multichannel digital audio, data file transfers, and timecode. mLan was used in a number of Yamaha products, notably digital mixing consoles and the Motif synthesizer, and in third-party products such as the PreSonus FIREstation and the Korg Triton Studio. No new mLan products have been released since 2007.

=== SCSI MIDI Device Interface (SMDI) ===
SCSI MIDI Device Interface (SMDI) was used by some samplers and hard disk recorders in the 1990s (e.g. Kurzweil K2000 and Peavey SP Sample Playback Synthesizer) for fast bidirectional sample transport to hard disk drives and magneto-optical drives.

===Ethernet and Internet===
Computer network implementations of MIDI provide network routing capabilities, and the high-bandwidth channel that earlier alternatives to MIDI, such as ZIPI, were intended to bring. Proprietary implementations have existed since the 1980s, some of which use fiber optic cables for transmission. The Internet Engineering Task Force&#x27;s RTP-MIDI open specification has gained industry support. Apple has supported this protocol from Mac OS X 10.4 onwards, and a Windows driver based on Apple&#x27;s implementation exists for Windows XP and newer versions.

===Wireless===
Systems for wireless MIDI transmission have been available since the 1980s. Several commercially available transmitters allow wireless transmission of MIDI and OSC signals over Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. iOS devices are able to function as MIDI control surfaces, using Wi-Fi and OSC. An XBee radio can be used to build a wireless MIDI transceiver as a do-it-yourself project. Android devices are able to function as full MIDI control surfaces using several different protocols over Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.

==MIDI 2.0==

The MIDI 2.0 standard was unveiled on January 17, 2020, at the Winter NAMM Show in Anaheim, California. Representatives Yamaha, Roli, Microsoft, Google, and the MIDI Association introduced the update, which enables bidirectional communication while maintaining backward compatibility.

Research on the new protocol began in 2005. Prototype devices showcasing wired and wireless connections have been shown privately at NAMM. Licensing and product certification policies have been developed, although no projected release date was announced. Proposed physical layer and transport layer included Ethernet-based protocols such as RTP MIDI and Audio Video Bridging/Time-Sensitive Networking, as well as User Datagram Protocol (UDP)-based transport.

AMEI and MMA announced that complete specifications will be published following interoperability testing of prototype implementations from major manufacturers such as Google, Yamaha, Steinberg, Roland, Ableton, Native Instruments, and ROLI, among others. In January 2020, Roland announced the A-88mkII controller keyboard that supports MIDI 2.0.

MIDI 2.0 includes MIDI Capability Inquiry specification for property exchange and profiles, and the new Universal MIDI Packet format for high-speed transports which supports both MIDI 1.0 and MIDI 2.0 voice messages.

Some devices operating MIDI 1.0 can &quot;retrofit&quot; some 2.0 features. Since its release in early January 2020 by the MIDI Manufacturers Association, more details have yet to come out about the new update. Currently there are five components to MIDI such as; M2-100-U v1.0 MIDI 2.0 Specification Overview, M2-101-UM v1.1 MIDI-CI Specification, M2-102-U v1.0 Common Rules for MIDI-CI Profiles, M2-103-UM v1.0 Common Rules for MIDI-CI PE and M2-104-UM v1.0 UMP and MIDI 2.0 Protocol Specification. Other specifications regarding MIDI 2.0 include; allowing the use of 32,000 controllers and wide range note enhancements. These enhancements are made better through the property exchange.

=== Property exchange ===
The property exchange in MIDI 2.0 uses JSON. This provides human-readable format to for exchanging data sets. In doing so, this opens up a wide range of capabilities for MIDI 2.0. JSON allows any plugged-in device whether it be a keyboard, piano or any other electrical device to describe what it is doing and what it can do rather than having the person operating it, change their settings every time they operate a new device. For example, a MIDI keyboard that is plugged into an iOS device with specific MIDI settings can now be plugged into a Windows device and not have to have their settings manually changed. Any musical component used in one device will be kept and can be altered automatically in another.

===MIDI Capability Inquiry===
MIDI Capability Inquiry (MIDI-CI) specifies Universal SysEx messages to implement device profiles, parameter exchange, and MIDI protocol negotiation. The specifications were released in November 2017 by AMEI and in January 2018 by the MMA.

Parameter exchange defines methods for inquiry of device capabilities, such as supported controllers, patch names, instrument profiles, device configuration and other metadata, and to get or set device configuration settings. Property exchange uses System Exclusive messages that carry JSON format data. Profiles define common sets of MIDI controllers for various instrument types, such as drawbar organs and analog synths, or for particular tasks, improving interoperability between instruments from different manufacturers. Protocol negotiation allows devices to employ the Next Generation protocol or manufacturer-specific protocols.

=== Universal MIDI Packet ===
MIDI 2.0 defines a new Universal MIDI Packet format, which contains messages of varying lengths (32, 64, 96 or 128 bits) depending on the payload type. This new packet format supports a total of 256 MIDI channels, organized in 16 groups of 16 channels; each group can carry either a MIDI 1.0 Protocol stream or new MIDI 2.0 Protocol stream, and can also include system messages, system exclusive data, and timestamps for precise rendering of several simultaneous notes. To simplify initial adoption, existing products are explicitly allowed to only implement MIDI 1.0 messages. The Universal MIDI Packet is intended for high-speed transport such as USB and Ethernet and is not supported on the existing 5-pin DIN connections. System Real-Time and System Common messages are the same as defined in MIDI 1.0.

=== New protocol ===
As of January 2019, the draft specification of the new protocol supports all core messages that also exist in MIDI 1.0, but extends their precision and resolution; it also defines many new high-precision controller messages. The specification defines default translation rules to convert between MIDI 2.0 Channel Voice and MIDI 1.0 Channel Voice messages that use different data resolution, as well as map 256 MIDI 2.0 streams to 16 MIDI 1.0 streams.

===Data transfer formats===

System Exclusive 8 messages use a new 8-bit data format, based on Universal System Exclusive messages. Mixed Data Set messages are intended to transfer large sets of data. System Exclusive 7 messages use the previous 7-bit data format.

==See also==

* ABC notation
* Digital piano
* Electronic drum module
* Guitar synthesizer
* List of music software
* MIDI mockup
* MusicXML
* Music Macro Language
* Open Sound Control
* SoundFont
* Scorewriter
* Synthesia
* Synthetic music mobile application format

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* The MIDI Association 
* You can download English-language MIDI specifications at the MIDI Manufacturers Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="0" end="4" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="8" end="44" title="MIDI" label="Musical Instrument Digital Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="51" end="69" title="technical standard" label="technical standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="87" end="109" title="communication protocol" label="communication protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q173156" start="111" end="128" title="Digital electronics" label="digital interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="134" end="154" title="electrical connector" label="electrical connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="187" end="216" title="electronic musical instrument" label="electronic musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="219" end="227" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="561" end="566" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343007" start="635" end="643" title="Electronic keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q715223" start="696" end="708" title="sound module" label="sound module"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093031" start="812" end="830" title="keyboard amplifier" label="keyboard amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="873" end="876" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="901" end="910" title="Music sequencer" label="sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="914" end="939" title="digital audio workstation" label="digital audio workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="990" end="1001" title="file format" label="file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146367" start="1071" end="1080" title="file size" label="file size"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="1168" end="1179" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="1183" end="1207" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="digitally sampled sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="1931" end="1943" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135058" start="2133" end="2163" title="MIDI Manufacturers Association" label="MIDI Manufacturers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809929" start="2292" end="2335" title="Association of Musical Electronics Industry" label="Association of Musical Electronics Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="2532" end="2544" title="standardized" label="standardized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="2568" end="2597" title="electronic musical instrument" label="electronic musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q493067" start="2722" end="2729" title="CV/gate" label="CV/gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128575" start="2731" end="2739" title="DIN sync" label="DIN sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027802" start="2744" end="2763" title="Digital Control Bus" label="Digital Control Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q322845" start="2771" end="2788" title="Ikutaro Kakehashi" label="Ikutaro Kakehashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="2807" end="2813" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009864" start="2961" end="2981" title="Oberheim Electronics" label="Oberheim Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530826" start="2990" end="3002" title="Tom Oberheim" label="Tom Oberheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017253" start="3157" end="3167" title="Dave Smith (engineer)" label="Dave Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435418" start="3186" end="3205" title="Sequential Circuits" label="Sequential Circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="3360" end="3366" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q386773" start="3368" end="3372" title="Korg" label="Korg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425561" start="3377" end="3382" title="Kawai" label="Kawai"/>
<link wikidata="Q758847" start="3823" end="3848" title="Audio Engineering Society" label="Audio Engineering Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q200883" start="4290" end="4301" title="Robert Moog" label="Robert Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650528" start="4320" end="4330" title="Moog Music" label="Moog Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398219" start="4382" end="4390" title="Keyboard (magazine)" label="Keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129867" start="4418" end="4427" title="NAMM Show" label="NAMM Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387433" start="4474" end="4485" title="Sequential Circuits Prophet-5" label="Prophet 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089307" start="4490" end="4501" title="Roland Jupiter-6" label="Roland JP-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011048" start="4637" end="4659" title="Technical Grammy Award" label="Technical Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089307" start="4745" end="4761" title="Roland Jupiter-6" label="Roland Jupiter-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="4807" end="4819" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q978134" start="4825" end="4838" title="Roland TR-909" label="Roland TR-909"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="4859" end="4868" title="music sequencer" label="sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195931" start="5246" end="5258" title="General MIDI" label="General MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="5308" end="5311" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="5316" end="5324" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="5488" end="5491" title="IEC" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5641" end="5644" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="5679" end="5690" title="open-source" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="5907" end="5922" title="record producer" label="record producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="5986" end="5999" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920631" start="6375" end="6408" title="History of computing hardware (1960s–present)" label="dawn of the personal computer era"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="6433" end="6441" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="samplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276177" start="6446" end="6465" title="digital synthesizer" label="digital synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="6669" end="6684" title="MIDI sequencing" label="MIDI sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q372029" start="7168" end="7182" title="home recording" label="home recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q342868" start="7198" end="7211" title="preproduction" label="preproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="7358" end="7366" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="7423" end="7426" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512076" start="7684" end="7706" title="TECnology Hall of Fame" label="TECnology Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q715223" start="8172" end="8184" title="sound module" label="sound module"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072260" start="8973" end="8980" title="Filter (signal processing)" label="Filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="8988" end="8994" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413083" start="9218" end="9227" title="parameter" label="parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27666154" start="9831" end="9848" title="List of MIDI editors and sequencers" label="computer software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753848" start="9877" end="9894" title="music workstation" label="music workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="9902" end="9927" title="digital audio workstation" label="digital audio workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142040" start="10011" end="10021" title="piano roll" label="piano roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="10243" end="10263" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758902" start="10751" end="10774" title="Algorithmic composition" label="Algorithmic composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195931" start="10981" end="10993" title="General MIDI" label="General MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q682626" start="11372" end="11382" title="audio file" label="audio file"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="11415" end="11432" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047675" start="11768" end="11779" title="Yamaha CX5M" label="Yamaha CX5M"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="11808" end="11818" title="Music sequencer" label="sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="11825" end="11828" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="11910" end="11928" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q907708" start="11936" end="11943" title="MPU-401" label="MPU-401"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="11990" end="12000" title="sound card" label="sound card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418253" start="12073" end="12083" title="sound chip" label="sound chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q27666154" start="12232" end="12245" title="Comparison of MIDI editors and sequencers" label="MIDI software"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="12334" end="12342" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="12344" end="12353" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="12355" end="12367" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="12369" end="12374" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41357" start="12376" end="12392" title="Acorn Archimedes" label="Acorn Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="12398" end="12415" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="12427" end="12435" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="12556" end="12562" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411846" start="12749" end="12769" title="Tandy Color Computer" label="Tandy Color Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238768" start="12774" end="12780" title="Dragon 32/64" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="13381" end="13406" title="broadband internet access" label="broadband internet access"/>
<link wikidata="Q345410" start="13822" end="13827" title="AdLib" label="AdLib"/>
<link wikidata="Q726912" start="13836" end="13849" title="Sound Blaster" label="Sound Blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141651" start="13917" end="13947" title="frequency modulation synthesis" label="frequency modulation synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="14411" end="14422" title="file format" label="file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q690856" start="14714" end="14722" title="ringtone" label="ringtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="14909" end="14917" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q229345" start="14943" end="14950" title="karaoke" label="karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="15102" end="15108" title="Multitrack recording" label="tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141160" start="15182" end="15188" title="Header (computing)" label="header"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="15629" end="15646" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205563" start="15674" end="15693" title="Downloadable Sounds" label="Downloadable Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196805" start="15705" end="15737" title="Resource Interchange File Format" label="Resource Interchange File Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q280943" start="15814" end="15824" title="deprecated" label="deprecated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042305" start="15861" end="15864" title="XMF" label="XMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="16043" end="16055" title="Computer multitasking" label="Multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058748" start="16282" end="16301" title="cut, copy and paste" label="cut, copy and paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q558376" start="16306" end="16319" title="drag and drop" label="drag and drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q118470" start="16321" end="16338" title="Keyboard shortcut" label="Keyboard shortcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="16647" end="16658" title="scorewriter" label="scorewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="16729" end="16736" title="Loop (music)" label="looping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976095" start="16738" end="16750" title="quantization (music)" label="quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q815323" start="16771" end="16784" title="transposition (music)" label="transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="16818" end="16822" title="Beat (music)" label="Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501482" start="16851" end="16857" title="groove (music)" label="groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552023" start="17339" end="17347" title="ACID Pro" label="ACID Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="17676" end="17687" title="sheet music" label="sheet music"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="17689" end="17701" title="Scorewriter" label="Scorewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="18023" end="18030" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416101" start="18059" end="18065" title="Finale (software)" label="Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375540" start="18067" end="18073" title="Encore (software)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q240110" start="18075" end="18083" title="Sibelius (software)" label="Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q240192" start="18085" end="18094" title="MuseScore" label="MuseScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q25931698" start="18099" end="18105" title="Dorico" label="Dorico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543896" start="18107" end="18117" title="SmartScore" label="SmartScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q82744" start="18155" end="18162" title="Image scanner" label="scanned"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047690" start="18374" end="18385" title="Yamaha FS1R" label="Yamaha FS1R"/>
<link wikidata="Q875408" start="19746" end="19752" title="Emagic" label="eMagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652569" start="20077" end="20095" title="Native Instruments" label="Native Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="20760" end="20787" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="20899" end="20908" title="polyphony" label="polyphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="20959" end="20962" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="20975" end="20986" title="sample rate" label="sample rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431161" start="20991" end="21000" title="Audio bit depth" label="bit depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="21287" end="21303" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096504" start="21473" end="21480" title="latency (audio)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587669" start="21575" end="21586" title="Max Mathews" label="Max Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="21590" end="21599" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719098" start="21610" end="21617" title="MUSIC-N" label="MUSIC-N"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445939" start="21723" end="21735" title="Seer Systems" label="Seer Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q477016" start="21907" end="21920" title="Creative Labs" label="Creative Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661166" start="22234" end="22260" title="Symbolic Sound Corporation" label="Symbolic Sound Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183391" start="22289" end="22298" title="Creamware (company)" label="Creamware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561801" start="22299" end="22309" title="Sonic Core" label="Sonic Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="22400" end="22411" title="effect unit" label="effect unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="22418" end="22423" title="audio console" label="mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="22746" end="22749" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q345410" start="22818" end="22824" title="Ad Lib, Inc." label="Ad Lib"/>
<link wikidata="Q726912" start="22828" end="22841" title="Sound Blaster" label="Sound Blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141651" start="22872" end="22884" title="FM synthesis" label="FM synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="22916" end="22926" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="22930" end="22939" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q796345" start="22942" end="22955" title="John Chowning" label="John Chowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q353280" start="23073" end="23100" title="Additive synthesis" label="enough sine waves were used"/>
<link wikidata="Q216158" start="23325" end="23338" title="daughterboard" label="daughterboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321530" start="23526" end="23538" title="E-mu Proteus" label="E-mu Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272976" start="24162" end="24179" title="MIDI Show Control" label="MIDI Show Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q616077" start="24286" end="24288" title="VJ (video performance artist)" label="VJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046801" start="24294" end="24306" title="Turntablism" label="turntablists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883824" start="24411" end="24421" title="Console automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q428936" start="24451" end="24459" title="Animusic" label="Animusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q621303" start="24693" end="24705" title="Apple Motion" label="Apple Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="24782" end="24802" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q335946" start="24814" end="24823" title="MIDI Maze" label="MIDI Maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="24843" end="24851" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q54767" start="24852" end="24872" title="computer puzzle game" label="computer puzzle game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266882" start="24879" end="24883" title="Oxyd" label="Oxyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="25058" end="25085" title="DIN connector" label="180° five-pin DIN connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501125" start="25161" end="25167" title="ground (electricity)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708162" start="25188" end="25201" title="balanced pair" label="balanced pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="25264" end="25280" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q429451" start="25450" end="25465" title="Phantom power" label="phantom-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="25513" end="25527" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q849084" start="25554" end="25567" title="Opto-isolator" label="Opto-isolator"/>
<link wikidata="Q992463" start="25654" end="25666" title="Ground loop (electricity)" label="ground loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="25723" end="25738" title="error detection" label="error detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q797225" start="25806" end="25818" title="interference (communication)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="25937" end="25957" title="Phone connector (audio)" label="TRS phone connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157702" start="26501" end="26512" title="Daisy chain (electrical engineering)" label="daisy-chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="28077" end="28091" title="D-subminiature" label="D-subminiature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127054" start="28098" end="28107" title="game port" label="game port"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="28109" end="28112" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="28114" end="28122" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="28124" end="28132" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="28184" end="28187" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966781" start="29512" end="29520" title="MIDI keyboard" label="Keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q690218" start="29959" end="29974" title="drum controller" label="drum controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q882090" start="29980" end="29995" title="wind controller" label="wind controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="30027" end="30035" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q92862" start="30256" end="30268" title="Jaron Lanier" label="Jaron Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30445" end="30455" title="#Extensions" label="extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q322400" start="31117" end="31129" title="Ableton Live" label="Ableton Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784412" start="31212" end="31217" title="MS-20" label="MS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q39186" start="31270" end="31282" title="patch cables" label="patch cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="31698" end="31714" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q431000" start="32429" end="32441" title="19-inch rack" label="19-inch rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="32614" end="32621" title="sampler (musical instrument)" label="sampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="32665" end="32685" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="32753" end="32759" title="Sampling (signal processing)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q580758" start="32847" end="32870" title="subtractive synthesizer" label="subtractive synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165275" start="33058" end="33066" title="Rompler" label="ROMplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q366336" start="33273" end="33287" title="Ensoniq Mirage" label="Ensoniq Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="33487" end="33499" title="Drum machine" label="Drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751062" start="33997" end="34013" title="Analog sequencer" label="Analog sequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q493067" start="34019" end="34026" title="CV/Gate" label="CV/Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="34160" end="34169" title="tape deck" label="tape deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="34270" end="34290" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="34646" end="34658" title="effects unit" label="effects unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416742" start="34714" end="34722" title="Eventide, Inc" label="Eventide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309046" start="34823" end="34833" title="Drum Buddy" label="Drum Buddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="34850" end="34862" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="34936" end="34948" title="looper pedal" label="looper pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="35051" end="35056" title="bytes" label="bytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192027" start="35085" end="35089" title="baud" label="baud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316326" start="35102" end="35135" title="asynchronous serial communication" label="asynchronous serial communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="35614" end="35624" title="polyphonic" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35754" end="35768" title="ADSR envelope#ADSR envelope" label="decay envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="35848" end="35858" title="monophonic" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422221" start="38900" end="38912" title="current loop" label="current loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045991" start="38959" end="38968" title="Circuit diagram" label="schematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="39035" end="39048" title="DIN connector" label="DIN connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="39054" end="39073" title="TRS phone connector" label="TRS phone connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q280409" start="39145" end="39149" title="UART" label="UART"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="39202" end="39213" title="milliampere" label="milliampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163768" start="39228" end="39235" title="Current source" label="sourced"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506009" start="39336" end="39344" title="Shielded cable" label="shielded"/>
<link wikidata="Q192808" start="39345" end="39357" title="twisted-pair" label="twisted-pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163768" start="39527" end="39532" title="Current sink" label="sinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="39546" end="39555" title="Resistors" label="Resistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708162" start="39611" end="39629" title="Balanced line" label="balanced impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="39635" end="39640" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="39707" end="39710" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q175943" start="39715" end="39730" title="phototransistor" label="phototransistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987617" start="39797" end="39813" title="pull-up resistor" label="pull-up resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="39911" end="39916" title="volts" label="volts"/>
<link wikidata="Q280409" start="40046" end="40050" title="UART" label="UART"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161128" start="40089" end="40103" title="Voltage source" label="voltage supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610210" start="41402" end="41406" title="A440 (pitch standard)" label="A440"/>
<link wikidata="Q980862" start="41699" end="41712" title="sustain pedal" label="sustain pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360238" start="42021" end="42030" title="Roland GS" label="Roland GS"/>
<link wikidata="Q368491" start="42283" end="42292" title="Yamaha XG" label="Yamaha XG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809929" start="42725" end="42729" title="Association of Musical Electronics Industry" label="AMEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532015" start="42744" end="42764" title="General MIDI Level 2" label="General MIDI Level 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591805" start="42924" end="42933" title="sostenuto" label="sostenuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760322" start="42938" end="42948" title="soft pedal" label="soft pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="43328" end="43345" title="equal temperament" label="equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081149" start="43358" end="43378" title="MIDI tuning standard" label="MIDI tuning standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045756" start="43441" end="43453" title="Microtonal music" label="microtunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224661" start="43878" end="43888" title="Digidesign" label="Digidesign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390415" start="43994" end="44008" title="SMPTE timecode" label="SMPTE timecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q795160" start="44173" end="44179" title="Frame (video)" label="frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260245" start="44299" end="44306" title="Dropout (communications)" label="dropout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272976" start="44815" end="44832" title="MIDI Show Control" label="MIDI Show Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297486" start="44894" end="44900" title="Cue (theatrical)" label="cueing"/>
<link wikidata="Q852514" start="44970" end="44984" title="motion control" label="motion control"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="45089" end="45103" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132463" start="45936" end="45946" title="Core Audio" label="Core Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="46536" end="46546" title="sound card" label="sound card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129025" start="47266" end="47287" title="Continuum Fingerboard" label="Continuum Fingerboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161784" start="47289" end="47301" title="LinnStrument" label="LinnStrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274596" start="47303" end="47316" title="ROLI Seaboard" label="ROLI Seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314756" start="47318" end="47324" title="Sensel" label="Sensel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026950" start="47336" end="47345" title="Eigenharp" label="Eigenharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="47526" end="47539" title="DIN connector" label="DIN connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="47617" end="47620" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="47622" end="47630" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="47636" end="47644" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="47925" end="47933" title="ISA card" label="ISA card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127054" start="47935" end="47944" title="game port" label="game port"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="48071" end="48085" title="USB device class" label="standard class"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="48202" end="48216" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48290" end="48303" title="DV (video format)#Connectivity" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942494" start="48709" end="48718" title="Voyetra-8" label="Voyetra-8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48770" end="48785" title="XLR connector#XLR3 connectors" label="XLR3 connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="48802" end="48811" title="DIN connector" label="5-pin DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359217" start="49114" end="49128" title="Mini DIN-8" label="8-pin mini-DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="49166" end="49177" title="serial port" label="serial port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107044" start="49212" end="49229" title="Blue and White G3" label="Blue and White G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770529" start="49315" end="49334" title="Mark of the Unicorn" label="Mark of the Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190440" start="49677" end="49696" title="DB-25 parallel port" label="DB-25 parallel port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127054" start="49713" end="49728" title="DA-15 game port" label="DA-15 game port"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="49773" end="49779" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q289334" start="49795" end="49799" title="mLAN" label="mLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="49840" end="49858" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994640" start="50095" end="50117" title="digital mixing console" label="digital mixing console"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564556" start="50127" end="50132" title="Yamaha Motif" label="Motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q666449" start="50215" end="50233" title="Korg Triton Studio" label="Korg Triton Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="50330" end="50334" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585046" start="50394" end="50412" title="hard disk recorder" label="hard disk recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q775802" start="50433" end="50447" title="Kurzweil K2000" label="Kurzweil K2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339598" start="50452" end="50458" title="Peavey Electronics" label="Peavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="50534" end="50550" title="hard disk drives" label="hard disk drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q125703231" start="50555" end="50576" title="magneto-optical drive" label="magneto-optical drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="50608" end="50624" title="Computer network" label="Computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069709" start="50761" end="50765" title="ZIPI" label="ZIPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="50867" end="50878" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="50908" end="50939" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277875" start="50947" end="50955" title="RTP-MIDI" label="RTP-MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="51043" end="51051" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="51072" end="51079" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773100" start="51342" end="51345" title="Open Sound Control" label="OSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="51359" end="51364" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="51369" end="51378" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041701" start="51463" end="51467" title="XBee" label="XBee"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="51658" end="51663" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="51668" end="51677" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136450" start="51822" end="51826" title="ROLI" label="Roli"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="52244" end="52258" title="physical layer" label="physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209372" start="52263" end="52278" title="transport layer" label="transport layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="52288" end="52296" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277875" start="52321" end="52329" title="RTP MIDI" label="RTP MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q758837" start="52334" end="52354" title="Audio Video Bridging" label="Audio Video Bridging"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850965" start="52355" end="52380" title="Time-Sensitive Networking" label="Time-Sensitive Networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="52393" end="52415" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="User Datagram Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="52607" end="52613" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="52615" end="52621" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q686292" start="52623" end="52632" title="Steinberg" label="Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="52634" end="52640" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q322379" start="52642" end="52649" title="Ableton" label="Ableton"/>
<link wikidata="Q652569" start="52651" end="52669" title="Native Instruments" label="Native Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136450" start="52675" end="52679" title="ROLI" label="ROLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063" start="53760" end="53764" title="JSON" label="JSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063" start="54994" end="54998" title="JSON" label="JSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q287067" start="56939" end="56951" title="ABC notation" label="ABC notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508837" start="56954" end="56967" title="Digital piano" label="Digital piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358355" start="56970" end="56992" title="Electronic drum module" label="Electronic drum module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527709" start="56995" end="57013" title="Guitar synthesizer" label="Guitar synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041413" start="57016" end="57038" title="List of music software" label="List of music software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715999" start="57041" end="57052" title="MIDI mockup" label="MIDI mockup"/>
<link wikidata="Q653301" start="57055" end="57063" title="MusicXML" label="MusicXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941595" start="57066" end="57086" title="Music Macro Language" label="Music Macro Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773100" start="57089" end="57107" title="Open Sound Control" label="Open Sound Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q967056" start="57110" end="57119" title="SoundFont" label="SoundFont"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="57122" end="57133" title="Scorewriter" label="Scorewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662707" start="57136" end="57145" title="Synthesia (video game)" label="Synthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921560" start="57148" end="57189" title="Synthetic music mobile application format" label="Synthetic music mobile application format"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135058" start="57323" end="57353" title="MIDI Manufacturers Association" label="MIDI Manufacturers Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19999" wikidata="Q175869" url="?curid=19999" title="Microcode">
<text>In processor design, microcode serves as an intermediary layer situated between the central processing unit (CPU) hardware and the programmer-visible instruction set architecture of a computer, also known as its machine code. It consists of a set of hardware-level instructions that implement the higher-level machine code instructions or control internal finite-state machine sequencing in many digital processing components. While microcode is utilized in Intel and AMD general-purpose CPUs in contemporary desktops and laptops, it functions only as a fallback path for scenarios that the faster hardwired control unit is unable to manage.

Housed in special high-speed memory, microcode translates machine instructions, state machine data, or other input into sequences of detailed circuit-level operations. It separates the machine instructions from the underlying electronics, thereby enabling greater flexibility in designing and altering instructions. Moreover, it facilitates the construction of complex multi-step instructions, while simultaneously reducing the complexity of computer circuits. The act of writing microcode is often referred to as &quot;microprogramming&quot;, and the microcode in a specific processor implementation is sometimes termed a &quot;microprogram&quot;.

Through extensive microprogramming, microarchitectures of smaller scale and simplicity can emulate more robust architectures with wider word lengths, additional execution units, and so forth. This approach provides a relatively straightforward method of ensuring software compatibility between different products within a processor family.

Some hardware vendors, notably IBM and Lenovo, use the term &quot;microcode&quot; interchangeably with &quot;firmware&quot;. In this context, all code within a device is termed microcode, whether it is microcode or machine code. For instance, updates to a hard disk drive&#x27;s microcode often encompass updates to both its microcode and firmware.

==Overview==
===Instruction sets===
At the hardware level, processors contain a number of separate areas of circuitry, or &quot;units&quot;, that perform different tasks. Commonly found units include the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) which performs instructions such as addition or comparing two numbers, circuits for reading and writing data to external memory, and small areas of onboard memory to store these values while they are being processed. In most designs, additional high-performance memory, the register file, is used to store temporary values, not just those needed by the current instruction.

To properly perform an instruction, the various circuits have to be activated in order. For instance, it is not possible to add two numbers if they have not yet been loaded from memory. In RISC designs, the proper ordering of these instructions is largely up to the programmer, or at least to the compiler of the programming language they are using. So to add two numbers, for instance, the compiler may output instructions to load one of the values into one register, the second into another, call the addition function in the ALU, and then write the result back out to memory.

As the sequence of instructions needed to complete this higher-level concept, &quot;add these two numbers in memory&quot;, may require multiple instructions, this can represent a performance bottleneck if those instructions are stored in main memory. Reading those instructions one by one is taking up time that could be used to read and write the actual data. For this reason, it is common for non-RISC designs to have many different instructions that differ largely on where they store data. For instance, the MOS 6502 has eight variations of the addition instruction, , which differ only in where they look to find the two operands.

Using the variation of the instruction, or &quot;opcode&quot;, that most closely matches the ultimate operation can reduce the number of instructions to one, saving memory used by the program code and improving performance by leaving the data bus open for other operations. Internally, however, these instructions are not separate operations, but sequences of the operations the units actually perform. Converting a single instruction read from memory into the sequence of internal actions is the duty of the control unit, another unit within the processor.

===Microcode===
The basic idea behind microcode is to replace the custom hardware logic implementing the instruction sequencing with a series of simple instructions run in a &quot;microcode engine&quot; in the processor. Whereas a custom logic system might have a series of diodes and gates that output a series of voltages on various control lines, the microcode engine is connected to these lines instead, and these are turned on and off as the engine reads the microcode instructions in sequence. The microcode instructions are often bit encoded to those lines, for instance, if bit 8 is true, that might mean that the ALU should be paused awaiting data. In this respect microcode is somewhat similar to the paper rolls in a player piano, where the holes represent which key should be pressed.

The distinction between custom logic and microcode may seem small, one uses a pattern of diodes and gates to decode the instruction and produce a sequence of signals, whereas the other encodes the signals as microinstructions that are read in sequence to produce the same results. The critical difference is that in a custom logic design, changes to the individual steps require the hardware to be redesigned. Using microcode, all that changes is the code stored in the memory containing the microcode. This makes it much easier to fix problems in a microcode system. It also means that there is no effective limit to the complexity of the instructions, it is only limited by the amount of memory one is willing to use.

The lowest layer in a computer&#x27;s software stack is traditionally raw machine code instructions for the processor. In microcoded processors, fetching and decoding those instructions, and executing them, may be done by microcode. To avoid confusion, each microprogram-related element is differentiated by the &quot;micro&quot; prefix: microinstruction, microassembler, microprogrammer, etc.

Complex digital processors may also employ more than one (possibly microcode-based) control unit in order to delegate sub-tasks that must be performed essentially asynchronously in parallel. For example, the VAX 9000 has a hardwired IBox unit to fetch and decode instructions, which it hands to a microcoded EBox unit to be executed, and the VAX 8800 has both a microcoded IBox and a microcoded EBox.

A high-level programmer, or even an assembly language programmer, does not normally see or change microcode. Unlike machine code, which often retains some backward compatibility among different processors in a family, microcode only runs on the exact electronic circuitry for which it is designed, as it constitutes an inherent part of the particular processor design itself.

===Design===
Engineers normally write the microcode during the design phase of a processor, storing it in a read-only memory (ROM) or programmable logic array (PLA) structure, or in a combination of both. However, machines also exist that have some or all microcode stored in static random-access memory (SRAM) or flash memory. This is traditionally denoted as &quot;writable control store&quot; in the context of computers, which can be either read-only or read–write memory. In the latter case, the CPU initialization process loads microcode into the control store from another storage medium, with the possibility of altering the microcode to correct bugs in the instruction set, or to implement new machine instructions.

===Microprograms===

Microprograms consist of series of microinstructions, which control the CPU at a very fundamental level of hardware circuitry. For example, a single typical &quot;horizontal&quot; microinstruction might specify the following operations:
* Connect register 1 to the &quot;A&quot; side of the ALU
* Connect register 7 to the &quot;B&quot; side of the ALU
* Set the ALU to perform two&#x27;s-complement addition
* Set the ALU&#x27;s carry input to zero
* Store the result value in register 8
* Update the condition codes from the ALU status flags (&quot;negative&quot;, &quot;zero&quot;, &quot;overflow&quot;, and &quot;carry&quot;)
* Microjump to a given μPC address for the next microinstruction

To simultaneously control all processor&#x27;s features in one cycle, the microinstruction is often wider than 50 bits; e.g., 128 bits on a 360/85 with an emulator feature. Microprograms are carefully designed and optimized for the fastest possible execution, as a slow microprogram would result in a slow machine instruction and degraded performance for related application programs that use such instructions.

==Justification==
Microcode was originally developed as a simpler method of developing the control logic for a computer. Initially, CPU instruction sets were hardwired. Each step needed to fetch, decode, and execute the machine instructions (including any operand address calculations, reads, and writes) was controlled directly by combinational logic and rather minimal sequential state machine circuitry. While such hard-wired processors were very efficient, the need for powerful instruction sets with multi-step addressing and complex operations (&quot;see below&quot;) made them difficult to design and debug; highly encoded and varied-length instructions can contribute to this as well, especially when very irregular encodings are used.

Microcode simplified the job by allowing much of the processor&#x27;s behaviour and programming model to be defined via microprogram routines rather than by dedicated circuitry. Even late in the design process, microcode could easily be changed, whereas hard-wired CPU designs were very cumbersome to change. Thus, this greatly facilitated CPU design.

From the 1940s to the late 1970s, a large portion of programming was done in assembly language; higher-level instructions mean greater programmer productivity, so an important advantage of microcode was the relative ease by which powerful machine instructions can be defined. The ultimate extension of this are &quot;Directly Executable High Level Language&quot; designs, in which each statement of a high-level language such as PL/I is entirely and directly executed by microcode, without compilation. The IBM Future Systems project and Data General Fountainhead Processor are examples of this. During the 1970s, CPU speeds grew more quickly than memory speeds and numerous techniques such as memory block transfer, memory pre-fetch and multi-level caches were used to alleviate this. High-level machine instructions, made possible by microcode, helped further, as fewer more complex machine instructions require less memory bandwidth. For example, an operation on a character string can be done as a single machine instruction, thus avoiding multiple instruction fetches.

Architectures with instruction sets implemented by complex microprograms included the IBM System/360 and Digital Equipment Corporation VAX. The approach of increasingly complex microcode-implemented instruction sets was later called complex instruction set computer (CISC). An alternate approach, used in many microprocessors, is to use one or more programmable logic array (PLA) or read-only memory (ROM) (instead of combinational logic) mainly for instruction decoding, and let a simple state machine (without much, or any, microcode) do most of the sequencing. The MOS Technology 6502 is an example of a microprocessor using a PLA for instruction decode and sequencing. The PLA is visible in photomicrographs of the chip, and its operation can be seen in the transistor-level simulation.

Microprogramming is still used in modern CPU designs. In some cases, after the microcode is debugged in simulation, logic functions are substituted for the control store. Logic functions are often faster and less expensive than the equivalent microprogram memory.

===Benefits===
A processor&#x27;s microprograms operate on a more primitive, totally different, and much more hardware-oriented architecture than the assembly instructions visible to normal programmers. In coordination with the hardware, the microcode implements the programmer-visible architecture. The underlying hardware need not have a fixed relationship to the visible architecture. This makes it easier to implement a given instruction set architecture on a wide variety of underlying hardware micro-architectures.

The IBM System/360 has a 32-bit architecture with 16 general-purpose registers, but most of the System/360 implementations use hardware that implements a much simpler underlying microarchitecture; for example, the System/360 Model 30 has 8-bit data paths to the arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and main memory and implemented the general-purpose registers in a special unit of higher-speed core memory, and the System/360 Model 40 has 8-bit data paths to the ALU and 16-bit data paths to main memory and also implemented the general-purpose registers in a special unit of higher-speed core memory. The Model 50 has full 32-bit data paths and implements the general-purpose registers in a special unit of higher-speed core memory. The Model 65 through the Model 195 have larger data paths and implement the general-purpose registers in faster transistor circuits. In this way, microprogramming enabled IBM to design many System/360 models with substantially different hardware and spanning a wide range of cost and performance, while making them all architecturally compatible. This dramatically reduces the number of unique system software programs that must be written for each model.

A similar approach was used by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in their VAX family of computers. As a result, different VAX processors use different microarchitectures, yet the programmer-visible architecture does not change.

Microprogramming also reduces the cost of field changes to correct defects (bugs) in the processor; a bug can often be fixed by replacing a portion of the microprogram rather than by changes being made to hardware logic and wiring.

==History==
===Early examples===
In 1947, the design of the MIT Whirlwind introduced the concept of a control store as a way to simplify computer design and move beyond &quot;ad hoc&quot; methods. The control store is a diode matrix: a two-dimensional lattice, where one dimension accepts &quot;control time pulses&quot; from the CPU&#x27;s internal clock, and the other connects to control signals on gates and other circuits. A &quot;pulse distributor&quot; takes the pulses generated by the CPU clock and breaks them up into eight separate time pulses, each of which activates a different row of the lattice. When the row is activated, it activates the control signals connected to it.

In 1951, Maurice Wilkes enhanced this concept by adding &quot;conditional execution&quot;, a concept akin to a conditional in computer software. His initial implementation consisted of a pair of matrices: the first one generated signals in the manner of the Whirlwind control store, while the second matrix selected which row of signals (the microprogram instruction word, so to speak) to invoke on the next cycle. Conditionals were implemented by providing a way that a single line in the control store could choose from alternatives in the second matrix. This made the control signals conditional on the detected internal signal. Wilkes coined the term &quot;microprogramming&quot; to describe this feature and distinguish it from a simple control store.

===The 360===

Microcode remained relatively rare in computer design as the cost of the ROM needed to store the code was not significantly different than using a custom control store. This changed through the early 1960s with the introduction of mass-produced core memory and core rope, which was far less expensive than dedicated logic based on diode arrays or similar solutions. The first to take real advantage of this was IBM in their 1964 System/360 series. This allowed the machines to have a very complex instruction set, including operations that matched high-level language constructs like formatting binary values as decimal strings, storing the complex series of instructions needed for this task in low cost memory.

But the real value in the 360 line was that one could build a series of machines that were completely different internally, yet run the same ISA. For a low-end machine, one might use an 8-bit ALU that requires multiple cycles to complete a single 32-bit addition, while a higher end machine might have a full 32-bit ALU that performs the same addition in a single cycle. These differences could be implemented in control logic, but the cost of implementing a completely different decoder for each machine would be prohibitive. Using microcode meant all that changed was the code in the ROM. For instance, one machine might include a floating point unit and thus its microcode for multiplying two numbers might be only a few lines line, whereas on the same machine without the FPU this would be a program that did the same using multiple additions, and all that changed was the ROM.

The outcome of this design was that customers could use a low-end model of the family to develop their software, knowing that if more performance was ever needed, they could move to a faster version and nothing else would change. This lowered the barrier to entry and the 360 was a runaway success. By the end of the decade, the use of microcode was &quot;de rigueur&quot; across the mainframe industry.

===Moving up the line===

Early minicomputers were far too simple to require microcode, and were more similar to earlier mainframes in terms of their instruction sets and the way they were decoded. But it was not long before their designers began using more powerful integrated circuits that allowed for more complex ISAs. By the mid-1970s, most new minicomputers and superminicomputers were using microcode as well, such as most models of the PDP-11 and, most notably, most models of the VAX, which included high-level instruction not unlike those found in the 360.

The same basic evolution occurred with microprocessors as well. Early designs were extremely simple, and even the more powerful 8-bit designs of the mid-1970s like the Zilog Z80 had instruction sets that were simple enough to be implemented in dedicated logic. By this time, the control logic could be patterned into the same die as the CPU, making the difference in cost between ROM and logic less of an issue. However, it was not long before these companies were also facing the problem of introducing higher-performance designs but still wanting to offer backward compatibility. Among early examples of microcode in micros was the Intel 8086.

Among the ultimate implementations of microcode in microprocessors is the Motorola 68000. This offered a highly orthogonal instruction set with a wide variety of addressing modes, all implemented in microcode. This did not come without cost, according to early articles, about 20% of the chip&#x27;s surface area (and thus cost) is the microcode system and of the systems 68,000 transistors were part of the microcode system.

===RISC enters===
While companies continued to compete on the complexity of their instruction sets, and the use of microcode to implement these was unquestioned, in the mid-1970s an internal project in IBM was raising serious questions about the entire concept. As part of a project to develop a high-performance all-digital telephone switch, a team led by John Cocke began examining huge volumes of performance data from their customer&#x27;s 360 (and System/370) programs. This led them to notice a curious pattern: when the ISA presented multiple versions of an instruction, the compiler almost always used the simplest one, instead of the one most directly representing the code. They learned that this was because those instructions were always implemented in hardware, and thus run the fastest. Using the other instruction might offer higher performance on some machines, but there was no way to know what machine they were running on. This defeated the purpose of using microcode in the first place, which was to hide these distinctions.

The team came to a radical conclusion: &quot;Imposing microcode between a computer and its users imposes an expensive overhead in performing the most frequently executed instructions.&quot;

The result of this discovery was what is today known as the RISC concept. The complex microcode engine and its associated ROM is reduced or eliminated completely, and those circuits instead dedicated to things like additional registers or a wider ALU, which increases the performance of every program. When complex sequences of instructions are needed, this is left to the compiler, which is the entire purpose of using a compiler in the first place. The basic concept was soon picked up by university researchers in California, where simulations suggested such designs would trivially outperform even the fastest conventional designs. It was one such project, at the University of California, Berkeley, that introduced the term RISC.

The industry responded to the concept of RISC with both confusion and hostility, including a famous dismissive article by the VAX team at Digital. A major point of contention was that implementing the instructions outside of the processor meant it would spend much more time reading those instructions from memory, thereby slowing overall performance no matter how fast the CPU itself ran. Proponents pointed out that simulations clearly showed the number of instructions was not much greater, especially when considering compiled code.

The debate raged until the first commercial RISC designs emerged in the second half of the 1980s, which easily outperformed the most complex designs from other companies. By the late 1980s it was over; even DEC was abandoning microcode for their DEC Alpha designs, and CISC processors switched to using hardwired circuitry, rather than microcode, to perform many functions. For example, the Intel 80486 uses hardwired circuitry to fetch and decode instructions, using microcode only to execute instructions; register-register move and arithmetic instructions required only one microinstruction, allowing them to be completed in one clock cycle. The Pentium Pro&#x27;s fetch and decode hardware fetches instructions and decodes them into series of micro-operations that are passed on to the execution unit, which schedules and executes the micro-operations, possibly doing so out-of-order. Complex instructions are implemented by microcode that consists of predefined sequences of micro-operations.

Some processor designs use machine code that runs in a special mode, with special instructions, available only in that mode, that have access to processor-dependent hardware, to implement some low-level features of the instruction set. The DEC Alpha, a pure RISC design, used PALcode to implement features such as translation lookaside buffer (TLB) miss handling and interrupt handling, as well as providing, for Alpha-based systems running OpenVMS, instructions requiring interlocked memory access that are similar to instructions provided by the VAX architecture. CMOS IBM System/390 CPUs, starting with the G4 processor, and z/Architecture CPUs use millicode to implement some instructions.

==Examples==
* The Analytical engine envisioned by Charles Babbage uses pegs inserted into rotating drums to store its internal procedures.
* The EMIDEC 1100 reputedly uses a hard-wired control store consisting of wires threaded through ferrite cores, known as &quot;the laces&quot;.
* Most models of the IBM System/360 series are microprogrammed:
** The Model 25 is unique among System/360 models in using the top 16 K bytes of core storage to hold the control storage for the microprogram. The 2025 uses a 16-bit microarchitecture with seven control words (or microinstructions). After system maintenance or when changing operating mode, the microcode is loaded from the card reader, tape, or other device. The IBM 1410 emulation for this model is loaded this way.
** The Model 30 uses an 8-bit microarchitecture with only a few hardware registers; everything that the programmer saw is emulated by the microprogram. The microcode for this model is also held on special punched cards, which are stored inside the machine in a dedicated reader per card, called &quot;CROS&quot; units (Capacitor Read-Only Storage). Another CROS unit is added for machines ordered with 1401/1440/1460 emulation and for machines ordered with 1620 emulation.
** The Model 40 uses 56-bit control words. The 2040 box implements both the System/360 main processor and the multiplex channel (the I/O processor). This model uses &quot;TROS&quot; dedicated readers similar to &quot;CROS&quot; units, but with an inductive pickup (Transformer Read-only Store).
** The Model 50 has two internal datapaths which operated in parallel: a 32-bit datapath used for arithmetic operations, and an 8-bit data path used in some logical operations. The control store uses 90-bit microinstructions.
** The Model 85 has separate instruction fetch (I-unit) and execution (E-unit) to provide high performance. The I-unit is hardware controlled. The E-unit is microprogrammed; the control words are 108 bits wide on a basic 360/85 and wider if an emulator feature is installed.
* The NCR 315 is microprogrammed with hand wired ferrite cores (a ROM) pulsed by a sequencer with conditional execution. Wires routed through the cores are enabled for various data and logic elements in the processor.
* The Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-9 processor, KL10 and KS10 PDP-10 processors, and PDP-11 processors with the exception of the PDP-11/20, are microprogrammed.
* Most Data General Eclipse minicomputers are microprogrammed. The task of writing microcode for the Eclipse MV/8000 is detailed in the Pulitzer Prize-winning book titled &quot;The Soul of a New Machine&quot;.
* Many systems from Burroughs are microprogrammed:
:* The B700 &quot;microprocessor&quot; execute application-level opcodes using sequences of 16-bit microinstructions stored in main memory; each of these is either a register-load operation or mapped to a single 56-bit &quot;nanocode&quot; instruction stored in read-only memory. This allows comparatively simple hardware to act either as a mainframe peripheral controller or to be packaged as a standalone computer.
:* The B1700 is implemented with radically different hardware including bit-addressable main memory but has a similar multi-layer organisation. The operating system preloads the interpreter for whatever language is required. These interpreters present different virtual machines for COBOL, Fortran, etc.
* Microdata produced computers in which the microcode is accessible to the user; this allows the creation of custom assembler level instructions. Microdata&#x27;s Reality operating system design makes extensive use of this capability.
* The Xerox Alto workstation used a microcoded design but, unlike many computers, the microcode engine is not hidden from the programmer in a layered design. Applications take advantage of this to accelerate performance.
* The IBM System/38 is described as having both horizontal and vertical microcode. In practice, the processor implements an instruction set architecture named the &quot;Internal Microprogrammed Interface&quot; (IMPI) using a horizontal microcode format. The so-called vertical microcode layer implements the System/38&#x27;s hardware-independent Machine Interface (MI) instruction set by translating MI code to IMPI code and executing it. Prior to the introduction of the IBM RS64 processor line, early IBM AS/400 systems used the same architecture. 
* The Nintendo 64&#x27;s Reality Coprocessor (RCP), which serves as the console&#x27;s graphics processing unit and audio processor, utilizes microcode; it is possible to implement new effects or tweak the processor to achieve the desired output. Some notable examples of custom RCP microcode include the high-resolution graphics, particle engines, and unlimited draw distances found in Factor 5&#x27;s &quot;Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine&quot;, &quot;Star Wars: Rogue Squadron&quot;, and &quot;Star Wars: Battle for Naboo&quot;; and the full motion video playback found in Angel Studios&#x27; &quot;Resident Evil 2&quot;.

* The VU0 and VU1 vector units in the Sony PlayStation 2 are microprogrammable; in fact, VU1 is only accessible via microcode for the first several generations of the SDK.
* The MicroCore Labs MCL86 , MCL51 and MCL65 are examples of highly encoded &quot;vertical&quot; microsequencer implementations of the Intel 8086/8088, 8051, and MOS 6502.
* The Digital Scientific Corp. Meta 4 Series 16 computer system was a user-microprogammable system first available in 1970. The microcode had a primarily vertical style with 32-bit microinstructions. The instructions were stored on replaceable program boards with a grid of bit positions. One (1) bits were represented by small metal squares that were sensed by amplifiers, zero (0) bits by the absence of the squares. The system could be configured with up to 4K 16-bit words of microstore. One of Digital Scientific&#x27;s products was an emulator for the IBM 1130.
* The MCP-1600 is a microprocessor made by Western Digital from 1975 through the early 1980s. It was used to implement three different computer architectures in microcode: the Pascal MicroEngine, the WD16, and the DEC LSI-11, a cost-reduced PDP-11.
* Earlier x86 processors are fully microcoded. x86 processors implemented patchable microcode (patch by BIOS or operating system) since Intel P6 microarchitecture and AMD K7 microarchitecture. Such processors implemented microcode ROM and microcode SRAM in their silicon.
* Many video cards and network interface controllers implement patchable microcode (patch by operating system). Such microcode is patched to device&#x27;s SRAM or DRAM, for example, GDDR SDRAM of a video card.

==Implementation==
Each microinstruction in a microprogram provides the bits that control the functional elements that internally compose a CPU. The advantage over a hard-wired CPU is that internal CPU control becomes a specialized form of a computer program. Microcode thus transforms a complex electronic design challenge (the control of a CPU) into a less complex programming challenge. To take advantage of this, a CPU is divided into several parts:
* An I-unit may decode instructions in hardware and determine the microcode address for processing the instruction in parallel with the E-unit.
* A microsequencer picks the next word of the control store. A sequencer is mostly a counter, but usually also has some way to jump to a different part of the control store depending on some data, usually data from the instruction register and always some part of the control store. The simplest sequencer is just a register loaded from a few bits of the control store.
* A register set is a fast memory containing the data of the central processing unit. It may include registers visible to application programs, such as general-purpose registers and the program counter, and may also include other registers that are not easily accessible to the application programmer. Often the register set is a triple-ported register file; that is, two registers can be read, and a third written at the same time.
* An arithmetic and logic unit performs calculations, usually addition, logical negation, a right shift, and logical AND. It often performs other functions, as well.

There may also be a memory address register and a memory data register, used to access the main computer storage. Together, these elements form an &quot;execution unit&quot;. Most modern CPUs have several execution units. Even simple computers usually have one unit to read and write memory, and another to execute user code. These elements could often be brought together as a single chip. This chip comes in a fixed width that would form a &quot;slice&quot; through the execution unit. These are known as &quot;bit slice&quot; chips. The AMD Am2900 family is one of the best known examples of bit slice elements. The parts of the execution units and the whole execution units are interconnected by a bundle of wires called a bus.

Programmers develop microprograms, using basic software tools. A microassembler allows a programmer to define the table of bits symbolically. Because of its close relationship to the underlying architecture, &quot;microcode has several properties that make it difficult to generate using a compiler.&quot; A simulator program is intended to execute the bits in the same way as the electronics, and allows much more freedom to debug the microprogram. After the microprogram is finalized, and extensively tested, it is sometimes used as the input to a computer program that constructs logic to produce the same data. This program is similar to those used to optimize a programmable logic array. Even without fully optimal logic, heuristically optimized logic can vastly reduce the number of transistors from the number needed for a read-only memory (ROM) control store. This reduces the cost to produce, and the electricity used by, a CPU.

Microcode can be characterized as &quot;horizontal&quot; or &quot;vertical&quot;, referring primarily to whether each microinstruction controls CPU elements with little or no decoding (horizontal microcode) or requires extensive decoding by combinatorial logic before doing so (vertical microcode). Consequently, each horizontal microinstruction is wider (contains more bits) and occupies more storage space than a vertical microinstruction.

===Horizontal microcode===
&quot;Horizontal microcode has several discrete micro-operations that are combined in a single microinstruction for simultaneous operation.&quot; Horizontal microcode is typically contained in a fairly wide control store; it is not uncommon for each word to be 108 bits or more. On each tick of a sequencer clock a microcode word is read, decoded, and used to control the functional elements that make up the CPU.

In a typical implementation a horizontal microprogram word comprises fairly tightly defined groups of bits. For example, one simple arrangement might be:
For this type of micromachine to implement a JUMP instruction with the address following the opcode, the microcode might require two clock ticks. The engineer designing it would write microassembler source code looking something like this:

For each tick it is common to find that only some portions of the CPU are used, with the remaining groups of bits in the microinstruction being no-ops. With careful design of hardware and microcode, this property can be exploited to parallelise operations that use different areas of the CPU; for example, in the case above, the ALU is not required during the first tick, so it could potentially be used to complete an earlier arithmetic instruction.

===Vertical microcode===
In vertical microcode, each microinstruction is significantly encoded, that is, the bit fields generally pass through intermediate combinatory logic that, in turn, generates the control and sequencing signals for internal CPU elements (ALU, registers, etc.). This is in contrast with horizontal microcode, in which the bit fields either directly produce the control and sequencing signals or are only minimally encoded. Consequently, vertical microcode requires smaller instruction lengths and less storage, but requires more time to decode, resulting in a slower CPU clock.

Some vertical microcode is just the assembly language of a simple conventional computer that is emulating a more complex computer. Some processors, such as DEC Alpha processors and the CMOS microprocessors on later IBM mainframes System/390 and z/Architecture, use machine code, running in a special mode that gives it access to special instructions, special registers, and other hardware resources unavailable to regular machine code, to implement some instructions and other functions, such as page table walks on Alpha processors. This is called PALcode on Alpha processors and millicode on IBM mainframe processors.

Another form of vertical microcode has two fields:
The &quot;field select&quot; selects which part of the CPU will be controlled by this word of the control store. The &quot;field value&quot; controls that part of the CPU. With this type of microcode, a designer explicitly chooses to make a slower CPU to save money by reducing the unused bits in the control store; however, the reduced complexity may increase the CPU&#x27;s clock frequency, which lessens the effect of an increased number of cycles per instruction.

As transistors grew cheaper, horizontal microcode came to dominate the design of CPUs using microcode, with vertical microcode being used less often.

When both vertical and horizontal microcode are used, the horizontal microcode may be referred to as &quot;nanocode&quot; or &quot;picocode&quot;.

==Writable control store==
A few computers were built using &quot;writable microcode&quot;. In this design, rather than storing the microcode in ROM or hard-wired logic, the microcode is stored in a RAM called a &quot;writable control store&quot; or &quot;WCS&quot;. Such a computer is sometimes called a &quot;writable instruction set computer&quot; (WISC).

Many experimental prototype computers use writable control stores; there are also commercial machines that use writable microcode, such as the Burroughs Small Systems, early Xerox workstations, the DEC VAX 8800 (&quot;Nautilus&quot;) family, the Symbolics L- and G-machines, a number of IBM System/360 and System/370 implementations, some DEC PDP-10 machines, and the Data General Eclipse MV/8000.

The IBM System/370 includes a facility called &quot;Initial-Microprogram Load&quot; (&quot;IML&quot; or &quot;IMPL&quot;) that can be invoked from the console, as part of &quot;power-on reset&quot; (&quot;POR&quot;) or from another processor in a tightly coupled multiprocessor complex.

Some commercial machines, for example IBM 360/85, have both a read-only storage and a writable control store for microcode.

WCS offers several advantages including the ease of patching the microprogram and, for certain hardware generations, faster access than ROMs can provide. User-programmable WCS allows the user to optimize the machine for specific purposes.

Starting with the Pentium Pro in 1995, several x86 CPUs have writable Intel Microcode. This, for example, has allowed bugs in the Intel Core 2 and Intel Xeon microcodes to be fixed by patching their microprograms, rather than requiring the entire chips to be replaced. A second prominent example is the set of microcode patches that Intel offered for some of their processor architectures of up to 10 years in age, in a bid to counter the security vulnerabilities discovered in their designs – Spectre and Meltdown – which went public at the start of 2018. A microcode update can be installed by Linux, FreeBSD, Microsoft Windows, or the motherboard BIOS.

Some machines offer user-programmable writable control stores as an option, including the HP 2100, DEC PDP-11/60, TI-990/12, and Varian Data Machines V-70 series minicomputers.

==Comparison to VLIW and RISC==
The design trend toward heavily microcoded processors with complex instructions began in the early 1960s and continued until roughly the mid-1980s. At that point the RISC design philosophy started becoming more prominent.

A CPU that uses microcode generally takes several clock cycles to execute a single instruction, one clock cycle for each step in the microprogram for that instruction. Some CISC processors include instructions that can take a very long time to execute. Such variations interfere with both interrupt latency and, what is far more important in modern systems, pipelining.

When designing a new processor, a hardwired control RISC has the following advantages over microcoded CISC:
* Programming has largely moved away from assembly level, so it&#x27;s no longer worthwhile to provide complex instructions for productivity reasons.
* Simpler instruction sets allow direct execution by hardware, avoiding the performance penalty of microcoded execution.
* Analysis shows complex instructions are rarely used, hence the machine resources devoted to them are largely wasted.
* The machine resources devoted to rarely used complex instructions are better used for expediting performance of simpler, commonly used instructions.
* Complex microcoded instructions may require many clock cycles that vary, and are difficult to pipeline for increased performance.

There are counterpoints as well:
* The complex instructions in heavily microcoded implementations may not take much extra machine resources, except for microcode space. For example, the same ALU is often used to calculate an effective address and to compute the result from the operands, e.g., the original Z80, 8086, and others.
* The simpler non-RISC instructions (i.e., involving direct memory operands) are frequently used by modern compilers. Even immediate to stack (i.e., memory result) arithmetic operations are commonly employed. Although such memory operations, often with varying length encodings, are more difficult to pipeline, it is still fully feasible to do so - clearly exemplified by the i486, AMD K5, Cyrix 6x86, Motorola 68040, etc.
* Non-RISC instructions inherently perform more work per instruction (on average), and are also normally highly encoded, so they enable smaller overall size of the same program, and thus better use of limited cache memories.

Many RISC and VLIW processors are designed to execute every instruction (as long as it is in the cache) in a single cycle. This is very similar to the way CPUs with microcode execute one microinstruction per cycle. VLIW processors have instructions that behave similarly to very wide horizontal microcode, although typically without such fine-grained control over the hardware as provided by microcode. RISC instructions are sometimes similar to the narrow vertical microcode.

Microcode has been popular in application-specific processors such as network processors, digital signal processors, channel controllers, disk controllers, network interface controllers, flash memory controllers, graphics processing units, and in other hardware.

==Micro-operations==
Modern CISC implementations, such as the x86 family starting with the NexGen Nx586, Intel Pentium Pro, and AMD K5. decode instructions into dynamically buffered micro-operations with an instruction encoding similar to RISC or traditional microcode. A hardwired instruction decode unit directly emits microoperations for common x86 instructions, but falls back to a more traditional microcode ROM containing microoperations for more complex or rarely used instructions.

For example, an x86 might look up microoperations from microcode to handle complex multistep operations such as loop or string instructions, floating-point unit transcendental functions or unusual values such as denormal numbers, and special-purpose instructions such as CPUID.

==See also==
* Address generation unit (AGU)
* CPU design
* Finite-state machine (FSM)
* Firmware
* Floating-point unit (FPU)
* Pentium FDIV bug
* Instruction pipeline
* Microsequencer
* MikroSim
* Millicode
* Superscalar
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Writable Instruction Set Computer
* Capacitor Read-only Store
* Transformer Read-only Store
* A Brief History of Microprogramming
* Intel processor microcode security update (fixes the issues when running 32-bit virtual machines in PAE mode)
* Notes on Intel Microcode Updates, March 2013, by Ben Hawkes, archived from the original on September 7, 2015
* Hole seen in Intel&#x27;s bug-busting feature, &quot;EE Times&quot;, 2002, by Alexander Wolfe, archived from the original on March 9, 2003
* Opteron Exposed: Reverse Engineering AMD K8 Microcode Updates, July 26, 2004
* WepSIM: An Online Interactive Educational Simulator Integrating Microdesign, Microprogramming, and Assembly Language Programming, July 26, 2022</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1303814" start="3" end="19" title="processor design" label="processor design"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="21" end="30" title="Microcode" label="microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="84" end="107" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="150" end="178" title="instruction set architecture" label="instruction set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="212" end="224" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="356" end="376" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="396" end="414" title="digital processing" label="digital processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="458" end="463" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="468" end="471" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q676838" start="598" end="620" title="hardwired control unit" label="hardwired control unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="723" end="736" title="state machine" label="state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="869" end="880" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q259864" start="1329" end="1346" title="microarchitecture" label="microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="1384" end="1391" title="Emulator" label="emulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="1429" end="1433" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="1454" end="1468" title="execution unit" label="execution unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1665" end="1668" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="1673" end="1679" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="1743" end="1751" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="1890" end="1905" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="2188" end="2209" title="arithmetic logic unit" label="arithmetic logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="2490" end="2503" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="2780" end="2784" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="2888" end="2896" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="2904" end="2924" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="3409" end="3420" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="3683" end="3691" title="MOS 6502" label="MOS 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q766483" start="3857" end="3863" title="opcode" label="opcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="4046" end="4054" title="data bus" label="data bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q676838" start="4317" end="4329" title="control unit" label="control unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q593995" start="5095" end="5107" title="player piano" label="player piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="5960" end="5972" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q676838" start="6365" end="6377" title="control unit" label="control unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906555" start="6489" end="6497" title="VAX 9000" label="VAX 9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906554" start="6623" end="6631" title="VAX 8800" label="VAX 8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="6719" end="6736" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="6838" end="6860" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="6934" end="6952" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="7168" end="7184" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112217" start="7194" end="7218" title="programmable logic array" label="programmable logic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="7336" end="7363" title="static random-access memory" label="static random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="7374" end="7386" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q669106" start="7436" end="7449" title="control store" label="control store"/>
<link wikidata="Q891131" start="7518" end="7535" title="read–write memory" label="read–write memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="8098" end="8101" title="Arithmetic logic unit" label="ALU"/>
<link wikidata="Q232577" start="8185" end="8206" title="Two&amp;#x27;s complement" label="two&amp;#x27;s-complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="8460" end="8463" title="program counter" label="μPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319195" start="8643" end="8649" title="IBM System/360 Model 85" label="360/85"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="9052" end="9067" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q676838" start="9074" end="9083" title="hardwired control unit" label="hardwired"/>
<link wikidata="Q76505" start="9248" end="9267" title="combinational logic" label="combinational logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173245" start="9287" end="9297" title="sequential circuit" label="sequential"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="10091" end="10108" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="10443" end="10447" title="PL/I" label="PL/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407192" start="10521" end="10547" title="IBM Future Systems project" label="IBM Future Systems project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172222" start="10552" end="10564" title="Data General" label="Data General"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="10708" end="10729" title="Direct memory access" label="memory block transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146784" start="10731" end="10747" title="Prefetching" label="memory pre-fetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="10752" end="10769" title="multi-level cache" label="multi-level cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="11175" end="11178" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="11179" end="11189" title="System/360" label="System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="11194" end="11223" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="11224" end="11227" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189120" start="11322" end="11354" title="complex instruction set computer" label="complex instruction set computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="11399" end="11413" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112217" start="11438" end="11462" title="programmable logic array" label="programmable logic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="11472" end="11488" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="11657" end="11676" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="11851" end="11861" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386642" start="12882" end="12901" title="IBM System/360 Model 30" label="System/360 Model 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="13054" end="13065" title="Magnetic-core memory" label="core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088121" start="13075" end="13094" title="IBM System/360 Model 40" label="System/360 Model 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295720" start="13266" end="13274" title="IBM System/360 Model 50" label="Model 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="14158" end="14162" title="Computer bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358364" start="14287" end="14301" title="hardware logic" label="hardware logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413683" start="14375" end="14388" title="Whirlwind (computer)" label="MIT Whirlwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="14490" end="14496" title="ad hoc" label="ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q175831" start="14535" end="14547" title="diode matrix" label="diode matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q911691" start="14809" end="14818" title="CPU clock" label="CPU clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q62857" start="15014" end="15028" title="Maurice Wilkes" label="Maurice Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="15116" end="15127" title="Conditional (programming)" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="16023" end="16034" title="core memory" label="core memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170214" start="16039" end="16048" title="core rope" label="core rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="16189" end="16192" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="16207" end="16217" title="System/360" label="System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="17125" end="17144" title="floating point unit" label="floating point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="17812" end="17824" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="18047" end="18065" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205450" start="18148" end="18165" title="superminicomputer" label="superminicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="18224" end="18230" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="18269" end="18272" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="18387" end="18401" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="18516" end="18525" title="Zilog Z80" label="Zilog Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="18906" end="18928" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="18982" end="18992" title="Intel 8086" label="Intel 8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="19069" end="19083" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q205198" start="19107" end="19133" title="orthogonal instruction set" label="orthogonal instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q367183" start="19157" end="19172" title="addressing mode" label="addressing mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="19747" end="19763" title="telephone switch" label="telephone switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q92632" start="19779" end="19789" title="John Cocke (computer scientist)" label="John Cocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="19875" end="19885" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="20004" end="20012" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="20719" end="20723" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="21327" end="21361" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="22179" end="22188" title="DEC Alpha" label="DEC Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="22324" end="22335" title="Intel 80486" label="Intel 80486"/>
<link wikidata="Q628189" start="22582" end="22593" title="Pentium Pro" label="Pentium Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153762" start="22808" end="22820" title="out-of-order execution" label="out-of-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046152" start="23208" end="23215" title="PALcode" label="PALcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="23246" end="23274" title="translation lookaside buffer" label="translation lookaside buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="23373" end="23380" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="23480" end="23483" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361373" start="23503" end="23517" title="IBM System/390" label="IBM System/390"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062893" start="23560" end="23574" title="z/Architecture" label="z/Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155681" start="23584" end="23593" title="millicode" label="millicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q485257" start="23646" end="23663" title="Analytical engine" label="Analytical engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="23678" end="23693" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="23699" end="23732" title="Read-only memory" label="pegs inserted into rotating drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323502" start="23773" end="23784" title="EMIDEC 1100" label="EMIDEC 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q28315842" start="23982" end="23990" title="IBM System/360 Model 25" label="Model 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965629" start="24340" end="24348" title="IBM 1410" label="IBM 1410"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386642" start="24401" end="24409" title="IBM 2030" label="Model 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088121" start="24874" end="24882" title="IBM System/360 Model 40" label="Model 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295720" start="25169" end="25177" title="IBM System/360 Model 50" label="Model 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319195" start="25395" end="25403" title="IBM System/360 Model 85" label="Model 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070977" start="25669" end="25676" title="NCR 315" label="NCR 315"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="25729" end="25732" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q40887508" start="25917" end="25922" title="PDP-9" label="PDP-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="25948" end="25954" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="25971" end="25977" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227175" start="26054" end="26074" title="Data General Eclipse" label="Data General Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702951" start="26148" end="26163" title="Data General Eclipse MV/8000" label="Eclipse MV/8000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765374" start="26224" end="26249" title="The Soul of a New Machine" label="The Soul of a New Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="26277" end="26286" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000483" start="26732" end="26737" title="B1700" label="B1700"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="27008" end="27013" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="27015" end="27022" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327637" start="27031" end="27040" title="Microdata Corporation" label="Microdata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382499" start="27192" end="27199" title="Pick operating system" label="Reality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27270" end="27280" title="Xerox Alto#Architecture" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q466308" start="27491" end="27504" title="IBM System/38" label="IBM System/38"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27533" end="27566" title="IBM System/38#Microcode" label="horizontal and vertical microcode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27831" end="27848" title="IBM System/38#Machine Interface" label="Machine Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q925376" start="27957" end="27965" title="IBM RS64" label="IBM RS64"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137400" start="27988" end="27998" title="IBM AS/400" label="IBM AS/400"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="28042" end="28053" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="28061" end="28080" title="Reality Coprocessor" label="Reality Coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="28123" end="28147" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q699634" start="28423" end="28431" title="Factor 5" label="Factor 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527683" start="28445" end="28483" title="Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine" label="Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28497" end="28522" title="Star Wars: Rogue Squadron" label="Star Wars: Rogue Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28540" end="28567" title="Star Wars: Battle for Naboo" label="Star Wars: Battle for Naboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="28583" end="28600" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q959329" start="28619" end="28632" title="Rockstar San Diego" label="Angel Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q733992" start="28645" end="28660" title="Resident Evil 2" label="Resident Evil 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="28707" end="28711" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="28712" end="28725" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146513" start="29571" end="29579" title="IBM 1130" label="IBM 1130"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019178" start="29587" end="29595" title="MCP-1600" label="MCP-1600"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="29601" end="29615" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="29624" end="29639" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141703" start="29757" end="29775" title="Pascal MicroEngine" label="Pascal MicroEngine"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827944" start="29781" end="29785" title="WD16" label="WD16"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="29795" end="29798" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29799" end="29805" title="PDP-11#LSI-11" label="LSI-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="29840" end="29843" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q669106" start="29904" end="29923" title="patchable microcode" label="patchable microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="29934" end="29938" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="29942" end="29958" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364041" start="29966" end="29992" title="P6 (microarchitecture)" label="Intel P6 microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q390562" start="29997" end="30021" title="Athlon" label="AMD K7 microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308" start="30109" end="30119" title="video card" label="video card"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="30125" end="30153" title="network interface controller" label="network interface controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="30257" end="30261" title="Static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="30265" end="30269" title="DRAM" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543359" start="30284" end="30294" title="GDDR SDRAM" label="GDDR SDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041767" start="30772" end="30778" title="I-unit" label="I-unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="30903" end="30909" title="Execution unit" label="E-unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q175848" start="30915" end="30929" title="microsequencer" label="microsequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735305" start="31130" end="31150" title="instruction register" label="instruction register"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="31285" end="31293" title="processor register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="31433" end="31458" title="general-purpose registers" label="general-purpose registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="31467" end="31482" title="program counter" label="program counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180944" start="31625" end="31638" title="register file" label="register file"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="31719" end="31744" title="arithmetic and logic unit" label="arithmetic and logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q583538" start="31901" end="31924" title="memory address register" label="memory address register"/>
<link wikidata="Q183380" start="31931" end="31951" title="memory data register" label="memory data register"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="31977" end="31993" title="computer storage" label="computer storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="32034" end="32048" title="execution unit" label="execution unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="32068" end="32072" title="Central processing unit" label="CPUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q878691" start="32394" end="32403" title="bit slicing" label="bit slice"/>
<link wikidata="Q291114" start="32421" end="32431" title="AMD Am2900" label="AMD Am2900"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="32608" end="32611" title="Computer bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590911" start="32679" end="32693" title="microassembler" label="microassembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="32922" end="32931" title="simulator" label="simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063837" start="33281" end="33305" title="programmable logic device" label="programmable logic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="33444" end="33460" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76505" start="33794" end="33813" title="combinatorial logic" label="combinatorial logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="36042" end="36051" title="DEC Alpha" label="DEC Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361373" start="36116" end="36126" title="System/390" label="System/390"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062893" start="36131" end="36145" title="z/Architecture" label="z/Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046152" start="36435" end="36442" title="PALcode" label="PALcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155681" start="36467" end="36476" title="millicode" label="millicode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37728" end="37751" title="#Writable control store" label="writable control stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000483" start="37829" end="37852" title="Burroughs Small Systems" label="Burroughs Small Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="37860" end="37865" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="37884" end="37887" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="37888" end="37891" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034213" start="37932" end="37941" title="Symbolics" label="Symbolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586139" start="37992" end="38002" title="System/370" label="System/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="38029" end="38035" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702951" start="38054" end="38082" title="Data General Eclipse MV/8000" label="Data General Eclipse MV/8000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38262" end="38276" title="Power-on reset#Power-on reset on IBM mainframes" label="power-on reset"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="38332" end="38347" title="tightly coupled system" label="tightly coupled"/>
<link wikidata="Q846651" start="38348" end="38362" title="multiprocessor" label="multiprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q628189" start="38756" end="38767" title="Pentium Pro" label="Pentium Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="38785" end="38788" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740683" start="38808" end="38823" title="Intel Microcode" label="Intel Microcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q216334" start="38868" end="38880" title="Intel Core 2" label="Intel Core 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="38891" end="38895" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47037422" start="39232" end="39239" title="Spectre (security vulnerability)" label="Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47036859" start="39244" end="39252" title="Meltdown (security vulnerability)" label="Meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="39341" end="39348" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616633" start="39485" end="39492" title="HP 2100" label="HP 2100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="39498" end="39507" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11/60"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670322" start="39509" end="39515" title="TI-990" label="TI-990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915750" start="39524" end="39544" title="Varian Data Machines" label="Varian Data Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="39557" end="39569" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="39771" end="39775" title="RISC" label="RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189120" start="40001" end="40005" title="Complex instruction set computer" label="CISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160861" start="40117" end="40134" title="interrupt latency" label="interrupt latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="40186" end="40196" title="Instruction pipelining" label="pipelining"/>
<link wikidata="Q676838" start="40233" end="40250" title="hardwired control" label="hardwired control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192422" start="40944" end="40952" title="pipeline (computing)" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="41288" end="41291" title="Z80" label="Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="41293" end="41297" title="8086" label="8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q719375" start="41378" end="41385" title="operand" label="operand"/>
<link wikidata="Q213423" start="41687" end="41691" title="i486" label="i486"/>
<link wikidata="Q294988" start="41693" end="41699" title="AMD K5" label="AMD K5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148844" start="41701" end="41711" title="Cyrix 6x86" label="Cyrix 6x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q674007" start="41713" end="41727" title="Motorola 68040" label="Motorola 68040"/>
<link wikidata="Q249743" start="41974" end="41978" title="Very long instruction word" label="VLIW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755335" start="42508" end="42525" title="network processor" label="network processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="42528" end="42552" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q844006" start="42555" end="42573" title="Channel I/O" label="channel controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q891128" start="42576" end="42591" title="disk controller" label="disk controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="42594" end="42622" title="network interface controller" label="network interface controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="42625" end="42648" title="flash memory controller" label="flash memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="42651" end="42675" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="42764" end="42767" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053326" start="42793" end="42799" title="NexGen" label="NexGen"/>
<link wikidata="Q628189" start="42813" end="42824" title="Pentium Pro" label="Pentium Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q294988" start="42830" end="42836" title="AMD K5" label="AMD K5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089782" start="42884" end="42899" title="micro-operation" label="micro-operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="43334" end="43353" title="floating-point unit" label="floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q864333" start="43354" end="43377" title="transcendental function" label="transcendental function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070094" start="43405" end="43420" title="denormal number" label="denormal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024235" start="43464" end="43469" title="CPUID" label="CPUID"/>
<link wikidata="Q19851307" start="43487" end="43510" title="Address generation unit" label="Address generation unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303814" start="43519" end="43529" title="CPU design" label="CPU design"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="43532" end="43552" title="Finite-state machine" label="Finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="43561" end="43569" title="Firmware" label="Firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="43572" end="43591" title="Floating-point unit" label="Floating-point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q668011" start="43600" end="43616" title="Pentium FDIV bug" label="Pentium FDIV bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="43619" end="43639" title="Instruction pipeline" label="Instruction pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q175848" start="43642" end="43656" title="Microsequencer" label="Microsequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933827" start="43659" end="43667" title="MikroSim" label="MikroSim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155681" start="43670" end="43679" title="Millicode" label="Millicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045706" start="43682" end="43693" title="Superscalar" label="Superscalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322946" start="44178" end="44186" title="EE Times" label="EE Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20003" wikidata="Q1052721" url="?curid=20003" title="Multitier architecture">
<text>In software engineering, multitier architecture (often referred to as &quot;n&quot;-tier architecture) is a client–server architecture in which presentation, application processing and data management functions are physically separated. The most widespread use of multitier architecture is the three-tier architecture (for example, Cisco&#x27;s Hierarchical internetworking model).

&quot;N&quot;-tier application architecture provides a model by which developers can create flexible and reusable applications. By segregating an application into tiers, developers acquire the option of modifying or adding a specific tier, instead of reworking the entire application. N-tier architecture is a good fit for small and simple applications because of its simplicity and low-cost. Also, it can be a good starting point when architectural requirements are not clear yet. A three-tier architecture is typically composed of a &quot;presentation&quot; tier, a &quot;logic&quot; tier, and a &quot;data&quot; tier.

While the concepts of layer and tier are often used interchangeably, one fairly common point of view is that there is indeed a difference. This view holds that a &quot;layer&quot; is a logical structuring mechanism for the conceptual elements that make up the software solution, while a &quot;tier&quot; is a physical structuring mechanism for the hardware elements that make up the system infrastructure. For example, a three-layer solution could easily be deployed on a single tier, such in the case of an extreme database-centric architecture called RDBMS-only architecture or in a personal workstation.

==Layers==
The &quot;Layers&quot; architectural pattern has been described in various publications.

===Common layers===
In a logical multilayer architecture for an information system with an object-oriented design, the following four are the most common:

* Presentation layer (a.k.a. UI layer, view layer, presentation tier in multitier architecture)
* Application layer (a.k.a. service layer or GRASP Controller Layer )
* Business layer (a.k.a. business logic layer (BLL), domain logic layer)
* Data access layer (a.k.a. persistence layer, logging, networking, and other services which are required to support a particular business layer)

If the application architecture has no explicit distinction between the business layer and the presentation layer (i.e., the presentation layer is considered part of the business layer), then a traditional client-server (two-tier) model has been implemented.

The more usual convention is that the application layer (or service layer) is considered a sublayer of the business layer, typically encapsulating the API definition surfacing the supported business functionality. The application/business layers can, in fact, be further subdivided to emphasize additional sublayers of distinct responsibility. For example, if the model–view–presenter pattern is used, the presenter sublayer might be used as an additional layer between the user interface layer and the business/application layer (as represented by the model sublayer).

Some also identify a separate layer called the business infrastructure layer (BI), located between the business layer(s) and the infrastructure layer(s). It is also sometimes called the &quot;low-level business layer&quot; or the &quot;business services layer&quot;. This layer is very general and can be used in several application tiers (e.g. a CurrencyConverter).

The infrastructure layer can be partitioned into different levels (high-level or low-level technical services). Developers often focus on the persistence (data access) capabilities of the infrastructure layer and therefore only talk about the persistence layer or the data access layer (instead of an infrastructure layer or technical services layer). In other words, the other kind of technical services is not always explicitly thought of as part of any particular layer.. The Data Access layer normally contains an object known as the Data Access Object (DAO).

A layer is on top of another, because it depends on it. Every layer can exist without the layers above it, and requires the layers below it to function. Another common view is that layers do not always strictly depend on only the adjacent layer below. For example, in a relaxed layered system (as opposed to a strict layered system) a layer can also depend on all the layers below it. The relaxed layered system has more couplings and subsequently it&#x27;s more difficult to change. Multi-tier architectures can use a hybrid approach so that some layers are strict while other layers are relaxed.

==Three-tier architecture==

Three-tier architecture is a client-server software architecture pattern in which the user interface (presentation), functional process logic (&quot;business rules&quot;), computer data storage and data access are developed and maintained as independent modules, most often on separate platforms. It was developed by John J. Donovan in Open Environment Corporation (OEC), a tools company he founded in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Apart from the usual advantages of modular software with well-defined interfaces, the three-tier architecture is intended to allow any of the three tiers to be upgraded or replaced independently in response to changes in requirements or technology. For example, a change of operating system in the &quot;presentation tier&quot; would only affect the user interface code.

Typically, the user interface runs on a desktop PC or workstation and uses a standard graphical user interface, functional process logic that may consist of one or more separate modules running on a workstation or application server, and an RDBMS on a database server or mainframe that contains the computer data storage logic. The middle tier may be multitiered itself (in which case the overall architecture is called an &quot;&quot;n&quot;-tier architecture&quot;).

; Presentation tier
: This is the topmost level of the application. The presentation tier displays information related to such services as browsing merchandise, purchasing and shopping cart contents. It communicates with other tiers by which it puts out the results to the browser/client tier and all other tiers in the network. In simple terms, it is a layer that users can access directly (such as a web page, or an operating system&#x27;s GUI).
; Application tier (business logic, logic tier, or middle tier)
: The logical tier is pulled out from the presentation tier and, as its layer, it controls an application’s functionality by performing detailed processing.
; Data tier
: The data tier includes the data persistence mechanisms (database servers, file shares, etc.) and the data access layer that encapsulates the persistence mechanisms and exposes the data. The data access layer should provide an API to the application tier that exposes methods of managing the stored data without exposing or creating dependencies on the data storage mechanisms. Avoiding dependencies on the storage mechanisms allows for updates or changes without the application tier clients being affected by or even aware of the change. As with the separation of any tier, there are costs for implementation and often costs to performance in exchange for improved scalability and maintainability.

===Web development usage===
In the web development field, three-tier is often used to refer to websites, commonly electronic commerce websites, which are built using three tiers:
# A front-end web server serving static content, and potentially some cached dynamic content. In web-based application, front end is the content rendered by the browser. The content may be static or generated dynamically.
# A middle dynamic content processing and generation level application server (e.g., Symfony, Spring, ASP.NET, Django, Rails, Node.js).
# A back-end database or data store, comprising both data sets and the database management system software that manages and provides access to the data.

===Other considerations===
Data transfer between tiers is part of the architecture. Protocols involved may include one or more of SNMP, CORBA, Java RMI, .NET Remoting, Windows Communication Foundation, sockets, UDP, web services or other standard or proprietary protocols. Often middleware is used to connect the separate tiers. Separate tiers often (but not necessarily) run on separate physical servers, and each tier may itself run on a cluster.

==Traceability==
The end-to-end traceability of data flows through &quot;n&quot;-tier systems is a challenging task which becomes more important when systems increase in complexity. The Application Response Measurement defines concepts and APIs for measuring performance and correlating transactions between tiers. 
Generally, the term &quot;tiers&quot; is used to describe physical distribution of components of a system on separate servers, computers, or networks (processing nodes). A three-tier architecture then will have three processing nodes. The term &quot;layers&quot; refers to a logical grouping of components which may or may not be physically located on one processing node.

==See also==
* Abstraction layer
* Client–server model
* Database-centric architecture
* Front-end and back-end
* Load balancing (computing)
* Monolithic application
* Open Services Architecture
* Rich web application
* Service layer
* Shearing layers
* Web application

==References==
==External links==
* Linux journal, &quot;Three Tier Architecture&quot;
* Microsoft Application Architecture Guide
* Example of free 3-tier system
* &quot;What Is the 3-Tier Architecture?&quot;
* Description of a concrete layered architecture for .NET/WPF Rich Client Applications</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="3" end="23" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052721" start="25" end="47" title="Multitier architecture" label="multitier architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052721" start="70" end="101" title="Multitier architecture" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;-tier architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="108" end="134" title="client–server architecture" label="client–server architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149776" start="185" end="200" title="data management" label="data management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052721" start="294" end="317" title="Multitier architecture" label="three-tier architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753103" start="345" end="379" title="Hierarchical internetworking model" label="Hierarchical internetworking model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193309" start="402" end="426" title="Applications architecture" label="application architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979154" start="438" end="443" title="model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204997" start="957" end="962" title="Business logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227234" start="987" end="991" title="Data access layer" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860294" start="1521" end="1550" title="database-centric architecture" label="database-centric architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052721" start="1558" end="1581" title="Multitier architecture" label="RDBMS-only architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q635346" start="1647" end="1668" title="architectural pattern" label="architectural pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237775" start="1805" end="1827" title="object-oriented design" label="object-oriented design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455759" start="1994" end="2007" title="Service layer pattern" label="service layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486676" start="2011" end="2016" title="GRASP (object-oriented design)" label="GRASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204997" start="2038" end="2052" title="Business logic" label="Business layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227234" start="2111" end="2128" title="Data access layer" label="Data access layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400808" start="2137" end="2154" title="persistence layer" label="persistence layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944207" start="2880" end="2900" title="model–view–presenter" label="model–view–presenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q741137" start="3993" end="4017" title="Data_access_object" label="Data Access Object (DAO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q635346" start="4691" end="4720" title="Software Architecture styles and patterns" label="software architecture pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="4734" end="4748" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204997" start="4765" end="4789" title="Business logic layer" label="functional process logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="4820" end="4841" title="computer data storage" label="computer data storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227230" start="4846" end="4857" title="data access" label="data access"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="4902" end="4909" title="modular programming" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="4934" end="4943" title="computing platform" label="platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241026" start="4965" end="4980" title="John J. Donovan" label="John J. Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="5050" end="5074" title="Cambridge, MA" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="5120" end="5128" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="5314" end="5324" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="5351" end="5367" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="5497" end="5499" title="personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="5503" end="5514" title="Workstation (computer hardware)" label="workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="5535" end="5559" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q71550" start="5663" end="5681" title="application server" label="application server"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="5690" end="5695" title="RDBMS" label="RDBMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q76320" start="5701" end="5716" title="database server" label="database server"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="5720" end="5729" title="Mainframe computer" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="6828" end="6831" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="7337" end="7352" title="web development" label="web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="7397" end="7404" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="7416" end="7435" title="electronic commerce" label="electronic commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="7495" end="7505" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q991293" start="7551" end="7557" title="web cache" label="cached"/>
<link wikidata="Q71550" start="7762" end="7780" title="application server" label="application server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322933" start="7788" end="7795" title="Symfony" label="Symfony"/>
<link wikidata="Q720314" start="7797" end="7803" title="Spring Framework" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q178817" start="7805" end="7812" title="ASP.NET" label="ASP.NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q842014" start="7814" end="7820" title="Django (web framework)" label="Django"/>
<link wikidata="Q190478" start="7822" end="7827" title="Ruby on Rails" label="Rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q756100" start="7829" end="7836" title="Node.js" label="Node.js"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="7852" end="7860" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q80428" start="7864" end="7874" title="data store" label="data store"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="7910" end="7936" title="database management system" label="database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184230" start="8123" end="8127" title="Simple Network Management Protocol" label="SNMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q691593" start="8129" end="8134" title="CORBA" label="CORBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q61902" start="8136" end="8144" title="Java RMI" label="Java RMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q158841" start="8146" end="8159" title=".NET Remoting" label=".NET Remoting"/>
<link wikidata="Q261595" start="8161" end="8193" title="Windows Communication Foundation" label="Windows Communication Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044498" start="8195" end="8202" title="Internet socket" label="sockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="8204" end="8207" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="UDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q193424" start="8209" end="8220" title="web service" label="web service"/>
<link wikidata="Q146923" start="8272" end="8282" title="Middleware (distributed applications)" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="8433" end="8440" title="Cluster (computing)" label="cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q621595" start="8629" end="8661" title="Application Response Measurement" label="Application Response Measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="8683" end="8686" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200992" start="9148" end="9165" title="Abstraction layer" label="Abstraction layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="9168" end="9187" title="Client–server model" label="Client–server model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860294" start="9190" end="9219" title="Database-centric architecture" label="Database-centric architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q620167" start="9222" end="9244" title="Front-end and back-end" label="Front-end and back-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q575614" start="9247" end="9273" title="Load balancing (computing)" label="Load balancing (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901701" start="9276" end="9298" title="Monolithic application" label="Monolithic application"/>
<link wikidata="Q430012" start="9301" end="9327" title="Open Services Architecture" label="Open Services Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q725485" start="9330" end="9350" title="Rich web application" label="Rich web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455767" start="9353" end="9366" title="Service layer" label="Service layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492199" start="9369" end="9384" title="Shearing layers" label="Shearing layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="9387" end="9402" title="Web application" label="Web application"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20016" wikidata="Q1863181" url="?curid=20016" title="Myrinet">
<text>Myrinet, ANSI/VITA 26-1998, is a high-speed local area networking system designed by the company Myricom to be used as an interconnect between multiple machines to form computer clusters.

==Description==
Myrinet was promoted as having lower protocol overhead than standards such as Ethernet, and therefore better throughput, less interference, and lower latency while using the host CPU. Although it can be used as a traditional networking system, Myrinet is often used directly by programs that &quot;know&quot; about it, thereby bypassing a call into the operating system.

Earlier versions of Myrinet used a variety of media and connectors:
* Generation 2 used copper media with DC-37 (Myrinet-LAN, M2L-* controllers and switches) or microribbon (Myrinet-SAN, M2M-*) connectors.
* Generation 3 used copper media with HSSDC (Myrinet-Serial, M3S-*) or microribbon (Myrinet-SAN, M3M-*) connectors, or fiber with LC-connectors (Myrinet-Fiber, M3F-*).

The later versions of Myrinet physically consist of two fibre optic cables, upstream and downstream, connected to the host computers with a single connector. Machines are connected via low-overhead routers and switches, as opposed to connecting one machine directly to another. Myrinet includes a number of fault-tolerance features, mostly backed by the switches. These include flow control, error control, and &quot;heartbeat&quot; monitoring on every link. The &quot;fourth-generation&quot; Myrinet, called Myri-10G, supported a 10 Gbit/s data rate and can use 10 Gigabit Ethernet on PHY, the physical layer (cables, connectors, distances, signaling). Myri-10G started shipping at the end of 2005.

Myrinet was approved in 1998 by the American National Standards Institute for use on the VMEbus as ANSI/VITA 26-1998. One of the earliest publications on Myrinet is a 1995 IEEE article.

=== Performance ===

Myrinet is a lightweight protocol with little overhead that allows it to operate with throughput close to the basic signaling speed of the physical layer. For supercomputing, the low latency of Myrinet is even more important than its throughput performance, since, according to Amdahl&#x27;s law, a high-performance parallel system tends to be bottlenecked by its slowest sequential process, which in all but the most embarrassingly parallel supercomputer workloads is often the latency of message transmission across the network.

=== Deployment ===
According to Myricom, 141 (28.2%) of the June 2005 TOP500 supercomputers used Myrinet technology. In the November 2005 TOP500, the number of supercomputers using Myrinet was down to 101 computers, or 20.2%, in November 2006, 79 (15.8%), and by November 2007, 18 (3.6%), a long way behind gigabit Ethernet at 54% and InfiniBand at 24.2%.

In the June 2014 TOP500 list, the number of supercomputers using Myrinet interconnect was 1 (0.2%).

In November, 2013, the assets of Myricom (including the Myrinet technology) were acquired by CSP Inc. In 2016, it was reported that Google had also offered to buy the company.

==See also==
*HIPPI
*InfiniBand
*List of device bandwidths 
*NUMAlink
*Quadrics (company)
*RapidIO
*Scalable Coherent Interconnect (SCI)

==References==
==External links==
* CSPI, current owner or Myrinet.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1863181" start="0" end="7" title="Myrinet" label="Myrinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="44" end="62" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="169" end="185" title="computer cluster" label="computer cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="283" end="291" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383412" start="314" end="324" title="throughput" label="throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="355" end="362" title="Latency (engineering)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="558" end="574" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="683" end="688" title="D-subminiature" label="DC-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="1008" end="1019" title="fibre optic" label="fibre optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="1150" end="1156" title="router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="1162" end="1168" title="Network switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474721" start="1515" end="1534" title="10 Gigabit Ethernet" label="10 Gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="1538" end="1541" title="PHY" label="PHY"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="1689" end="1726" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377238" start="1742" end="1748" title="VMEbus" label="VMEbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q460419" start="2139" end="2156" title="Amdahl&amp;#x27;s law" label="Amdahl&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369501" start="2279" end="2302" title="embarrassingly parallel" label="embarrassingly parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q633765" start="2463" end="2469" title="TOP500" label="TOP500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069084" start="2700" end="2716" title="gigabit Ethernet" label="gigabit Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q922437" start="2728" end="2738" title="InfiniBand" label="InfiniBand"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="2983" end="2989" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629677" start="3042" end="3047" title="HIPPI" label="HIPPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q922437" start="3049" end="3059" title="InfiniBand" label="InfiniBand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="3061" end="3086" title="List of device bandwidths" label="List of device bandwidths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961594" start="3089" end="3097" title="NUMAlink" label="NUMAlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412590" start="3099" end="3117" title="Quadrics (company)" label="Quadrics (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367679" start="3119" end="3126" title="RapidIO" label="RapidIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228757" start="3128" end="3158" title="Scalable Coherent Interconnect" label="Scalable Coherent Interconnect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20017" wikidata="Q823560" url="?curid=20017" title="Musique concrète">
<text>Musique concrète (; ) is a type of music composition that utilizes recorded sounds as raw material. Sounds are often modified through the application of audio signal processing and tape music techniques, and may be assembled into a form of sound collage. It can feature sounds derived from recordings of musical instruments, the human voice, and the natural environment, as well as those created using sound synthesis and computer-based digital signal processing. Compositions in this idiom are not restricted to the normal musical rules of melody, harmony, rhythm, and metre. The technique exploits acousmatic sound, such that sound identities can often be intentionally obscured or appear unconnected to their source cause.

The theoretical basis of &quot;musique concrète&quot; as a compositional practice was developed by French composer Pierre Schaeffer beginning in the early 1940s. It was largely an attempt to differentiate between music based on the abstract medium of notation and that created using so-called sound objects (&quot;l&#x27;objet sonore&quot;). By the early 1950s musique concrète was contrasted with &quot;pure&quot; &quot;elektronische Musik&quot; as then developed in West Germany &quot;–&quot; based solely on the use of electronically produced sounds rather than recorded sounds – but the distinction has since been blurred such that the term &quot;electronic music&quot; covers both meanings. Schaeffer&#x27;s work resulted in the establishment of France&#x27;s Groupe de Recherches de Musique Concrète (GRMC), which attracted important figures including Pierre Henry, Luc Ferrari, Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Edgard Varèse, and Iannis Xenakis. From the late 1960s onward, and particularly in France, the term acousmatic music (&quot;musique acousmatique&quot;) was used in reference to fixed media compositions that utilized both &quot;musique concrète-&quot;based techniques and live sound spatialisation.

==History==

===Beginnings===

In 1928 music critic André Cœuroy wrote in his book &quot;Panorama of Contemporary Music&quot; that &quot;perhaps the time is not far off when a composer will be able to represent through recording, music specifically composed for the gramophone&quot;. In the same period the American composer Henry Cowell, in referring to the projects of Nikolai Lopatnikoff, believed that &quot;there was a wide field open for the composition of music for phonographic discs&quot;. This sentiment was echoed further in 1930 by Igor Stravinsky, when he stated in the revue &quot;Kultur und Schallplatte&quot; that &quot;there will be a greater interest in creating music in a way that will be peculiar to the gramophone record&quot;. The following year, 1931, Boris de Schloezer also expressed the opinion that one could write for the gramophone or for the wireless just as one can for the piano or the violin. Shortly after, German art theorist Rudolf Arnheim discussed the effects of microphonic recording in an essay entitled &quot;Radio&quot;, published in 1936. In it the idea of a creative role for the recording medium was introduced and Arnheim stated that: &quot;The rediscovery of the musicality of sound in noise and in language, and the reunification of music, noise and language in order to obtain a unity of material: that is one of the chief artistic tasks of radio&quot;.

Possible antecedents to musique concrète have been noted; Walter Ruttmann&#x27;s film &quot;Wochend&quot; (&quot;Weekend&quot;) (1930), a work of &quot;blind cinema&quot; without visuals, introduced recordings of environmental sound, to represent the urban soundscape of Berlin, two decades before musique concrète was formalised. Ruttmann&#x27;s soundtrack has been retrospectively called &quot;musique concrète&quot;. According to Seth Kim-Cohen the piece was the first to &quot;organise &#x27;concrete&#x27; sounds into a formal, artistic composition.&quot; Composer Irwin Bazelon referred to a sound collage in the film &quot;Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde&quot; (1931), during the first transformation scene, as &quot;pre-musique concrète&quot;. Ottorino Respighi&#x27;s &quot;Pines of Rome&quot; (1924) calls for a phonograph recording of birdsong to be played during the third movement.

===Pierre Schaeffer and Studio d&#x27;Essai===
In 1942, French composer and theoretician Pierre Schaeffer began his exploration of radiophony when he joined Jacques Copeau and his pupils in the foundation of the Studio d&#x27;Essai de la Radiodiffusion nationale. The studio originally functioned as a center for the French Resistance on radio, which in August 1944 was responsible for the first broadcasts in liberated Paris. It was here that Schaeffer began to experiment with creative radiophonic techniques using the sound technologies of the time. In 1948 Schaeffer began to keep a set of journals describing his attempt to create a &quot;symphony of noises&quot;. These journals were published in 1952 as &quot;A la recherche d&#x27;une musique concrète&quot;, and according to Brian Kane, author of &quot;Sound Unseen: Acousmatic Sound in Theory and Practice&quot;, Schaeffer was driven by: &quot;a compositional desire to construct music from concrete objects – no matter how unsatisfactory the initial results – and a theoretical desire to find a vocabulary, solfège, or method upon which to ground such music.

The development of Schaeffer&#x27;s practice was informed by encounters with voice actors, and microphone usage and radiophonic art played an important part in inspiring and consolidating Schaeffer&#x27;s conception of sound-based composition. Another important influence on Schaeffer&#x27;s practice was cinema, and the techniques of recording and montage, which were originally associated with cinematographic practice, came to &quot;serve as the substrate of musique concrète&quot;. Marc Battier notes that, prior to Schaeffer, Jean Epstein drew attention to the manner in which sound recording revealed what was hidden in the act of basic acoustic listening. Epstein&#x27;s reference to this &quot;phenomenon of an epiphanic being&quot;, which appears through the transduction of sound, proved influential on Schaeffer&#x27;s concept of reduced listening. Schaeffer would explicitly cite Jean Epstein with reference to his use of extra-musical sound material. Epstein had already imagined that &quot;through the transposition of natural sounds, it becomes possible to create chords and dissonances, melodies and symphonies of noise, which are a new and specifically cinematographic music&quot;.

===Halim El-Dabh===
As a student in Cairo in the early to mid-1940s, Egyptian composer Halim El-Dabh began experimenting with electroacoustic music using a cumbersome wire recorder. He recorded the sounds of an ancient &quot;zaar&quot; ceremony and at the Middle East Radio studios processed the material using reverberation, echo, voltage controls, and re-recording. The resulting tape-based composition, entitled &quot;The Expression of Zaar&quot;, was presented in 1944 at an art gallery event in Cairo. El-Dabh has described his initial activities as an attempt to unlock &quot;the inner sound&quot; of the recordings. While his early compositional work was not widely known outside of Egypt at the time, El-Dabh would eventually gain recognition for his influential work at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in Manhattan in the late 1950s.

===Club d&#x27;Essai and &quot;Cinq études de bruits&quot;===
Following Schaeffer&#x27;s work with Studio d&#x27;Essai at Radiodiffusion Nationale during the early 1940s he was credited with originating the theory and practice of &quot;musique concrète.&quot; The Studio d&#x27;Essai was renamed Club d&#x27;Essai de la Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française in 1946 and in the same year Schaeffer discussed, in writing, the question surrounding the transformation of time perceived through recording. The essay evidenced knowledge of sound manipulation techniques he would further exploit compositionally. In 1948 Schaeffer formally initiated &quot;research in to noises&quot; at the Club d&#x27;Essai and on 5 October 1948 the results of his initial experimentation were premiered at a concert given in Paris. Five works for phonograph – known collectively as &quot;Cinq études de bruits&quot; (Five Studies of Noises) including &quot;Étude violette&quot; (&quot;Study in Purple&quot;) and &quot;Étude aux chemins de fer&quot; (Study with Railroads) – were presented.

===Musique concrète===
By 1949 Schaeffer&#x27;s compositional work was known publicly as &quot;musique concrète&quot;. Schaeffer stated: &quot;when I proposed the term &#x27;musique concrète,&#x27; I intended … to point out an opposition with the way musical work usually goes. Instead of notating musical ideas on paper with the symbols of solfege and entrusting their realization to well-known instruments, the question was to collect concrete sounds, wherever they came from, and to abstract the musical values they were potentially containing&quot;. According to Pierre Henry, &quot;musique concrète was not a study of timbre, it is focused on envelopes, forms. It must be presented by means of non-traditional characteristics, you see … one might say that the origin of this music is also found in the interest in &#x27;plastifying&#x27; music, of rendering it plastic like sculpture…musique concrète, in my opinion … led to a manner of composing, indeed, a new mental framework of composing&quot;. Schaeffer had developed an aesthetic that was centred upon the use of sound as a primary compositional resource. The aesthetic also emphasised the importance of play (&quot;jeu&quot;) in the practice of sound based composition. Schaeffer&#x27;s use of the word &quot;jeu&quot;, from the verb &quot;jouer&quot;, carries the same double meaning as the English verb &quot;to play&quot;: &#x27;to enjoy oneself by interacting with one&#x27;s surroundings&#x27;, as well as &#x27;to operate a musical instrument&#x27;. During this early development of music concrete, Schaeffer continued participation in his Club d’Essai. Prior to their collaboration on Timbres-Durées (1952), Schaeffer’s acquaintance and serialist composer, Olivier Messiaen, periodically participated in broadcasts, round tables, and critiques surrounding musique concrète.

===Groupe de Recherche de Musique Concrète===
By 1951 the work of Schaeffer, composer-percussionist Pierre Henry, and sound engineer Jacques Poullin had received official recognition and the Groupe de Recherches de Musique Concrète, Club d &#x27;Essai de la Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française was established at RTF in Paris, the ancestor of the ORTF. At RTF the GRMC established the first purpose-built electroacoustic music studio. It quickly attracted many who either were or were later to become notable composers, including Olivier Messiaen, Pierre Boulez, Jean Barraqué, Karlheinz Stockhausen, Edgard Varèse, Iannis Xenakis, Michel Philippot, and Arthur Honegger. Compositional &quot;output from 1951 to 1953 comprised &quot;Étude I&quot; (1951) and &quot;Étude II&quot; (1951) by Boulez, &quot;Timbres-durées&quot; (1952) by Messiaen, &quot;Étude aux mille collants&quot; (1952) by Stockhausen, &quot;Le microphone bien tempéré&quot; (1952) and &quot;La voile d&#x27;Orphée&quot; (1953) by Henry, &quot;Étude I&quot; (1953) by Philippot, &quot;Étude&quot; (1953) by Barraqué, the mixed pieces &quot;Toute la lyre&quot; (1951) and &quot;Orphée 53&quot; (1953) by Schaeffer/Henry, and the film music &quot;Masquerage&quot; (1952) by Schaeffer and &quot;Astrologie&quot; (1953) by Henry. In 1954 Varèse and Honegger visited to work on the tape parts of &quot;Déserts&quot; and &quot;La rivière endormie&quot;&quot;.

In the early and mid 1950s Schaeffer&#x27;s commitments to RTF included official missions that often required extended absences from the studios. This led him to invest Philippe Arthuys with responsibility for the GRMC in his absence, with Pierre Henry operating as Director of Works. Pierre Henry&#x27;s composing talent developed greatly during this period at the GRMC and he worked with experimental filmmakers such as Max de Haas, Jean Grémillon, Enrico Fulchignoni, and Jean Rouch and with choreographers including Dick Sanders and Maurice Béjart. Schaeffer returned to run the group at the end of 1957, and immediately stated his disapproval of the direction the GRMC had taken. A proposal was then made to &quot;renew completely the spirit, the methods and the personnel of the Group, with a view to undertake research and to offer a much needed welcome to young composers&quot;.

===Groupe de Recherches Musicales===
Following the emergence of differences within the GRMC, Pierre Henry, Philippe Arthuys, and several of their colleagues, resigned in April 1958. Schaeffer created a new collective, called Groupe de Recherches Musicales (GRM) and set about recruiting new members including Luc Ferrari, Beatriz Ferreyra, François-Bernard Mâche, Iannis Xenakis, Bernard Parmegiani, and Mireille Chamass-Kyrou. Later arrivals included Ivo Malec, Philippe Carson, Romuald Vandelle, Edgardo Canton and François Bayle.

GRM was one of several theoretical and experimental groups working under the umbrella of the Schaeffer-led Service de la Recherche at ORTF (1960–1974). Together with the GRM, three other groups existed: the Groupe de Recherches Image GRI, the Groupe de Recherches Technologiques GRT and the Groupe de Recherches which became the Groupe d&#x27;Etudes Critiques. Communication was the one theme that unified the various groups, all of which were devoted to production and creation. In terms of the question &quot;who says what to whom?&quot; Schaeffer added &quot;how?&quot;, thereby creating a platform for research into audiovisual communication and mass media, audible phenomena and music in general (including non-Western musics). At the GRM the theoretical teaching remained based on practice and could be summed up in the catch phrase &quot;do and listen&quot;.

Schaeffer kept up a practice established with the GRMC of delegating the functions (though not the title) of Group Director to colleagues. Since 1961 GRM has had six Group Directors: Michel Philippot (1960–1961), Luc Ferrari (1962–1963), Bernard Baschet and François Vercken (1964–1966). From the beginning of 1966, François Bayle took over the direction for the duration of thirty-one years, to 1997. He was then replaced by Daniel Teruggi.

===Traité des objets musicaux===
The group continued to refine Schaeffer&#x27;s ideas and strengthened the concept of &quot;musique acousmatique&quot;. Schaeffer had borrowed the term acousmatic from Pythagoras and defined it as: &quot;Acousmatic, adjective: referring to a sound that one hears without seeing the causes behind it&quot;. In 1966 Schaeffer published the book &quot;Traité des objets musicaux&quot; (Treatise on Musical Objects) which represented the culmination of some 20 years of research in the field of &quot;musique concrète&quot;. In conjunction with this publication, a set of sound recordings was produced, entitled &quot;Le solfège de l&#x27;objet sonore&quot; (Music Theory of the Acoustic Object), to provide examples of concepts dealt with in the treatise.

==Technology==
The development of musique concrète was facilitated by the emergence of new music technology in post-war Europe. Access to microphones, phonographs, and later magnetic tape recorders (created in 1939 and acquired by the Schaeffer&#x27;s Groupe de Recherche de Musique Concrète (Research Group on Concrete Music) in 1952), facilitated by an association with the French national broadcasting organization, at that time the Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française, gave Schaeffer and his colleagues an opportunity to experiment with recording technology and tape manipulation.

===Initial tools of musique concrète===
In 1948, a typical radio studio consisted of a series of shellac record players, a shellac record recorder, a mixing desk with rotating potentiometers, mechanical reverberation units, filters, and microphones. This technology made a number of limited operations available to a composer:
*Shellac record players: could play sound forwards or in reverse; could change speed at fixed ratios, permitting limited transposition.
*Shellac recorder: would record any result coming out of the mixing desk.
*Mixing desk: would permit several sources to be mixed together with an independent control of the gain or volume of the sound. The result of the mixing was sent to the recorder and to the monitoring loudspeakers. Signals could be sent to the filters or the reverberation unit.
*Mechanical reverberation: made of a metal plate or a series of springs that created an artificial reverb effect.
*Filters: two kinds of filters, third-octave octave filter banks and high- and low-pass filters. They allowed the elimination or enhancement of selected frequencies.
*Microphones: essential tool for capturing sound.

The application of the above technologies in the creation of musique concrète led to the development of a number of sound manipulation techniques including:

*Sound transposition: reading a sound at a different speed than the one at which it was recorded.
*Sound looping: composers developed a skilled technique in order to create loops at specific locations within a recording.
*Sound-sample extraction: a hand-controlled method that required delicate manipulation to get a clean sample of sound. It entailed letting the stylus read only a small segment of a record. Used in the &quot;Symphonie pour un homme seul&quot;.
*Filtering: by eliminating certain frequencies from a signal, the remains would keep some trace of the original sound but alter it often beyond recognition.

===Magnetic tape===
The first tape recorders started arriving at ORTF in 1949; however, they were much less reliable than the shellac players, to the point that the &quot;Symphonie pour un homme seul&quot; (1950–1951) was mainly composed with records even if the tape recorder was available. In 1950, when the machines finally functioned correctly, the techniques of the studio were expanded. A range of new sound manipulation practices were explored using improved media manipulation methods and operations such as continuous speed variation. A completely new possibility of organising sounds appeared with tape editing, which permitted tape to be spliced and arranged with much more precision. The &quot;axe-cut junctions&quot; were replaced with micrometric junctions and a whole new technique of production, less dependent on performance skills, could be developed. Tape editing brought a new technique called &quot;micromontage&quot;, in which very small fragments of sound were edited together, thus creating completely new sounds or structures on a larger scale.

===Development of novel devices===
During the GRMC period from 1951 to 1958, Schaeffer and Poullin developed a number of novel sound creation tools. These included a three-track tape recorder; a machine with ten playback heads to replay tape loops in echo (the morphophone); a keyboard-controlled machine to play tape loops at preset speeds (the keyboard, chromatic, or &quot;Tolana phonogène&quot;); a slide-controlled machine to replay tape loops at a continuously variable range of speeds (the handle, continuous, or &quot;Sareg phonogène&quot;); and a device to distribute an encoded track across four loudspeakers, including one hanging from the centre of the ceiling (the &quot;potentiomètre d&#x27;espace&quot;).

====&quot;Phonogène&quot;====

Speed variation was a powerful tool for sound design applications. It had been identified that transformations brought about by varying playback speed lead to modification in the character of the sound material:
* Variation in the sounds&#x27; length, in a manner directly proportional to the ratio of speed variation.
* Variation in length is coupled with a variation in pitch, and is also proportional to the ratio of speed variation.
* A sound&#x27;s attack characteristic is altered, whereby it is either dislocated from succeeding events, or the energy of the attack is more sharply focused.
* The distribution of spectral energy is altered, thereby influencing how the resulting timbre might be perceived, relative to its original unaltered state.
The phonogène was a machine capable of modifying sound structure significantly and it provided composers with a means to adapt sound to meet specific compositional contexts. The initial phonogènes were manufactured in 1953 by two subcontractors: the chromatic phonogène by a company called Tolana, and the sliding version by the SAREG Company. A third version was developed later at ORTF. An outline of the unique capabilities of the various phonogènes can be seen here:

*Chromatic: The chromatic phonogène was controlled through a one-octave keyboard. Multiple capstans of differing diameters vary the tape speed over a single stationary magnetic tape head. A tape loop was put into the machine, and when a key was played, it would act on an individual pinch roller / capstan arrangement and cause the tape to be played at a specific speed. The machine worked with short sounds only.
*Sliding: The sliding phonogène (also called continuous-variation phonogène) provided continuous variation of tape speed using a control rod. The range allowed the motor to arrive at almost a stop position, always through a continuous variation. It was basically a normal tape recorder but with the ability to control its speed, so it could modify any length of tape. One of the earliest examples of its use can by heard in &quot;Voile d&#x27;Orphée&quot; by Pierre Henry (1953), where a lengthy glissando is used to symbolise the removal of Orpheus&#x27;s veil as he enters hell.
*Universal: A final version called the universal phonogène was completed in 1963. The device&#x27;s main ability was that it enabled the dissociation of pitch variation from time variation. This was the starting point for methods that would later become widely available using digital technology, for instance harmonising (transposing sound without modifying duration) and time stretching (modifying duration without pitch modification). This was obtained through a rotating magnetic head called the Springer temporal regulator, an ancestor of the rotating heads used in video machines.

====Three-head tape recorder====
This original tape recorder was one of the first machines permitting the simultaneous listening of several synchronised sources. Until 1958 musique concrète, radio and the studio machines were monophonic. The three-head tape recorder superposed three magnetic tapes that were dragged by a common motor, each tape having an independent spool. The objective was to keep the three tapes synchronised from a common starting point. Works could then be conceived polyphonically, and thus each head conveyed a part of the information and was listened to through a dedicated loudspeaker. It was an ancestor of the multi-track player (four then eight tracks) that appeared in the 1960s. &quot;Timbres Durées&quot; by Olivier Messiaen with the technical assistance of Pierre Henry was the first work composed for this tape recorder in 1952. A rapid rhythmic polyphony was distributed over the three channels.

====Morphophone====

This machine was conceived to build complex forms through repetition, and accumulation of events through delays, filtering and feedback. It consisted of a large rotating disk, 50 cm in diameter, on which was stuck a tape with its magnetic side facing outward. A series of twelve movable magnetic heads (one each recording head and erasing head, and ten playback heads) were positioned around the disk, in contact with the tape. A sound up to four seconds long could be recorded on the looped tape and the ten playback heads would then read the information with different delays, according to their (adjustable) positions around the disk. A separate amplifier and band-pass filter for each head could modify the spectrum of the sound, and additional feedback loops could transmit the information to the recording head. The resulting repetitions of a sound occurred at different time intervals, and could be filtered or modified through feedback. This system was also easily capable of producing artificial reverberation or continuous sounds.

====Early sound spatialisation system====

At the premiere of Pierre Schaeffer&#x27;s &quot;Symphonie pour un homme seul&quot; in 1951, a system that was designed for the spatial control of sound was tested. It was called a &quot;relief desk&quot; (&quot;pupitre de relief&quot;, but also referred to as &quot;pupitre d&#x27;espace&quot; or &quot;potentiomètre d&#x27;espace&quot;) and was intended to control the dynamic level of music played from several shellac players. This created a stereophonic effect by controlling the positioning of a monophonic sound source. One of five tracks, provided by a purpose-built tape machine, was controlled by the performer and the other four tracks each supplied a single loudspeaker. This provided a mixture of live and preset sound positions. The placement of loudspeakers in the performance space included two loudspeakers at the front right and left of the audience, one placed at the rear, and in the centre of the space a loudspeaker was placed in a high position above the audience. The sounds could therefore be moved around the audience, rather than just across the front stage. On stage, the control system allowed a performer to position a sound either to the left or right, above or behind the audience, simply by moving a small, hand held transmitter coil towards or away from four somewhat larger receiver coils arranged around the performer in a manner reflecting the loudspeaker positions. A contemporary eyewitness described the &quot;potentiomètre d&#x27;espace&quot; in normal use:

One found one&#x27;s self sitting in a small studio which was equipped with four loudspeakers—two in front of one—right and left; one behind one and a fourth suspended above. In the front center were four large loops and an &quot;executant&quot; moving a small magnetic unit through the air. The four loops controlled the four speakers, and while all four were giving off sounds all the time, the distance of the unit from the loops determined the volume of sound sent out from each.&lt;br&gt;The music thus came to one at varying intensity from various parts of the room, and this &quot;spatial projection&quot; gave new sense to the rather abstract sequence of sound originally recorded. The central concept underlying this method was the notion that music should be controlled during public presentation in order to create a performance situation; an attitude that has stayed with acousmatic music to the present day.

===Coupigny synthesiser and Studio 54 mixing desk===
After the longstanding rivalry with the electronic music of the Cologne studio had subsided, in 1970 the GRM finally created an electronic studio using tools developed by the physicist Enrico Chiarucci, called the Studio 54, which featured the &quot;Coupigny modular synthesiser&quot; and a Moog synthesiser. The Coupigny synthesiser, named for its designer François Coupigny, director of the Group for Technical Research, and the Studio 54 mixing desk had a major influence on the evolution of GRM and from the point of their introduction on they brought a new quality to the music. The mixing desk and synthesiser were combined in one unit and were created specifically for the creation of musique concrète.

The design of the desk was influenced by trade union rules at French National Radio that required technicians and production staff to have clearly defined duties. The solitary practice of musique concrète composition did not suit a system that involved three operators: one in charge of the machines, a second controlling the mixing desk, and third to provide guidance to the others. Because of this the synthesiser and desk were combined and organised in a manner that allowed it to be used easily by a composer. Independently of the mixing tracks (24 in total), it had a coupled connection patch that permitted the organisation of the machines within the studio. It also had a number of remote controls for operating tape recorders. The system was easily adaptable to any context, particularly that of interfacing with external equipment.

Before the late 1960s the musique concrète produced at GRM had largely been based on the recording and manipulation of sounds, but synthesised sounds had featured in a number of works prior to the introduction of the Coupigny. Pierre Henry had used oscillators to produce sounds as early as 1955. But a synthesiser with envelope control was something Pierre Schaeffer was against, since it favoured the preconception of music and therefore deviated from Schaeffer&#x27;s principle of &quot;making through listening&quot;. Because of Schaeffer&#x27;s concerns the Coupigny synthesiser was conceived as a sound-event generator with parameters controlled globally, without a means to define values as precisely as some other synthesisers of the day.

The development of the machine was constrained by several factors. It needed to be modular and the modules had to be easily interconnected (so that the synthesiser would have more modules than slots and it would have an easy-to-use patch). It also needed to include all the major functions of a modular synthesiser including oscillators, noise-generators, filters, ring-modulators, but an intermodulation facility was viewed as the primary requirement; to enable complex synthesis processes such as frequency modulation, amplitude modulation, and modulation via an external source. No keyboard was attached to the synthesiser and instead a specific and somewhat complex envelope generator was used to shape sound. This synthesiser was well-adapted to the production of continuous and complex sounds using intermodulation techniques such as cross-synthesis and frequency modulation but was less effective in generating precisely defined frequencies and triggering specific sounds.

The Coupigny synthesiser also served as the model for a smaller, portable unit, which has been used down to the present day.

===Acousmonium===

In 1966 composer and technician François Bayle was placed in charge of the Groupe de Recherches Musicales and in 1975, GRM was integrated with the new Institut national de l&#x27;audiovisuel (INA – Audiovisual National Institute) with Bayle as its head. In taking the lead on work that began in the early 1950s, with Jacques Poullin&#x27;s potentiomètre d&#x27;espace, a system designed to move monophonic sound sources across four speakers, Bayle and the engineer Jean-Claude Lallemand created an orchestra of loudspeakers (&quot;un orchestre de haut-parleurs&quot;) known as the Acousmonium in 1974. An inaugural concert took place on 14 February 1974 at the Espace Pierre Cardin in Paris with a presentation of Bayle&#x27;s &quot;Expérience acoustique&quot;.

The Acousmonium is a specialised sound reinforcement system consisting of between 50 and 100 loudspeakers, depending on the character of the concert, of varying shape and size. The system was designed specifically for the concert presentation of musique-concrète-based works but with the added enhancement of sound spatialisation. Loudspeakers are placed both on stage and at positions throughout the performance space and a mixing console is used to manipulate the placement of acousmatic material across the speaker array, using a performative technique known as &quot;sound diffusion&quot;. Bayle has commented that the purpose of the Acousmonium is to &quot;substitute a momentary classical disposition of sound making, which diffuses the sound from the circumference towards the centre of the hall, by a group of sound projectors which form an &#x27;orchestration&#x27; of the acoustic image&quot;.

As of 2010, the Acousmonium was still performing, with 64 speakers, 35 amplifiers, and 2 consoles.

==In popular music==
Although Schaeffer&#x27;s work aimed to defamiliarize the used sounds, other composers favoured the familiarity of source material by using snippets of music or speech taken from popular entertainment and mass media, with the ethic that &quot;truly contemporary art should reflect not just nature or the industrial-urban environment but the mediascape in which humans increasingly dwelled&quot;, according to writer Simon Reynolds. Composers such as James Tenney and Arne Mellnäs created pieces in the 1960s that recontextualised the music of Elvis Presley and the singer&#x27;s own voice, respectively, while later in the decade, Bernard Parmegiani created the pieces &quot;Pop&#x27;electric&quot; and &quot;Du pop a l&#x27;ane&quot;, which used fragments of musical genres such as easy listening, dixieland, classical music and progressive rock. Reynolds writes that this approach continued in the later work of musicians Matmos, whose &quot;A Chance to Cut Is a Chance to Cure&quot; (2001) was created with the sounds of cosmetic surgery, and the &quot;pop-collage&quot; work of John Oswald, who referred to the approach as &#x27;plunderphonics&#x27;. Oswald&#x27;s &quot;Plexure&quot; (1993) was created using recognisable elements of rock and pop music from 1982 to 1992.

===1960s===
In the 1960s, as popular music began to increase in cultural importance and question its role as commercial entertainment, many popular musicians began taking influence from the post-war avant-garde, including the Beatles, who incorporated techniques such as tape loops, speed manipulation, and reverse playback in their song &quot;Tomorrow Never Knows&quot; (1966). Bernard Gendron describes the Beatles&#x27; &quot;musique concrète&quot; experimentation as helping popularise avant-garde art in the era, alongside Jimi Hendrix&#x27;s use of noise and feedback, Bob Dylan&#x27;s surreal lyricism and Frank Zappa&#x27;s &quot;ironic detachment&quot;. In &quot;The Wire&quot;, Edwin Pouncey wrote that the 1960s represented the height of confluence between rock and academic music, noting that composers like Luciano Berio and Pierre Henry found likeness in the &quot;distorting-mirror&quot; sound of psychedelic rock, and that &quot;concrète&quot;&#x27;s contrasting tones and timbres were suited to the effects of psychedelic drugs.

Following the Beatles&#x27; example, many groups incorporated found sounds into otherwise typical pop songs for psychedelic effect, resulting in &quot;pop and rock musique concrète flirtations&quot;; examples include the Lovin&#x27; Spoonful&#x27;s &quot;Summer in the City&quot; (1966), Love&#x27;s &quot;7 and 7 Is&quot; (1967) and The Box Tops&#x27; &quot;The Letter&quot; (1967). Popular musicians more versed in modern classical and experimental music utilised elements of musique concrète more maturely, including Zappa and the Mothers of Invention on pieces like the Edgard Varèse tribute &quot;The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet&quot; (1966), &quot;The Chrome Planted Megaphone of Destiny&quot; and &quot;Lumpy Gravy&quot; (both 1968), and Jefferson Airplane&#x27;s &quot;Would You Like a Snack?&quot; (1968), while the Grateful Dead&#x27;s album &quot;Anthem of the Sun&quot; (1968), which featured Berio student Phil Lesh on bass, features musique concrète passages that Pouncey compared to Varèse&#x27;s &quot;Deserts&quot; and the &quot;keyboard deconstructions&quot; of John Cage and Conlon Nancarrow. The Beatles continued their use of concrète on songs such as &quot;Strawberry Fields Forever&quot;, &quot;Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!&quot; and &quot;I Am the Walrus&quot; (all 1967), before the approach climaxed with the pure musique concrète piece &quot;Revolution 9&quot; (1968); afterwards, John Lennon, alongside wife and Fluxus artist Yoko Ono, continued the approach on their solo works &quot;Two Virgins&quot; (1968) and &quot;Life with the Lions&quot; (1969).

===1970s===
The musique concrète elements present on Pink Floyd&#x27;s best-selling album &quot;The Dark Side of the Moon&quot; (1973), including the cash register sounds on &quot;Money&quot;, have been cited as notable examples of the practice&#x27;s influence on popular music. Also in 1973, German band Faust released &quot;The Faust Tapes&quot;; priced in the United Kingdom at 49 pence, the album was described by writer Chris Jones as &quot;a contender for the most widely heard piece of musique concrete&quot; after &quot;Revolution 9&quot;. Another German group, Kraftwerk, achieved a surprise hit in 1975 with &quot;Autobahn&quot;, which contained a &quot;sampled collage of revving engines, horns and traffic noise&quot;. Stephen Dalton of &quot;The Times&quot; wrote: &quot;This droll blend of accessible pop and avant-garde musique concrete propelled Kraftwerk across America for three months&quot;. Steve Taylor writes that industrial groups Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire continued the concrète tradition with collages constructed with tape manipulation and loops, while Ian Inglis credits Brian Eno for introducing new sensibilities &quot;about what could be in included in the canon of popular music&quot;, citing his 1970s ambient work and the musique concrete collages on &quot;My Life in the Bush of Ghosts&quot; (1981), which combines tape samples with synthesised sounds.

===1980s and beyond===
With the emergence of hip hop music in the 1980s, deejays such as Grandmaster Flash utitlised turnables to &quot;[montage] in real time&quot; with portions of rock, R&amp;B and disco records, in order to create groove-based music with percussive scratching; this provided a parallel breakthrough to collage artist Christian Marclay&#x27;s use of vinyl records as a &quot;noise-generating medium&quot; in his own work. Reynolds wrote: &quot;As sampling technology grew more affordable, DJs-turned-producers like Eric B. developed hip-hop into a studio-based art. Although there was no direct line traceable between the two Pierres and Marley Marl, it was as if &quot;musique concrète&quot; went truant from the academy and became street music, the soundtrack to block parties and driving.&quot; He described this era of hip hop as &quot;the most vibrant and flourishing descendant – albeit an indirect one – of &quot;musique concrète&quot;&quot;. &quot;Chicago Reader&quot;&#x27;s J. Niimi writes that when Public Enemy producers the Bomb Squad &quot;unwittingly revisited&quot; the concept of musique concrète with their sample-based music, they proved that the technique &quot;worked great as pop&quot;.

In 1989, John Diliberto of &quot;Music Technology&quot; described the group Art of Noise as having both digitised and synthesised musique concrète and &quot;locked it into a crunching groove and turned it into dance music for the &#x27;80s&quot;. He wrote that while Schaeffer and Henry used tapes in their work, Art of Noise &quot;uses Fairlight CMIs and Akai S1000 samplers and the skyscrapers of multitrack recording to create their updated sound&quot;. As described by Will Hodgkinson, Art of Noise brought classical and avant-garde sounds into pop by &quot;[aiming] to emulate the musique concrète composers of the 1950s&quot; via Fairlight samplers instead of tape. In a piece for &quot;Pitchfork&quot;, musicians Matmos noted the use of musique concrète in later popular music, including the crying baby effects in Aaliyah&#x27;s &quot;Are You That Somebody?&quot; (1998) or Missy Elliott&#x27;s &quot;backwards chorus&quot;, while noting that the aesthetic was arguably built upon by works including Art of Noise&#x27;s &quot;Close (to the Edit)&quot; (1984), Meat Beat Manifesto&#x27;s &quot;Storm the Studio&quot; (1989) and the work of Public Enemy, Negativland and People Like Us, among other examples. Chuck Eddy writes that, by 1991, heavy metal bands began absorbing a wealth of esoteric outside inspirations, citing the &quot;found-sound jackhammer-and-national-anthem musique concrète&quot; on Slaughter&#x27;s &quot;Up All Night&quot; (1990) as a key example.

==See also==
* Audium
* Birmingham ElectroAcoustic Sound Theatre
* Canadian Electroacoustic Community
* Computer music
* Concrete poetry
* Noise music
* Sound art
* Sound collage
* Sound design
* Sound engineering

== Notes ==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==

* Dack, John (1993). &quot;La Recherche de l&#x27;Instrument Perdu&quot;. &quot;Electroacoustic Music: Journal of the Electroacoustic Music Association of Great Britain&quot; 7:.
* (cloth) (pbk).
* Jaffrennou, Pierre-Alain (1998). &quot;De la scénographie sonore&quot;. In &quot;Le son et l&#x27;espace: 1ères Rencontres musicales pluridisciplinaires, Lyon, 1995&quot;, edited by Hugues Genevois and Yann Orlarey, 143–156. Musique et sciences. Lyon: GRAME &amp; Aléas. .
* Kane, Brian (2007). &quot;L&#x27;Objet Sonore Maintenant: Pierre Schaeffer, Sound Objects and the Phenomenological Reduction&quot;. &quot;Organised Sound&quot;, 12, no. 1:15–24.
* Manning, Peter (1985). &quot;Electronic and Computer Music&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press. .
* Nyman, Michael (1999), &quot;Experimental Music: Cage and Beyond&quot;, 2nd edition. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. (cloth); (pbk).
* Palombini, Carlos (1998). &quot;Pierre Schaeffer, 1953: &#x27;Towards an Experimental Music&#x27;, An Exegesis of Schaeffer&#x27;s &#x27;Vers une musique expérimentale&#x27;&quot;. &quot;Music &amp; Letters&quot; 74, no. 4:542–557.
* Schaeffer, Pierre (1952b). &quot;L&#x27;objet musical&quot;. &quot;La Revue Musicale: L&#x27;œuvre du XXe siècle&quot;, no. 212: 65–76.
* Vella, Richard (2000). &quot;Musical Environments: A Manual for Listening, Improvising and Composing&quot;, with additional topics by Andy Arthurs. Sydney: Currency Press. . Reprinted as &quot;Sounds in Space: Sounds in Time: Projects in Listening, Improvising and Composing&quot;. London: Boosey &amp; Hawkes, 2003. .


==External links==
* INA-GRM website
* Home page, François Bayle
* Michel Chion official site
* Electroacoustic Music Studies Network
* Bernard Parmegiani&#x27;s personal website
* INA-GRM 31st season (2008/2009). Multiphonies program of events
* &quot;Organised Sound&quot;, an international journal of music and technology
* Audium, a theatre of sound-sculptured space</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="0" end="16" title="Musique concrète" label="Musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="35" end="52" title="music composition" label="music composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="67" end="81" title="recorded sound" label="recorded sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719318" start="153" end="176" title="audio signal processing" label="audio signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326777" start="181" end="191" title="tape music" label="tape music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="240" end="253" title="sound collage" label="sound collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="304" end="322" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390" start="329" end="340" title="human voice" label="human voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="408" end="417" title="synthesizer" label="synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="437" end="462" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="541" end="547" title="melody" label="melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="549" end="556" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="558" end="564" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="570" end="575" title="Metre (music)" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001637" start="600" end="616" title="acousmatic sound" label="acousmatic sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q315744" start="842" end="858" title="Pierre Schaeffer" label="Pierre Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882379" start="1020" end="1032" title="sound object" label="sound object"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1148" end="1167" title="electronic music#Elektronische Musik, Germany" label="elektronische Musik"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1195" end="1207" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q544469" start="1585" end="1597" title="Pierre Henry" label="Pierre Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279889" start="1599" end="1610" title="Luc Ferrari" label="Luc Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="1612" end="1625" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="1627" end="1648" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57247" start="1650" end="1663" title="Edgard Varèse" label="Edgard Varèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152880" start="1669" end="1683" title="Iannis Xenakis" label="Iannis Xenakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q423918" start="1750" end="1766" title="acousmatic music" label="acousmatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="2215" end="2225" title="Phonograph" label="gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q434610" start="2274" end="2286" title="Henry Cowell" label="Henry Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739754" start="2320" end="2339" title="Nikolai Lopatnikoff" label="Nikolai Lopatnikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="2493" end="2508" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q373117" start="2725" end="2743" title="Boris de Schlözer" label="Boris de Schloezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="2822" end="2830" title="Radio" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q213642" start="2911" end="2925" title="Rudolf Arnheim" label="Rudolf Arnheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q77365" start="3412" end="3427" title="Walter Ruttmann" label="Walter Ruttmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3625" end="3631" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q777224" start="3924" end="3937" title="Irwin Bazelon" label="Irwin Bazelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q830778" start="3984" end="4007" title="Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1931 film)" label="Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q243837" start="4098" end="4115" title="Ottorino Respighi" label="Ottorino Respighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095813" start="4129" end="4142" title="Pines of Rome" label="Pines of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126556" start="4192" end="4200" title="Bird vocalization" label="birdsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q315744" start="4331" end="4347" title="Pierre Schaeffer" label="Pierre Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q369758" start="4399" end="4413" title="Jacques Copeau" label="Jacques Copeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628276" start="4454" end="4473" title="Studio d&amp;#x27;Essai" label="Studio d&amp;#x27;Essai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416985" start="4480" end="4504" title="Radiodiffusion Nationale (France)" label="Radiodiffusion nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="4559" end="4576" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q456968" start="5894" end="5906" title="Jean Epstein" label="Jean Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="6599" end="6604" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109811" start="6650" end="6663" title="Halim El-Dabh" label="Halim El-Dabh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123529209" start="6730" end="6743" title="Wire recording" label="wire recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503028" start="6788" end="6792" title="Zār" label="zaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984573" start="7346" end="7388" title="Computer Music Center" label="Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="8246" end="8256" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121079" start="8287" end="8308" title="Cinq études de bruits" label="Cinq études de bruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q544469" start="9057" end="9069" title="Pierre Henry" label="Pierre Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="9583" end="9596" title="music composition" label="compositional"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="10420" end="10433" title="percussionist" label="percussionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226101" start="10592" end="10627" title="Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française" label="Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q362280" start="10681" end="10685" title="ORTF" label="ORTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326777" start="10739" end="10760" title="electroacoustic music" label="electroacoustic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q151593" start="10864" end="10880" title="Olivier Messiaen" label="Olivier Messiaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="10882" end="10895" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276420" start="10897" end="10910" title="Jean Barraqué" label="Jean Barraqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="10912" end="10933" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57247" start="10935" end="10948" title="Edgard Varèse" label="Edgard Varèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152880" start="10950" end="10964" title="Iannis Xenakis" label="Iannis Xenakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310585" start="10966" end="10982" title="Michel Philippot" label="Michel Philippot"/>
<link wikidata="Q123164" start="10988" end="11003" title="Arthur Honegger" label="Arthur Honegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405075" start="11183" end="11207" title="Konkrete Etüde" label="Étude aux mille collants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045077" start="11698" end="11705" title="Déserts" label="Déserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="12146" end="12163" title="experimental film" label="experimental film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685560" start="12191" end="12205" title="Jean Grémillon" label="Jean Grémillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166405" start="12231" end="12241" title="Jean Rouch" label="Jean Rouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="12251" end="12265" title="choreography" label="choreographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279889" start="12953" end="12964" title="Luc Ferrari" label="Luc Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877254" start="12966" end="12982" title="Beatriz Ferreyra" label="Beatriz Ferreyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246028" start="12984" end="13006" title="François-Bernard Mâche" label="François-Bernard Mâche"/>
<link wikidata="Q152880" start="13008" end="13022" title="Iannis Xenakis" label="Iannis Xenakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q291288" start="13024" end="13042" title="Bernard Parmegiani" label="Bernard Parmegiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013052" start="13048" end="13070" title="Mireille Chamass-Kyrou" label="Mireille Chamass-Kyrou"/>
<link wikidata="Q360834" start="13096" end="13105" title="Ivo Malec" label="Ivo Malec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450908" start="13161" end="13175" title="François Bayle" label="François Bayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q423918" start="14612" end="14632" title="acousmatic music" label="musique acousmatique"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001637" start="14672" end="14682" title="acousmatic sound" label="acousmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="14688" end="14698" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="14736" end="14745" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q27333678" start="15365" end="15381" title="music technology" label="music technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="15448" end="15471" title="tape recorder" label="magnetic tape recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="15919" end="15931" title="radio studio" label="radio studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="15965" end="15979" title="phonograph" label="record players"/>
<link wikidata="Q429659" start="15983" end="15990" title="shellac" label="shellac"/>
<link wikidata="Q654117" start="16010" end="16021" title="mixing desk" label="mixing desk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="16036" end="16049" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q468809" start="16063" end="16076" title="reverberation" label="reverberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819865" start="16084" end="16091" title="audio filter" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="16097" end="16107" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q815323" start="16308" end="16321" title="Transposition (music)" label="transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q262754" start="16858" end="16863" title="high-pass filter" label="high-"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="16868" end="16883" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="16942" end="16953" title="audio frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="17487" end="17493" title="Sampling (music)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581044" start="17528" end="17534" title="Magnetic cartridge" label="stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="17566" end="17572" title="phonograph" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="18706" end="18718" title="micromontage" label="micromontage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="19035" end="19048" title="multitrack recording" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="19134" end="19142" title="music keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="19213" end="19222" title="chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="19463" end="19474" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="19981" end="19986" title="Pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q176994" start="21118" end="21130" title="pinch roller" label="pinch roller"/>
<link wikidata="Q176994" start="21133" end="21140" title="Capstan (tape recorder)" label="capstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q471744" start="21745" end="21754" title="glissando" label="glissando"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="21791" end="21798" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295260" start="22140" end="22151" title="Audio timescale-pitch modification" label="harmonising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295260" start="22203" end="22218" title="Audio timescale-pitch modification" label="time stretching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="22644" end="22654" title="monaural" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520790" start="22786" end="22791" title="Bobbin" label="spool"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="22908" end="22918" title="polyphonic" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021489" start="23477" end="23483" title="Delay (audio effect)" label="delays"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="23499" end="23507" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454950" start="23659" end="23673" title="tape head" label="magnetic heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501010" start="23684" end="23698" title="recording head" label="recording head"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="24021" end="24030" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718101" start="24035" end="24051" title="band-pass filter" label="band-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q113581936" start="24083" end="24091" title="sound spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="24903" end="24915" title="stereophonic" label="stereophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="24959" end="24969" title="monaural" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="26972" end="26988" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="27254" end="27265" title="synthesizer" label="synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="27684" end="27695" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q290667" start="28805" end="28821" title="Envelope (music)" label="envelope control"/>
<link wikidata="Q391640" start="29528" end="29547" title="modular synthesiser" label="modular synthesiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q249997" start="29558" end="29569" title="Electronic oscillator" label="oscillators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638353" start="29589" end="29596" title="Voltage-controlled filter" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564640" start="29598" end="29613" title="ring modulation" label="ring-modulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142232" start="29622" end="29637" title="intermodulation" label="intermodulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="29732" end="29752" title="frequency modulation" label="frequency modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="29754" end="29774" title="amplitude modulation" label="amplitude modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q290667" start="29903" end="29921" title="envelope generator" label="envelope generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450908" start="30391" end="30405" title="François Bayle" label="François Bayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665109" start="30510" end="30549" title="Institut national de l&amp;#x27;audiovisuel" label="Institut national de l&amp;#x27;audiovisuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323979" start="30754" end="30764" title="monaural" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823426" start="30940" end="30951" title="Acousmonium" label="Acousmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q829504" start="31155" end="31181" title="sound reinforcement system" label="sound reinforcement system"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="31215" end="31227" title="loudspeakers" label="loudspeakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q423918" start="31368" end="31390" title="acousmatic music" label="musique-concrète-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q35140" start="31655" end="31667" title="performance" label="performative"/>
<link wikidata="Q97358551" start="31693" end="31708" title="sound diffusion" label="sound diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q202676" start="32564" end="32578" title="Simon Reynolds" label="Simon Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q715379" start="32598" end="32610" title="James Tenney" label="James Tenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q844100" start="32615" end="32627" title="Arne Mellnäs" label="Arne Mellnäs"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="32691" end="32704" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="32931" end="32945" title="easy listening" label="easy listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="32947" end="32956" title="dixieland" label="dixieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="32958" end="32973" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="32978" end="32994" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256138" start="33072" end="33078" title="Matmos" label="Matmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655802" start="33092" end="33127" title="A Chance to Cut Is a Chance to Cure" label="A Chance to Cut Is a Chance to Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="33172" end="33188" title="cosmetic surgery" label="cosmetic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="33208" end="33215" title="sound collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q278207" start="33230" end="33241" title="John Oswald (composer)" label="John Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205507" start="33281" end="33295" title="plunderphonics" label="plunderphonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="33648" end="33659" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q630338" start="33770" end="33790" title="Tomorrow Never Knows" label="Tomorrow Never Knows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="33954" end="33966" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="33981" end="33986" title="noise music" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="33991" end="33999" title="guitar feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="34001" end="34010" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="34039" end="34050" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="34098" end="34106" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474446" start="34114" end="34127" title="Edwin Pouncey" label="Edwin Pouncey"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="34246" end="34259" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="34338" end="34354" title="psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="34453" end="34469" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105516" start="34535" end="34546" title="found sound" label="found sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053608" start="34690" end="34714" title="the Lovin&amp;#x27; Spoonful" label="the Lovin&amp;#x27; Spoonful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472381" start="34728" end="34746" title="Summer in the City (song)" label="Summer in the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q664248" start="34761" end="34765" title="Love (band)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643906" start="34779" end="34789" title="7 and 7 Is" label="7 and 7 Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q72839" start="34807" end="34819" title="The Box Tops" label="The Box Tops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095265" start="34832" end="34842" title="The Letter (Box Tops song)" label="The Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q530362" start="35003" end="35027" title="the Mothers of Invention" label="the Mothers of Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q57247" start="35047" end="35060" title="Edgard Varèse" label="Edgard Varèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760464" start="35075" end="35114" title="The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet" label="The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q901620" start="35135" end="35174" title="We&amp;#x27;re Only in It for the Money" label="The Chrome Planted Megaphone of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q914620" start="35191" end="35202" title="Lumpy Gravy" label="Lumpy Gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488260" start="35226" end="35244" title="Jefferson Airplane" label="Jefferson Airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="35306" end="35319" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q572310" start="35339" end="35356" title="Anthem of the Sun" label="Anthem of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350527" start="35400" end="35409" title="Phil Lesh" label="Phil Lesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q703236" start="35575" end="35591" title="Conlon Nancarrow" label="Conlon Nancarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213718" start="35660" end="35685" title="Strawberry Fields Forever" label="Strawberry Fields Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q610258" start="35699" end="35733" title="Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!" label="Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138639" start="35750" end="35765" title="I Am the Walrus" label="I Am the Walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346881" start="35856" end="35868" title="Revolution 9" label="Revolution 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="35895" end="35906" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="35927" end="35933" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="35941" end="35949" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36000" end="36011" title="Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins" label="Two Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36035" end="36054" title="Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions" label="Life with the Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="36123" end="36133" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q150901" start="36166" end="36191" title="The Dark Side of the Moon" label="The Dark Side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838973" start="36250" end="36255" title="Money (Pink Floyd song)" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q679697" start="36376" end="36381" title="Faust (band)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987009" start="36397" end="36412" title="The Faust Tapes" label="The Faust Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="36641" end="36650" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076440" start="36695" end="36703" title="Autobahn (song)" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="36826" end="36835" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="37007" end="37017" title="industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165655" start="37025" end="37042" title="Throbbing Gristle" label="Throbbing Gristle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024747" start="37047" end="37063" title="Cabaret Voltaire (band)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="37182" end="37191" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="37318" end="37325" title="ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066227" start="37374" end="37403" title="My Life in the Bush of Ghosts (album)" label="My Life in the Bush of Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="37517" end="37530" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="37545" end="37551" title="deejay" label="deejay"/>
<link wikidata="Q506900" start="37561" end="37578" title="Grandmaster Flash" label="Grandmaster Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046801" start="37589" end="37598" title="turntablism" label="turnables"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="37660" end="37667" title="rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="37672" end="37677" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501482" start="37706" end="37712" title="groove (music)" label="groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413166" start="37741" end="37751" title="scratching" label="scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q923306" start="37809" end="37826" title="Christian Marclay" label="Christian Marclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="37938" end="37946" title="music sampler" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q55196674" start="38006" end="38013" title="Eric B." label="Eric B."/>
<link wikidata="Q1347312" start="38129" end="38140" title="Marley Marl" label="Marley Marl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076422" start="38447" end="38461" title="Chicago Reader" label="Chicago Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="38501" end="38513" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736338" start="38524" end="38538" title="the Bomb Squad" label="the Bomb Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q502967" start="38777" end="38789" title="Art of Noise" label="Art of Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="39038" end="39051" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight CMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828910" start="39057" end="39067" title="Akai S1000" label="Akai S1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="39100" end="39120" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002866" start="39174" end="39189" title="Will Hodgkinson" label="Will Hodgkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="39394" end="39403" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11617" start="39523" end="39530" title="Aaliyah" label="Aaliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q732408" start="39544" end="39566" title="Are You That Somebody?" label="Are You That Somebody?"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="39583" end="39596" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569320" start="39610" end="39626" title="Work It (Missy Elliott song)" label="backwards chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135179" start="39735" end="39754" title="Close (to the Edit)" label="Close (to the Edit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366325" start="39769" end="39788" title="Meat Beat Manifesto" label="Meat Beat Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620210" start="39802" end="39818" title="Storm the Studio" label="Storm the Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q624627" start="39862" end="39873" title="Negativland" label="Negativland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165899" start="39878" end="39892" title="People Like Us (musician)" label="People Like Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q867101" start="39916" end="39926" title="Chuck Eddy" label="Chuck Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="39949" end="39960" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664392" start="40112" end="40121" title="Slaughter (band)" label="Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897949" start="40135" end="40147" title="Up All Night (Slaughter song)" label="Up All Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949379" start="40195" end="40201" title="Audium (theater)" label="Audium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916693" start="40204" end="40244" title="Birmingham ElectroAcoustic Sound Theatre" label="Birmingham ElectroAcoustic Sound Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="40247" end="40281" title="Canadian Electroacoustic Community" label="Canadian Electroacoustic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122550" start="40284" end="40298" title="Computer music" label="Computer music"/>
<link wikidata="Q596594" start="40301" end="40316" title="Concrete poetry" label="Concrete poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="40319" end="40330" title="Noise music" label="Noise music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744327" start="40333" end="40342" title="Sound art" label="Sound art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="40345" end="40358" title="Sound collage" label="Sound collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="40361" end="40373" title="Sound design" label="Sound design"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="40376" end="40393" title="Sound engineering" label="Sound engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q313639" start="41311" end="41325" title="Michael Nyman" label="Nyman, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708875" start="41653" end="41672" title="Music &amp;amp; Letters" label="Music &amp;amp; Letters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20018" wikidata="Q180953" url="?curid=20018" title="Metric space">
<text>In mathematics, a metric space is a set together with a notion of &quot;distance&quot; between its elements, usually called points. The distance is measured by a function called a metric or distance function. Metric spaces are the most general setting for studying many of the concepts of mathematical analysis and geometry.

The most familiar example of a metric space is 3-dimensional Euclidean space with its usual notion of distance. Other well-known examples are a sphere equipped with the angular distance and the hyperbolic plane. A metric may correspond to a metaphorical, rather than physical, notion of distance: for example, the set of 100-character Unicode strings can be equipped with the Hamming distance, which measures the number of characters that need to be changed to get from one string to another.

Since they are very general, metric spaces are a tool used in many different branches of mathematics. Many types of mathematical objects have a natural notion of distance and therefore admit the structure of a metric space, including Riemannian manifolds, normed vector spaces, and graphs. In abstract algebra, the &quot;p&quot;-adic numbers arise as elements of the completion of a metric structure on the rational numbers. Metric spaces are also studied in their own right in metric geometry and analysis on metric spaces.

Many of the basic notions of mathematical analysis, including balls, completeness, as well as uniform, Lipschitz, and Hölder continuity, can be defined in the setting of metric spaces. Other notions, such as continuity, compactness, and open and closed sets, can be defined for metric spaces, but also in the even more general setting of topological spaces.

== Definition and illustration ==
=== Motivation ===
To see the utility of different notions of distance, consider the surface of the Earth as a set of points. We can measure the distance between two such points by the length of the shortest path along the surface, &quot;as the crow flies&quot;; this is particularly useful for shipping and aviation. We can also measure the straight-line distance between two points through the Earth&#x27;s interior; this notion is, for example, natural in seismology, since it roughly corresponds to the length of time it takes for seismic waves to travel between those two points.

The notion of distance encoded by the metric space axioms has relatively few requirements. This generality gives metric spaces a lot of flexibility. At the same time, the notion is strong enough to encode many intuitive facts about what distance means. This means that general results about metric spaces can be applied in many different contexts.

Like many fundamental mathematical concepts, the metric on a metric space can be interpreted in many different ways. A particular metric may not be best thought of as measuring physical distance, but, instead, as the cost of changing from one state to another (as with Wasserstein metrics on spaces of measures) or the degree of difference between two objects (for example, the Hamming distance between two strings of characters, or the Gromov–Hausdorff distance between metric spaces themselves).

=== Definition ===
Formally, a metric space is an ordered pair where is a set and is a metric on , i.e., a functionformula_1satisfying the following axioms for all points formula_2:
# The distance from a point to itself is zero: formula_3
# (Positivity) The distance between two distinct points is always positive: formula_4
# (Symmetry) The distance from to is always the same as the distance from to : formula_5
# The triangle inequality holds: formula_6This is a natural property of both physical and metaphorical notions of distance: you can arrive at from by taking a detour through , but this will not make your journey any shorter than the direct path.

If the metric is unambiguous, one often refers by abuse of notation to &quot;the metric space &quot;.

By taking all axioms except the second, one can show that distance is always non-negative:formula_7Therefore the second axiom can be weakened to formula_8 and combined with the first to make formula_9.

===Simple examples===
====The real numbers====
The real numbers with the distance function formula_10 given by the absolute difference form a metric space. Many properties of metric spaces and functions between them are generalizations of concepts in real analysis and coincide with those concepts when applied to the real line.

====Metrics on Euclidean spaces====

The Euclidean plane formula_11 can be equipped with many different metrics. The Euclidean distance familiar from school mathematics can be defined by
formula_12

The &quot;taxicab&quot; or &quot;Manhattan&quot; distance is defined by
formula_13
and can be thought of as the distance you need to travel along horizontal and vertical lines to get from one point to the other, as illustrated at the top of the article.

The &quot;maximum&quot;, formula_14, or &quot;Chebyshev distance&quot; is defined by
formula_15) because if it was then the fact that formula_16 is a Banach space would imply that it converges (a contradiction).

== Equivalence of metrics ==

For a given set &quot;X&quot;, two metrics formula_17 and formula_18 are called &quot;topologically equivalent&quot; (&quot;uniformly equivalent&quot;) if the identity mapping
:formula_19
is a homeomorphism (uniform isomorphism).

For example, if formula_20 is a metric, then formula_21 and formula_22 are metrics equivalent to formula_23

== References ==
*
*; reprinted with added commentary from </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="18" end="30" title="Metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="36" end="39" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q126017" start="72" end="80" title="distance" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="99" end="107" title="Element (mathematics)" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="124" end="130" title="point (geometry)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="162" end="170" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="180" end="186" title="Metric space" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="190" end="207" title="Metric space" label="distance function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="289" end="310" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="315" end="323" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="373" end="402" title="3-dimensional Euclidean space" label="3-dimensional Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="470" end="476" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357788" start="495" end="511" title="angular distance" label="angular distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="520" end="536" title="hyperbolic plane" label="hyperbolic plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633818" start="567" end="579" title="Conceptual metaphor" label="metaphorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q272172" start="702" end="718" title="Hamming distance" label="Hamming distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="1054" end="1073" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q726210" start="1076" end="1095" title="normed vector space" label="normed vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="1102" end="1107" title="graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="1113" end="1129" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="1135" end="1161" title="p-adic numbers" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="1187" end="1197" title="completion (metric space)" label="completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1227" end="1243" title="rational numbers" label="rational numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="1298" end="1313" title="Metric space" label="metric geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="1318" end="1343" title="Metric space" label="analysis on metric spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="1375" end="1396" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838611" start="1408" end="1412" title="ball (mathematics)" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="1415" end="1427" title="Complete metric space" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q741865" start="1440" end="1447" title="uniform continuity" label="uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q652707" start="1449" end="1458" title="Lipschitz continuity" label="Lipschitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q91259930" start="1464" end="1481" title="Hölder continuity" label="Hölder continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="1554" end="1564" title="continuous function" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="1566" end="1577" title="compactness" label="compactness"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="1583" end="1587" title="open set" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="1592" end="1602" title="closed set" label="closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="1684" end="1701" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1824" end="1844" title="surface of the Earth" label="surface of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q912925" start="1938" end="1969" title="great-circle distance" label="shortest path along the surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q177348" start="1977" end="1994" title="as the crow flies" label="as the crow flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="2198" end="2208" title="seismology" label="seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q768993" start="2943" end="2961" title="Wasserstein metric" label="Wasserstein metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="2976" end="2983" title="measure (mathematics)" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q272172" start="3052" end="3068" title="Hamming distance" label="Hamming distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q929777" start="3111" end="3136" title="Gromov–Hausdorff convergence" label="Gromov–Hausdorff distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="3223" end="3235" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="3280" end="3288" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q981351" start="3501" end="3509" title="Symmetric function" label="Symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="3593" end="3612" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q842159" start="3884" end="3901" title="abuse of notation" label="abuse of notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4191" end="4202" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773230" start="4255" end="4274" title="absolute difference" label="absolute difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="4391" end="4404" title="real analysis" label="real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q847073" start="4587" end="4605" title="Euclidean distance" label="Euclidean distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q573509" start="4673" end="4726" title="taxicab geometry" label="&amp;quot;taxicab&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;Manhattan&amp;quot; distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q573482" start="4970" end="4988" title="Chebyshev distance" label="Chebyshev distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="5360" end="5373" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789884" start="5375" end="5394" title="uniform isomorphism" label="uniform isomorphism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20021" wikidata="Q7173" url="?curid=20021" title="Marine biology">
<text>Marine biology is the scientific study of the biology of marine life, organisms that inhabit the sea. Given that in biology many phyla, families and genera have some species that live in the sea and others that live on land, marine biology classifies species based on the environment rather than on taxonomy.

A large proportion of all life on Earth lives in the ocean. The exact size of this &quot;large proportion&quot; is unknown, since many ocean species are still to be discovered. The ocean is a complex three-dimensional world, covering approximately 71% of the Earth&#x27;s surface. The habitats studied in marine biology include everything from the tiny layers of surface water in which organisms and abiotic items may be trapped in surface tension between the ocean and atmosphere, to the depths of the oceanic trenches, sometimes 10,000 meters or more beneath the surface of the ocean. Specific habitats include estuaries, coral reefs, kelp forests, seagrass meadows, the surrounds of seamounts and thermal vents, tidepools, muddy, sandy and rocky bottoms, and the open ocean (pelagic) zone, where solid objects are rare and the surface of the water is the only visible boundary. The organisms studied range from microscopic phytoplankton and zooplankton to huge cetaceans (whales) in length. Marine ecology is the study of how marine organisms interact with each other and the environment.

Marine life is a vast resource, providing food, medicine, and raw materials, in addition to helping to support recreation and tourism all over the world. At a fundamental level, marine life helps determine the very nature of our planet. Marine organisms contribute significantly to the oxygen cycle, and are involved in the regulation of the Earth&#x27;s climate. Shorelines are in part shaped and protected by marine life, and some marine organisms even help create new land.

Many species are economically important to humans, including both finfish and shellfish. It is also becoming understood that the well-being of marine organisms and other organisms are linked in fundamental ways. The human body of knowledge regarding the relationship between life in the sea and important cycles is rapidly growing, with new discoveries being made nearly every day. These cycles include those of matter (such as the carbon cycle) and of air (such as Earth&#x27;s respiration, and movement of energy through ecosystems including the ocean). Large areas beneath the ocean surface still remain effectively unexplored.

== Biological oceanography ==
Marine biology can be contrasted with biological oceanography. Marine life is a field of study both in marine biology and in biological oceanography. Biological oceanography is the study of how organisms affect and are affected by the physics, chemistry, and geology of the oceanographic system. Biological oceanography mostly focuses on the microorganisms within the ocean; looking at how they are affected by their environment and how that affects larger marine creatures and their ecosystem. Biological oceanography is similar to marine biology, but it studies ocean life from a different perspective. Biological oceanography takes a bottom up approach in terms of the food web, while marine biology studies the ocean from a top down perspective. Biological oceanography mainly focuses on the ecosystem of the ocean with an emphasis on plankton: their diversity (morphology, nutritional sources, motility, and metabolism); their productivity and how that plays a role in the global carbon cycle; and their distribution (predation and life cycle). Biological oceanography also investigates the role of microbes in food webs, and how humans impact the ecosystems in the oceans.

==Marine habitats==


Marine habitats can be divided into coastal and open ocean habitats. Coastal habitats are found in the area that extends from the shoreline to the edge of the continental shelf. Most marine life is found in coastal habitats, even though the shelf area occupies only seven percent of the total ocean area. Open ocean habitats are found in the deep ocean beyond the edge of the continental shelf. Alternatively, marine habitats can be divided into pelagic and demersal habitats. Pelagic habitats are found near the surface or in the open water column, away from the bottom of the ocean and affected by ocean currents, while demersal habitats are near or on the bottom. Marine habitats can be modified by their inhabitants. Some marine organisms, like corals, kelp and sea grasses, are ecosystem engineers which reshape the marine environment to the point where they create further habitat for other organisms.

===Intertidal and near shore===
Intertidal zones, the areas that are close to the shore, are constantly being exposed and covered by the ocean&#x27;s tides. A huge array of life can be found within this zone. Shore habitats span from the upper intertidal zones to the area where land vegetation takes prominence. It can be underwater anywhere from daily to very infrequently. Many species here are scavengers, living off of sea life that is washed up on the shore. Many land animals also make much use of the shore and intertidal habitats. A subgroup of organisms in this habitat bores and grinds exposed rock through the process of bioerosion.

===Estuaries===
Estuaries are also near shore and influenced by the tides. An estuary is a partially enclosed coastal body of water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it and with a free connection to the open sea. Estuaries form a transition zone between freshwater river environments and saltwater maritime environments. They are subject both to marine influences—such as tides, waves, and the influx of saline water—and to riverine influences—such as flows of fresh water and sediment. The shifting flows of both sea water and fresh water provide high levels of nutrients both in the water column and in sediment, making estuaries among the most productive natural habitats in the world.

=== Reefs ===

Reefs comprise some of the densest and most diverse habitats in the world. The best-known types of reefs are tropical coral reefs which exist in most tropical waters; however, reefs can also exist in cold water. Reefs are built up by corals and other calcium-depositing animals, usually on top of a rocky outcrop on the ocean floor. Reefs can also grow on other surfaces, which has made it possible to create artificial reefs. Coral reefs also support a huge community of life, including the corals themselves, their symbiotic zooxanthellae, tropical fish and many other organisms.

Much attention in marine biology is focused on coral reefs and the El Niño weather phenomenon. In 1998, coral reefs experienced the most severe mass bleaching events on record, when vast expanses of reefs across the world died because sea surface temperatures rose well above normal. Some reefs are recovering, but scientists say that between 50% and 70% of the world&#x27;s coral reefs are now endangered and predict that global warming could exacerbate this trend.

===Open ocean===

The open ocean is relatively unproductive because of a lack of nutrients, yet because it is so vast, in total it produces the most primary productivity. The open ocean is separated into different zones, and the different zones each have different ecologies. Zones which vary according to their depth include the epipelagic, mesopelagic, bathypelagic, abyssopelagic, and hadopelagic zones. Zones which vary by the amount of light they receive include the photic and aphotic zones. Much of the aphotic zone&#x27;s energy is supplied by the open ocean in the form of detritus.

=== Deep sea and trenches ===
The deepest recorded oceanic trench measured to date is the Mariana Trench, near the Philippines, in the Pacific Ocean at . At such depths, water pressure is extreme and there is no sunlight, but some life still exists. A white flatfish, a shrimp and a jellyfish were seen by the American crew of the bathyscaphe &quot;Trieste&quot; when it dove to the bottom in 1960. In general, the deep sea is considered to start at the aphotic zone, the point where sunlight loses its power of transference through the water. Many life forms that live at these depths have the ability to create their own light known as bio-luminescence. Marine life also flourishes around seamounts that rise from the depths, where fish and other sea life congregate to spawn and feed. Hydrothermal vents along the mid-ocean ridge spreading centers act as oases, as do their opposites, cold seeps. Such places support unique biomes and many new microbes and other lifeforms have been discovered at these locations. There is still much more to learn about the deeper parts of the ocean.

== Marine life ==

In biology, many phyla, families and genera have some species that live in the sea and others that live on land. Marine biology classifies species based on their environment rather than their taxonomy. For this reason, marine biology encompasses not only organisms that live only in a marine environment, but also other organisms whose lives revolve around the sea.

=== Microscopic life ===
As inhabitants of the largest environment on Earth, microbial marine systems drive changes in every global system. Microbes are responsible for virtually all photosynthesis that occurs in the ocean, as well as the cycling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and other nutrients and trace elements.

Microscopic life undersea is incredibly diverse and still poorly understood. For example, the role of viruses in marine ecosystems is barely being explored even in the beginning of the 21st century.

The role of phytoplankton is better understood due to their critical position as the most numerous primary producers on Earth. Phytoplankton are categorized into cyanobacteria (also called blue-green algae/bacteria), various types of algae (red, green, brown, and yellow-green), diatoms, dinoflagellates, euglenoids, coccolithophorids, cryptomonads, chrysophytes, chlorophytes, prasinophytes, and silicoflagellates.

Zooplankton tend to be somewhat larger, and not all are microscopic. Many Protozoa are zooplankton, including dinoflagellates, zooflagellates, foraminiferans, and radiolarians. Some of these (such as dinoflagellates) are also phytoplankton; the distinction between plants and animals often breaks down in very small organisms. Other zooplankton include cnidarians, ctenophores, chaetognaths, molluscs, arthropods, urochordates, and annelids such as polychaetes. Many larger animals begin their life as zooplankton before they become large enough to take their familiar forms. Two examples are fish larvae and sea stars (also called starfish).

=== Plants and algae ===
Microscopic algae and plants provide important habitats for life, sometimes acting as hiding places for larval forms of larger fish and foraging places for invertebrates.

Algal life is widespread and very diverse under the ocean. Microscopic photosynthetic algae contribute a larger proportion of the world&#x27;s photosynthetic output than all the terrestrial forests combined. Most of the niche occupied by sub plants on land is actually occupied by macroscopic algae in the ocean, such as &quot;Sargassum&quot; and kelp, which are commonly known as seaweeds that create kelp forests.

Plants that survive in the sea are often found in shallow waters, such as the seagrasses (examples of which are eelgrass, &quot;Zostera&quot;, and turtle grass, &quot;Thalassia&quot;). These plants have adapted to the high salinity of the ocean environment. The intertidal zone is also a good place to find plant life in the sea, where mangroves or cordgrass or beach grass might grow.

===Invertebrates===
As on land, invertebrates, or animals that lack a backbone, make up a huge portion of all life in the sea. Invertebrate sea life includes Cnidaria such as jellyfish and sea anemones; Ctenophora; sea worms including the phyla Platyhelminthes, Nemertea, Annelida, Sipuncula, Echiura, Chaetognatha, and Phoronida; Mollusca including shellfish, squid, octopus; Arthropoda including Chelicerata and Crustacea; Porifera; Bryozoa; Echinodermata including starfish; and Urochordata including sea squirts or tunicates.

=== Fungi ===
Over 10,000 species of fungi are known from marine environments. These are parasitic on marine algae or animals, or are saprobes on algae, corals, protozoan cysts, sea grasses, wood and other substrata, and can also be found in sea foam. Spores of many species have special appendages which facilitate attachment to the substratum. A very diverse range of unusual secondary metabolites is produced by marine fungi.

===Vertebrates===
==== Fish ====
A reported 33,400 species of fish, including bony and cartilaginous fish, had been described by 2016, more than all other vertebrates combined. About 60% of fish species live in saltwater.

==== Reptiles ====
Reptiles which inhabit or frequent the sea include sea turtles, sea snakes, terrapins, the marine iguana, and the saltwater crocodile. Most extant marine reptiles, except for some sea snakes, are oviparous and need to return to land to lay their eggs. Thus most species, excluding sea turtles, spend most of their lives on or near land rather than in the ocean. Despite their marine adaptations, most sea snakes prefer shallow waters nearby land, around islands, especially waters that are somewhat sheltered, as well as near estuaries. Some extinct marine reptiles, such as ichthyosaurs, evolved to be viviparous and had no requirement to return to land.

==== Birds ====
Birds adapted to living in the marine environment are often called seabirds. Examples include albatross, penguins, gannets, and auks. Although they spend most of their lives in the ocean, species such as gulls can often be found thousands of miles inland.

==== Mammals ====
There are five main types of marine mammals: cetaceans (toothed whales and baleen whales); sirenians such as manatees; pinnipeds including seals and the walrus; sea otters; and the 
polar bear. All are air-breathing, meaning that while some such as the sperm whale can dive for prolonged periods, all must return to the surface to breathe.

== Subfields ==
The marine ecosystem is large, and thus there are many sub-fields of marine biology. Most involve studying specializations of particular animal groups, such as phycology, invertebrate zoology and ichthyology. Other subfields study the physical effects of continual immersion in sea water and the ocean in general, adaptation to a salty environment, and the effects of changing various oceanic properties on marine life. A subfield of marine biology studies the relationships between oceans and ocean life, and global warming and environmental issues (such as carbon dioxide displacement). Recent marine biotechnology has focused largely on marine biomolecules, especially proteins, that may have uses in medicine or engineering. Marine environments are the home to many exotic biological materials that may inspire biomimetic materials.

Through constant monitoring of the ocean, there have been discoveries of marine life which could be used to create remedies for certain diseases such as cancer and leukemia. In addition, Ziconotide, an approved drug used to treat pain, was created from a snail which resides in the ocean.

=== Related fields ===
Marine biology is a branch of biology. It is closely linked to oceanography, especially biological oceanography, and may be regarded as a sub-field of marine science. It also encompasses many ideas from ecology. Fisheries science and marine conservation can be considered partial offshoots of marine biology (as well as environmental studies). Marine chemistry, physical oceanography and atmospheric sciences are also closely related to this field.

==Distribution factors==
An active research topic in marine biology is to discover and map the life cycles of various species and where they spend their time. Technologies that aid in this discovery include pop-up satellite archival tags, acoustic tags, and a variety of other data loggers. Marine biologists study how the ocean currents, tides and many other oceanic factors affect ocean life forms, including their growth, distribution and well-being. This has only recently become technically feasible with advances in GPS and newer underwater visual devices.

Most ocean life breeds in specific places, nests in others, spends time as juveniles in still others, and in maturity in yet others. Scientists know little about where many species spend different parts of their life cycles especially in the infant and juvenile years. For example, it is still largely unknown where juvenile sea turtles and some sharks in the first year of their life travel. Recent advances in underwater tracking devices are illuminating what we know about marine organisms that live at great ocean depths. The information that pop-up satellite archival tags gives aids in fishing closures for certain times of the year and the development of marine protected areas. This data is important to both scientists and fishermen because they are discovering that, by restricting commercial fishing in one small area, they can have a large impact in maintaining a healthy fish population in a much larger area.

== History ==

The study of marine biology dates to Aristotle (384–322 BC), who made many observations of life in the sea around Lesbos, laying the foundation for many future discoveries. In 1768, Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin (1744–1774) published the &quot;Historia Fucorum&quot;, the first work dedicated to marine algae and the first book on marine biology to use the new binomial nomenclature of Linnaeus. It included elaborate illustrations of seaweed and marine algae on folded leaves. The British naturalist Edward Forbes (1815–1854) is generally regarded as the founder of the science of marine biology. The pace of oceanographic and marine biology studies quickly accelerated during the course of the 19th century.

The observations made in the first studies of marine biology fueled the Age of Discovery and exploration that followed. During this time, a vast amount of knowledge was gained about the life that exists in the oceans of the world. Many voyages contributed significantly to this pool of knowledge. Among the most significant were the voyages of where Charles Darwin came up with his theories of evolution and on the formation of coral reefs. Another important expedition was undertaken by HMS &quot;Challenger&quot;, where findings were made of unexpectedly high species diversity among fauna stimulating much theorizing by population ecologists on how such varieties of life could be maintained in what was thought to be such a hostile environment. This era was important for the history of marine biology but naturalists were still limited in their studies because they lacked technology that would allow them to adequately examine species that lived in deep parts of the oceans.

The creation of marine laboratories was important because it allowed marine biologists to conduct research and process their specimens from expeditions. The oldest marine laboratory in the world, Station biologique de Roscoff, was established in Concarneau, France founded by the College of France in 1859. In the United States, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography dates back to 1903, while the prominent Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute was founded in 1930. The development of technology such as sound navigation and ranging, scuba diving gear, submersibles and remotely operated vehicles allowed marine biologists to discover and explore life in deep oceans that was once thought to not exist. Public interest in the subject continued to develop in the post-war years with the publication of Rachel Carson&#x27;s sea trilogy (1941–1955).
== See also ==
* Acoustic ecology
* Aquaculture
* Bathymetry
* Biological oceanography
* Effects of climate change on oceans
* Freshwater biology
* Marine habitat concrete
* Modular ocean model
* Oceanic basin
* Oceanic climate
* Phycology
=== Lists ===

* Glossary of ecology
* Index of biology articles
* Large marine ecosystem
* List of ecologists
* List of marine biologists
* List of marine ecoregions (WWF)
* Outline of biology
* Outline of ecology
== References ==
== Further references ==
* Morrissey J and Sumich J (2011) &quot;Introduction to the Biology of Marine Life&quot; Jones &amp; Bartlett Publishers. .
* Mladenov, Philip V., Marine Biology: A Very Short Introduction, 2nd edn (Oxford, 2020; online edn, Very Short Introductions online, Feb. 2020), http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/actrade/9780198841715.001.0001, accessed 21 Jun. 2020.

== External links ==

* Smithsonian Ocean Portal 
* Marine Conservation Society 
* Marine Ecology – an evolutionary perspective
* Free special issue: Marine Biology in Time and Space 
* Creatures of the deep ocean – &quot;National Geographic&quot; documentary, 2010.
* Exploris 
* Freshwater and Marine Image Bank – From the University of Washington Library
* Marine Training Portal – Portal grouping training initiatives in the field of Marine Biology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="0" end="14" title="Marine biology" label="Marine biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="57" end="68" title="marine life" label="marine life"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="97" end="100" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="116" end="123" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="129" end="134" title="scientific classification" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="136" end="144" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="149" end="155" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="272" end="283" title="environment (biophysical)" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="299" end="307" title="taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="336" end="349" title="life" label="life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="742" end="757" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q119253" start="813" end="827" title="oceanic trench" label="oceanic trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="923" end="932" title="estuaries" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="934" end="944" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="947" end="958" title="kelp forest" label="kelp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411280" start="961" end="977" title="seagrass meadows" label="seagrass meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="996" end="1004" title="seamount" label="seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="1010" end="1022" title="thermal vent" label="thermal vent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521187" start="1025" end="1033" title="tidepool" label="tidepool"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="1088" end="1095" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="1236" end="1249" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="1254" end="1265" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="1274" end="1283" title="cetaceans" label="cetaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="1304" end="1318" title="Marine ecosystem" label="Marine ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="1514" end="1524" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1529" end="1536" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140866" start="1689" end="1701" title="oxygen cycle" label="oxygen cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="1758" end="1765" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="1767" end="1772" title="Shore" label="Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q167751" start="2313" end="2325" title="carbon cycle" label="carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q650994" start="2347" end="2371" title="Global climate model" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="2404" end="2413" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378619" start="2581" end="2604" title="biological oceanography" label="biological oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="2606" end="2617" title="Marine life" label="Marine life"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="2679" end="2691" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2778" end="2785" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="2787" end="2796" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2802" end="2809" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="2817" end="2837" title="ocean" label="oceanographic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="2885" end="2898" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="3382" end="3390" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="3696" end="3705" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="3781" end="3788" title="coastal" label="coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="3793" end="3803" title="open ocean" label="open ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="3875" end="3884" title="shoreline" label="shoreline"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="3904" end="3921" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="4191" end="4198" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255177" start="4203" end="4211" title="demersal" label="demersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395805" start="4281" end="4293" title="water column" label="water column"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="4345" end="4358" title="ocean current" label="ocean current"/>
<link wikidata="Q962054" start="4528" end="4546" title="ecosystem engineer" label="ecosystem engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="4686" end="4701" title="Intertidal zone" label="Intertidal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="4804" end="4809" title="tides" label="tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120531" start="5287" end="5297" title="bioerosion" label="bioerosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="5316" end="5325" title="Estuaries" label="Estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="5368" end="5373" title="tides" label="tides"/>
<link wikidata="Q184358" start="6019" end="6023" title="Reef" label="Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="6128" end="6136" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="6137" end="6147" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="6253" end="6258" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="6270" end="6277" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q985843" start="6428" end="6443" title="artificial reef" label="artificial reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q220392" start="6546" end="6559" title="zooxanthellae" label="zooxanthellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="6669" end="6676" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507383" start="6837" end="6860" title="sea surface temperature" label="sea surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="7025" end="7039" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="7400" end="7410" title="epipelagic" label="epipelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q279640" start="7412" end="7423" title="mesopelagic" label="mesopelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417842" start="7425" end="7437" title="bathypelagic" label="bathypelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q242857" start="7439" end="7452" title="abyssopelagic" label="abyssopelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q746158" start="7458" end="7469" title="hadopelagic" label="hadopelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="7542" end="7548" title="Photic zone" label="photic"/>
<link wikidata="Q618477" start="7553" end="7565" title="aphotic zone" label="aphotic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="7652" end="7660" title="detritus" label="detritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q119253" start="7714" end="7728" title="oceanic trench" label="oceanic trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q510" start="7753" end="7767" title="Mariana Trench" label="Mariana Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="7778" end="7789" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="7798" end="7811" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="7833" end="7847" title="water pressure" label="water pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577" start="7921" end="7929" title="flatfish" label="flatfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q208532" start="7994" end="8005" title="bathyscaphe" label="bathyscaphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q850157" start="8012" end="8019" title="Bathyscaphe Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q618477" start="8117" end="8129" title="aphotic zone" label="aphotic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179924" start="8301" end="8317" title="bio-luminescence" label="bio-luminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="8354" end="8362" title="seamount" label="seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="8451" end="8468" title="Hydrothermal vent" label="Hydrothermal vent"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="8480" end="8495" title="mid-ocean ridge" label="mid-ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="8521" end="8526" title="oasis" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107856" start="8551" end="8561" title="cold seeps" label="cold seeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="8590" end="8595" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="8610" end="8617" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="8744" end="8749" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="9321" end="9335" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="9388" end="9394" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="9396" end="9404" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="9406" end="9416" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="9427" end="9436" title="nutrients" label="nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="9560" end="9565" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="9670" end="9683" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q515905" start="9757" end="9774" title="primary production" label="primary producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="9820" end="9833" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="9892" end="9897" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="9937" end="9943" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="9946" end="9960" title="dinoflagellate" label="dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134863" start="9963" end="9973" title="Euglenid" label="euglenoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647990" start="9975" end="9991" title="coccolithophorid" label="coccolithophorid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18668642" start="9994" end="10005" title="cryptomonad" label="cryptomonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763065" start="10008" end="10019" title="chrysophyte" label="chrysophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q264543" start="10022" end="10033" title="chlorophyte" label="chlorophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134915" start="10036" end="10048" title="prasinophyte" label="prasinophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18679042" start="10055" end="10071" title="silicoflagellate" label="silicoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="10075" end="10086" title="Zooplankton" label="Zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="10149" end="10157" title="Protozoa" label="Protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074171" start="10202" end="10215" title="zooflagellate" label="zooflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="10218" end="10230" title="foraminifera" label="foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920" start="10238" end="10249" title="radiolarian" label="radiolarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="10428" end="10437" title="cnidarian" label="cnidarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q102778" start="10440" end="10450" title="Ctenophora (phylum)" label="ctenophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192416" start="10453" end="10465" title="chaetognatha" label="chaetognaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="10467" end="10474" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="10477" end="10486" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q165118" start="10489" end="10501" title="Tunicate" label="urochordates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25522" start="10507" end="10514" title="annelid" label="annelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="10524" end="10534" title="polychaete" label="polychaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986436" start="10668" end="10678" title="fish larva" label="fish larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="10707" end="10715" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="11136" end="11141" title="ecological niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="11209" end="11214" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q865061" start="11243" end="11252" title="Sargassum" label="Sargassum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="11263" end="11267" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="11297" end="11304" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="11318" end="11329" title="kelp forest" label="kelp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="11411" end="11419" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q157371" start="11461" end="11468" title="Zostera" label="Zostera"/>
<link wikidata="Q596300" start="11500" end="11509" title="Thalassia (plant)" label="Thalassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="11595" end="11610" title="foreshore" label="intertidal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="11669" end="11678" title="mangroves" label="mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q159038" start="11682" end="11691" title="cordgrass" label="cordgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130" start="11695" end="11706" title="Ammophila (Poaceae)" label="beach grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="11752" end="11765" title="invertebrates" label="invertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="11878" end="11886" title="Cnidaria" label="Cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="11895" end="11904" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q147256" start="11909" end="11920" title="sea anemone" label="sea anemone"/>
<link wikidata="Q102778" start="11923" end="11933" title="Ctenophora (phylum)" label="Ctenophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440146" start="11935" end="11943" title="sea worm" label="sea worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="11959" end="11964" title="phylum (biology)" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q124900" start="11965" end="11980" title="Platyhelminthes" label="Platyhelminthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185631" start="11982" end="11990" title="Nemertea" label="Nemertea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25522" start="11992" end="12000" title="Annelida" label="Annelida"/>
<link wikidata="Q205712" start="12002" end="12011" title="Sipuncula" label="Sipuncula"/>
<link wikidata="Q64119" start="12013" end="12020" title="Echiura" label="Echiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q192416" start="12022" end="12034" title="Chaetognatha" label="Chaetognatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q162907" start="12040" end="12049" title="Phoronida" label="Phoronida"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="12051" end="12059" title="Mollusca" label="Mollusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="12070" end="12079" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="12081" end="12086" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="12088" end="12095" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="12097" end="12107" title="Arthropoda" label="Arthropoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359" start="12118" end="12129" title="Chelicerata" label="Chelicerata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="12134" end="12143" title="Crustacea" label="Crustacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="12145" end="12153" title="Porifera" label="Porifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="12155" end="12162" title="Bryozoa" label="Bryozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="12164" end="12177" title="Echinodermata" label="Echinodermata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="12188" end="12196" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q165118" start="12202" end="12213" title="Urochordata" label="Urochordata"/>
<link wikidata="Q190090" start="12224" end="12234" title="sea squirt" label="sea squirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165118" start="12239" end="12247" title="tunicate" label="tunicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="12288" end="12293" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783890" start="12353" end="12365" title="marine algae" label="marine algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="12385" end="12392" title="saprobe" label="saprobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q249020" start="12493" end="12501" title="sea foam" label="sea foam"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="12639" end="12649" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283970" start="12725" end="12747" title="Diversity of fish" label="33,400 species of fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="12759" end="12763" title="bony fish" label="bony"/>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="12768" end="12786" title="cartilaginous fish" label="cartilaginous fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="12923" end="12930" title="Reptile" label="Reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="12974" end="12984" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44514058" start="12987" end="12996" title="sea snake" label="sea snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703292" start="12999" end="13007" title="terrapin" label="terrapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208796" start="13014" end="13027" title="marine iguana" label="marine iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182599" start="13037" end="13056" title="saltwater crocodile" label="saltwater crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="13063" end="13069" title="extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="13119" end="13128" title="oviparity" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="13465" end="13472" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q194515" start="13498" end="13509" title="ichthyosaur" label="ichthyosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="13526" end="13536" title="viviparity" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764288" start="13627" end="13645" title="marine environment" label="marine environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="13663" end="13670" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="13690" end="13699" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="13701" end="13708" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651414" start="13711" end="13717" title="gannet" label="gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="13724" end="13727" title="auk" label="auk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="13800" end="13804" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="13916" end="13923" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q144144" start="13927" end="13940" title="toothed whale" label="toothed whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="13946" end="13958" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431" start="13962" end="13970" title="sirenian" label="sirenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42797" start="13980" end="13987" title="manatee" label="manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="13990" end="13998" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="14024" end="14030" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="14032" end="14041" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="14053" end="14063" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="14124" end="14135" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="14232" end="14248" title="marine ecosystem" label="marine ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188391" start="14388" end="14397" title="phycology" label="phycology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12744095" start="14399" end="14419" title="invertebrate zoology" label="invertebrate zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60242" start="14424" end="14435" title="ichthyology" label="ichthyology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="14506" end="14515" title="sea water" label="sea water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="14787" end="14801" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="14831" end="14844" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q206229" start="14875" end="14886" title="biomolecule" label="biomolecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="14900" end="14907" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q189131" start="15043" end="15062" title="Bionics" label="biomimetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="15409" end="15416" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="15442" end="15454" title="oceanography" label="oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378619" start="15467" end="15490" title="biological oceanography" label="biological oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="15530" end="15544" title="marine science" label="marine science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="15582" end="15589" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420050" start="15591" end="15608" title="Fisheries science" label="Fisheries science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916831" start="15613" end="15632" title="marine conservation" label="marine conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381367" start="15699" end="15720" title="environmental studies" label="environmental studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076133" start="15723" end="15739" title="Marine chemistry" label="Marine chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337681" start="15741" end="15762" title="physical oceanography" label="physical oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q757520" start="15767" end="15786" title="atmospheric science" label="atmospheric science"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="15924" end="15934" title="biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228946" start="16036" end="16065" title="pop-up satellite archival tag" label="pop-up satellite archival tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674716" start="16068" end="16080" title="acoustic tag" label="acoustic tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172468" start="16106" end="16118" title="data loggers" label="data loggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="16152" end="16165" title="ocean current" label="ocean current"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="16168" end="16172" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="16351" end="16354" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="16718" end="16728" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="16739" end="16744" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228946" start="16940" end="16969" title="pop-up satellite archival tag" label="pop-up satellite archival tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="17055" end="17076" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="17369" end="17378" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17402" end="17438" title="Aristotle&amp;#x27;s biology#Empirical research" label="many observations of life in the sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="17446" end="17452" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q61471" start="17514" end="17536" title="Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin" label="Samuel Gottlieb Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="17628" end="17633" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="17686" end="17707" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="17711" end="17719" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248394" start="17826" end="17839" title="Edward Forbes" label="Edward Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="18108" end="18124" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="18386" end="18400" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="18430" end="18439" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="18464" end="18475" title="coral reefs" label="coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q119397" start="18524" end="18550" title="HMS Challenger (1858)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q706937" start="18598" end="18615" title="species diversity" label="species diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="18622" end="18627" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323056" start="19214" end="19243" title="Station biologique de Roscoff" label="Station biologique de Roscoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q604029" start="19351" end="19386" title="Scripps Institution of Oceanography" label="Scripps Institution of Oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404053" start="19427" end="19461" title="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute" label="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="19521" end="19549" title="Sonar" label="sound navigation and ranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="19551" end="19563" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570255" start="19570" end="19581" title="submersible" label="submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q618465" start="19587" end="19613" title="Remotely operated underwater vehicle" label="remotely operated vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q100948" start="19818" end="19831" title="Rachel Carson" label="Rachel Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674681" start="19881" end="19897" title="Acoustic ecology" label="Acoustic ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="19900" end="19911" title="Aquaculture" label="Aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q810826" start="19914" end="19924" title="Bathymetry" label="Bathymetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378619" start="19927" end="19950" title="Biological oceanography" label="Biological oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347373" start="19953" end="19988" title="Effects of climate change on oceans" label="Effects of climate change on oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306816" start="19991" end="20009" title="Freshwater biology" label="Freshwater biology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20012" end="20035" title="Types of concrete#Marine habitat concrete" label="Marine habitat concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889725" start="20038" end="20057" title="Modular ocean model" label="Modular ocean model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069932" start="20060" end="20073" title="Oceanic basin" label="Oceanic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20076" end="20091" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188391" start="20094" end="20103" title="Phycology" label="Phycology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414984" start="20121" end="20140" title="Glossary of ecology" label="Glossary of ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276666" start="20143" end="20168" title="Index of biology articles" label="Index of biology articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="20171" end="20193" title="Large marine ecosystem" label="Large marine ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617719" start="20196" end="20214" title="List of ecologists" label="List of ecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627179" start="20217" end="20242" title="List of marine biologists" label="List of marine biologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627185" start="20245" end="20276" title="List of marine ecoregions (WWF)" label="List of marine ecoregions (WWF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920666" start="20279" end="20297" title="Outline of biology" label="Outline of biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112610" start="20300" end="20318" title="Outline of ecology" label="Outline of ecology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20023" wikidata="Q726378" url="?curid=20023" title="Microkernel">
<text>In computer science, a microkernel (often abbreviated as μ-kernel) is the near-minimum amount of software that can provide the mechanisms needed to implement an operating system (OS). These mechanisms include low-level address space management, thread management, and inter-process communication (IPC).

If the hardware provides multiple rings or CPU modes, the microkernel may be the only software executing at the most privileged level, which is generally referred to as supervisor or kernel mode. Traditional operating system functions, such as device drivers, protocol stacks and file systems, are typically removed from the microkernel itself and are instead run in user space.

In terms of the source code size, microkernels are often smaller than monolithic kernels. The MINIX 3 microkernel, for example, has only approximately 12,000 lines of code.

==History==
Microkernels trace their roots back to Danish computer pioneer Per Brinch Hansen and his tenure in Danish computer company Regnecentralen where he led software development efforts for the RC 4000 computer. In 1967, Regnecentralen was installing a RC 4000 prototype in the Zakłady Azotowe Puławy fertilizer plant in Poland. The computer used a small real-time operating system tailored for the needs of the plant. Brinch Hansen and his team became concerned with the lack of generality and reusability of the RC 4000 system. They feared that each installation would require a different operating system so they started to investigate novel and more general ways of creating software for the RC 4000.
In 1969, their effort resulted in the completion of the RC 4000 Multiprogramming System. Its nucleus provided inter-process communication based on message-passing for up to 23 unprivileged processes, out of which 8 at a time were protected from one another. It further implemented scheduling of time slices of programs executed in parallel, initiation and control of program execution at the request of other running programs, and initiation of data transfers to or from peripherals. Besides these elementary mechanisms, it had no built-in strategy for program execution and resource allocation. This strategy was to be implemented by a hierarchy of running programs in which parent processes had complete control over child processes and acted as their operating systems.

Following Brinch Hansen&#x27;s work, microkernels have been developed since the 1970s. The term microkernel itself first appeared no later than 1981. Microkernels were meant as a response to changes in the computer world, and to several challenges adapting existing &quot;mono-kernels&quot; to these new systems. New device drivers, protocol stacks, file systems and other low-level systems were being developed all the time. This code was normally located in the monolithic kernel, and thus required considerable work and careful code management to work on. Microkernels were developed with the idea that all of these services would be implemented as user-space programs, like any other, allowing them to be worked on monolithically and started and stopped like any other program. This would not only allow these services to be more easily worked on, but also separated the kernel code to allow it to be finely tuned without worrying about unintended side effects. Moreover, it would allow entirely new operating systems to be &quot;built up&quot; on a common core, aiding OS research.

Microkernels were a very hot topic in the 1980s when the first usable local area networks were being introduced.. The AmigaOS Exec kernel was an early example, introduced in 1986 and used in a PC with relative commercial success. The lack of memory protection, considered in other respects a flaw, allowed this kernel to have very high message-passing performance because it did not need to copy data while exchanging messages between user-space programs.

The same mechanisms that allowed the kernel to be distributed into user space also allowed the system to be distributed across network links. The first microkernels, notably Mach created by Richard Rashid, proved to have disappointing performance, but the inherent advantages appeared so great that it was a major line of research into the late 1990s. However, during this time the speed of computers grew greatly in relation to networking systems, and the disadvantages in performance came to overwhelm the advantages in development terms.

Many attempts were made to adapt the existing systems to have better performance, but the overhead was always considerable and most of these efforts required the user-space programs to be moved back into the kernel. By 2000, most large-scale Mach kernel efforts had ended, although Apple&#x27;s macOS, released in 2001, still uses a hybrid kernel called XNU, which combines a heavily modified (hybrid) OSF/1&#x27;s Mach kernel (OSFMK 7.3 kernel) with code from BSD UNIX, and this kernel is also used in iOS, tvOS, and watchOS. Windows NT, starting with NT 3.1 and continuing with Windows 11, uses a hybrid kernel design. , the Mach-based GNU Hurd is also functional and included in testing versions of Arch Linux and Debian.

Although major work on microkernels had largely ended, experimenters continued development. It has since been shown that many of the performance problems of earlier designs were not a fundamental limitation of the concept, but instead due to the designer&#x27;s desire to use single-purpose systems to implement as many of these services as possible. Using a more pragmatic approach to the problem, including assembly code and relying on the processor to enforce concepts normally supported in software led to a new series of microkernels with dramatically improved performance.

Microkernels are closely related to exokernels. They also have much in common with hypervisors, but the latter make no claim to minimality and are specialized to supporting virtual machines; the L4 microkernel frequently finds use in a hypervisor capacity.

==Introduction==
Early operating system kernels were rather small, partly because computer memory was limited. As the capability of computers grew, the number of devices the kernel had to control also grew. Throughout the early history of Unix, kernels were generally small, even though they contained various device drivers and file system implementations. When address spaces increased from 16 to 32 bits, kernel design was no longer constrained by the hardware architecture, and kernels began to grow larger.

The Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) of Unix began the era of larger kernels. In addition to operating a basic system consisting of the CPU, disks and printers, BSD added a complete TCP/IP networking system and a number of &quot;virtual&quot; devices that allowed the existing programs to work &#x27;invisibly&#x27; over the network. This growth continued for many years, resulting in kernels with millions of lines of source code. As a result of this growth, kernels were prone to bugs and became increasingly difficult to maintain.

The microkernel was intended to address this growth of kernels and the difficulties that resulted. In theory, the microkernel design allows for easier management of code due to its division into user space services. This also allows for increased security and stability resulting from the reduced amount of code running in kernel mode. For example, if a networking service crashed due to buffer overflow, only the networking service&#x27;s memory would be corrupted, leaving the rest of the system still functional.

==Inter-process communication==
Inter-process communication (IPC) is any mechanism which allows separate processes to communicate with each other, usually by sending messages. Shared memory is, strictly defined, also an inter-process communication mechanism, but the abbreviation IPC usually refers to message passing only, and it is the latter that is particularly relevant to microkernels. IPC allows the operating system to be built from a number of smaller programs called servers, which are used by other programs on the system, invoked via IPC. Most or all support for peripheral hardware is handled in this fashion, with servers for device drivers, network protocol stacks, file systems, graphics, etc.

IPC can be synchronous or asynchronous. Asynchronous IPC is analogous to network communication: the sender dispatches a message and continues executing. The receiver checks (polls) for the availability of the message, or is alerted to it via some notification mechanism. Asynchronous IPC requires that the kernel maintains buffers and queues for messages, and deals with buffer overflows; it also requires double copying of messages (sender to kernel and kernel to receiver). In synchronous IPC, the first party (sender or receiver) blocks until the other party is ready to perform the IPC. It does not require buffering or multiple copies, but the implicit rendezvous can make programming tricky. Most programmers prefer asynchronous send and synchronous receive.

First-generation microkernels typically supported synchronous as well as asynchronous IPC, and suffered from poor IPC performance. Jochen Liedtke assumed the design and implementation of the IPC mechanisms to be the underlying reason for this poor performance. In his L4 microkernel he pioneered methods that lowered IPC costs by an order of magnitude. These include an IPC system call that supports a send as well as a receive operation, making all IPC synchronous, and passing as much data as possible in registers. Furthermore, Liedtke introduced the concept of the &quot;direct process switch&quot;, where during an IPC execution an (incomplete) context switch is performed from the sender directly to the receiver. If, as in L4, part or all of the message is passed in registers, this transfers the in-register part of the message without any copying at all. Furthermore, the overhead of invoking the scheduler is avoided; this is especially beneficial in the common case where IPC is used in a remote procedure call (RPC) type fashion by a client invoking a server. Another optimization, called &quot;lazy scheduling&quot;, avoids traversing scheduling queues during IPC by leaving threads that block during IPC in the ready queue. Once the scheduler is invoked, it moves such threads to the appropriate waiting queue. As in many cases a thread gets unblocked before the next scheduler invocation, this approach saves significant work. Similar approaches have since been adopted by QNX and MINIX 3.

In a series of experiments, Chen and Bershad compared memory cycles per instruction (MCPI) of monolithic Ultrix with those of microkernel Mach combined with a 4.3BSD Unix server running in user space. Their results explained Mach&#x27;s poorer performance by higher MCPI and demonstrated that IPC alone is not responsible for much of the system overhead, suggesting that optimizations focused exclusively on IPC will have a limited effect. Liedtke later refined Chen and Bershad&#x27;s results by making an observation that the bulk of the difference between Ultrix and Mach MCPI was caused by capacity cache-misses and concluding that drastically reducing the cache working set of a microkernel will solve the problem.

In a client-server system, most communication is essentially synchronous, even if using asynchronous primitives, as the typical operation is a client invoking a server and then waiting for a reply. As it also lends itself to more efficient implementation, most microkernels generally followed L4&#x27;s lead and only provided a synchronous IPC primitive. Asynchronous IPC could be implemented on top by using helper threads. However, experience has shown that the utility of synchronous IPC is dubious: synchronous IPC forces a multi-threaded design onto otherwise simple systems, with the resulting synchronization complexities. Moreover, an RPC-like server invocation sequentializes client and server, which should be avoided if they are running on separate cores. Versions of L4 deployed in commercial products have therefore found it necessary to add an asynchronous notification mechanism to better support asynchronous communication. This signal-like mechanism does not carry data and therefore does not require buffering by the kernel. By having two forms of IPC, they have nonetheless violated the principle of minimality. Other versions of L4 have switched to asynchronous IPC completely.

As synchronous IPC blocks the first party until the other is ready, unrestricted use could easily lead to deadlocks. Furthermore, a client could easily mount a denial-of-service attack on a server by sending a request and never attempting to receive the reply. Therefore, synchronous IPC must provide a means to prevent indefinite blocking. Many microkernels provide timeouts on IPC calls, which limit the blocking time. In practice, choosing sensible timeout values is difficult, and systems almost inevitably use infinite timeouts for clients and zero timeouts for servers. As a consequence, the trend is towards not providing arbitrary timeouts, but only a flag which indicates that the IPC should fail immediately if the partner is not ready. This approach effectively provides a choice of the two timeout values of zero and infinity. Recent versions of L4 and MINIX have gone down this path (older versions of L4 used timeouts). QNX avoids the problem by requiring the client to specify the reply buffer as part of the message send call. When the server replies the kernel copies the data to the client&#x27;s buffer, without having to wait for the client to receive the response explicitly.

==Servers==
Microkernel servers are essentially daemon programs like any others, except that the kernel grants some of them privileges to interact with parts of physical memory that are otherwise off limits to most programs. This allows some servers, particularly device drivers, to interact directly with hardware.

A basic set of servers for a general-purpose microkernel includes file system servers, device driver servers, networking servers, display servers, and user interface device servers. This set of servers (drawn from QNX) provides roughly the set of services offered by a Unix monolithic kernel. The necessary servers are started at system startup and provide services, such as file, network, and device access, to ordinary application programs. With such servers running in the environment of a user application, server development is similar to ordinary application development, rather than the build-and-boot process needed for kernel development.

Additionally, many &quot;crashes&quot; can be corrected by simply stopping and restarting the server, which would not be feasible if the entire kernel had to reboot. However, part of the system state is lost with the failing server, hence this approach requires applications to cope with failure. A good example is a server responsible for TCP/IP connections: If this server is restarted, applications will experience a &quot;lost&quot; connection, a normal occurrence in a networked system. For other services, failure is less expected and may require changes to application code. For QNX, restart capability is offered as the QNX High Availability Toolkit.

==Device drivers==
Device drivers frequently perform direct memory access (DMA), and therefore can write to arbitrary locations of physical memory, including various kernel data structures. Such drivers must therefore be trusted. It is a common misconception that this means that they must be part of the kernel. In fact, a driver is not inherently more or less trustworthy by being part of the kernel.

While running a device driver in user space does not necessarily reduce the damage a misbehaving driver can cause, in practice it is beneficial for system stability in the presence of buggy (rather than malicious) drivers: memory-access violations by the driver code itself (as opposed to the device) may still be caught by the memory-management hardware. Furthermore, many devices are not DMA-capable, their drivers can be made untrusted by running them in user space. Recently, an increasing number of computers feature IOMMUs, many of which can be used to restrict a device&#x27;s access to physical memory. This also allows user-mode drivers to become untrusted.

User-mode drivers actually predate microkernels. The Michigan Terminal System (MTS), in 1967, supported user space drivers (including its file system support), the first operating system to be designed with that capability. Historically, drivers were less of a problem, as the number of devices was small and trusted anyway, so having them in the kernel simplified the design and avoided potential performance problems. This led to the traditional driver-in-the-kernel style of Unix, Linux, and Windows NT. With the proliferation of various kinds of peripherals, the amount of driver code escalated and in modern operating systems dominates the kernel in code size.

==Essential components and minimality==
As a microkernel must allow building arbitrary operating system services on top, it must provide some core functionality. At a minimum, this includes:
* Some mechanisms for dealing with address spaces, required for managing memory protection
* Some execution abstraction to manage CPU allocation, typically threads or scheduler activations
* Inter-process communication, required to invoke servers running in their own address spaces

This minimal design was pioneered by Brinch Hansen&#x27;s Nucleus and the hypervisor of IBM&#x27;s VM. It has since been formalised in Liedtke&#x27;s &quot;minimality principle&quot;:
A concept is tolerated inside the microkernel only if moving it outside the kernel, i.e., permitting competing implementations, would prevent the implementation of the system&#x27;s required functionality.
Everything else can be done in a usermode program, although device drivers implemented as user programs may on some processor architectures require special privileges to access I/O hardware.

Related to the minimality principle, and equally important for microkernel design, is the separation of mechanism and policy, it is what enables the construction of arbitrary systems on top of a minimal kernel. Any policy built into the kernel cannot be overwritten at user level and therefore limits the generality of the microkernel. Policy implemented in user-level servers can be changed by replacing the servers (or letting the application choose between competing servers offering similar services).

For efficiency, most microkernels contain schedulers and manage timers, in violation of the minimality principle and the principle of policy-mechanism separation.

Start up (booting) of a microkernel-based system requires device drivers, which are not part of the kernel. Typically, this means that they are packaged with the kernel in the boot image, and the kernel supports a bootstrap protocol that defines how the drivers are located and started; this is the traditional bootstrap procedure of L4 microkernels. Some microkernels simplify this by placing some key drivers inside the kernel (in violation of the minimality principle), LynxOS and the original Minix are examples. Some even include a file system in the kernel to simplify booting. A microkernel-based system may boot via multiboot compatible boot loader. Such systems usually load statically-linked servers to make an initial bootstrap or mount an OS image to continue bootstrapping.

A key component of a microkernel is a good IPC system and virtual-memory-manager design that allows implementing page-fault handling and swapping in usermode servers in a safe way. Since all services are performed by usermode programs, efficient means of communication between programs are essential, far more so than in monolithic kernels. The design of the IPC system makes or breaks a microkernel. To be effective, the IPC system must not only have low overhead, but also interact well with CPU scheduling.

==Performance==
On most mainstream processors, obtaining a service is inherently more expensive in a microkernel-based system than a monolithic system. In the monolithic system, the service is obtained by a single system call, which requires two &quot;mode switches&quot; (changes of the processor&#x27;s ring or CPU mode). In the microkernel-based system, the service is obtained by sending an IPC message to a server, and obtaining the result in another IPC message from the server. This requires a context switch if the drivers are implemented as processes, or a function call if they are implemented as procedures. In addition, passing actual data to the server and back may incur extra copying overhead, while in a monolithic system the kernel can directly access the data in the client&#x27;s buffers.

Performance is therefore a potential issue in microkernel systems. The experience of first-generation microkernels such as Mach and ChorusOS showed that systems based on them performed very poorly. However, Jochen Liedtke showed that Mach&#x27;s performance problems were the result of poor design and implementation, specifically Mach&#x27;s excessive cache footprint. Liedtke demonstrated with his own L4 microkernel that through careful design and implementation, and especially by following the minimality principle, IPC costs could be reduced by more than an order of magnitude compared to Mach. L4&#x27;s IPC performance is still unbeaten across a range of architectures.

While these results demonstrate that the poor performance of systems based on first-generation microkernels is not representative for second-generation kernels such as L4, this constitutes no proof that microkernel-based systems can be built with good performance. It has been shown that a monolithic Linux server ported to L4 exhibits only a few percent overhead over native Linux. However, such a single-server system exhibits few, if any, of the advantages microkernels are supposed to provide by structuring operating system functionality into separate servers.

A number of commercial multi-server systems exist, in particular the real-time systems QNX and Integrity. No comprehensive comparison of performance relative to monolithic systems has been published for those multiserver systems. Furthermore, performance does not seem to be the overriding concern for those commercial systems, which instead emphasize reliably quick interrupt handling response times (QNX) and simplicity for the sake of robustness. An attempt to build a high-performance multiserver operating system was the IBM Sawmill Linux project. However, this project was never completed.

It has been shown in the meantime that user-level device drivers can come close to the performance of in-kernel drivers even for such high-throughput, high-interrupt devices as Gigabit Ethernet. This seems to imply that high-performance multi-server systems are possible.

== Security ==
The security benefits of microkernels have been frequently discussed. In the context of security the minimality principle of microkernels is, some have argued, a direct consequence of the principle of least privilege, according to which all code should have only the privileges needed to provide required functionality. Minimality requires that a system&#x27;s trusted computing base (TCB) should be kept minimal. As the kernel (the code that executes in the privileged mode of the hardware) has unvetted access to any data and can thus violate its integrity or confidentiality, the kernel is always part of the TCB. Minimizing it is natural in a security-driven design.

Consequently, microkernel designs have been used for systems designed for high-security applications, including KeyKOS, EROS and military systems. In fact common criteria (CC) at the highest assurance level (Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) 7) has an explicit requirement that the target of evaluation be &quot;simple&quot;, an acknowledgment of the practical impossibility of establishing true trustworthiness for a complex system. Again, the term &quot;simple&quot; is misleading and ill-defined. At least the Department of Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria introduced somewhat more precise verbiage at the B3/A1 classes:

In 2018, a paper presented at the Asia-Pacific Systems Conference claimed that microkernels were demonstrably safer than monolithic kernels by investigating all published critical CVEs for the Linux kernel at the time. The study concluded that 40% of the issues could not occur at all in a formally verified microkernel, and only 4% of the issues would remain entirely unmitigated in such a system.

==Third generation==
More recent work on microkernels has been focusing on formal specifications of the kernel API, and formal proofs of the API&#x27;s security properties and implementation correctness. The first example of this is a mathematical proof of the confinement mechanisms in EROS, based on a simplified model of the EROS API. More recently (in 2007) a comprehensive set of machine-checked proofs was performed of the properties of the protection model of seL4, a version of L4.

This has led to what is referred to as &quot;third-generation microkernels&quot;, characterised by a security-oriented API with resource access controlled by capabilities, virtualization as a first-class concern, novel approaches to kernel resource management, and a design goal of suitability for formal analysis, besides the usual goal of high performance. Examples are Coyotos, seL4, Nova, Redox and Fiasco.OC.

In the case of seL4, complete formal verification of the implementation has been achieved, i.e. a mathematical proof that the kernel&#x27;s implementation is consistent with its formal specification. This provides a guarantee that the properties proved about the API actually hold for the real kernel, a degree of assurance which goes beyond even CC EAL7. It was followed by proofs of security-enforcement properties of the API, and a proof demonstrating that the executable binary code is a correct translation of the C implementation, taking the compiler out of the TCB. Taken together, these proofs establish an end-to-end proof of security properties of the kernel.

== Examples ==
Some examples of microkernels are:

* AmigaOS
* Amoeba OS
* BlackBerry QNX
* Genode
* HarmonyOS (HarmonyOS NEXT)
* HelenOS
* Horizon (Nintendo Switch system software)
* The L4 microkernel family
* Mach
* Mac OS 7 to Mac OS 9 (Mac OS nanokernel)
* Minix
* Midori
* Redox
* Symbian
* Zircon
* Phantom OS

== Nanokernel ==
The term &quot;nanokernel&quot; or &quot;picokernel&quot; historically referred to:
* A kernel where the total amount of kernel code, i.e. code executing in the privileged mode of the hardware, is very small. The term &quot;picokernel&quot; was sometimes used to further emphasize small size. The term &quot;nanokernel&quot; was coined by Jonathan S. Shapiro in the paper &quot;The KeyKOS NanoKernel Architecture&quot;. It was a sardonic response to Mach, which claimed to be a microkernel while Shapiro considered it monolithic, essentially unstructured, and slower than the systems it sought to replace. Subsequent reuse of and response to the term, including the picokernel coinage, suggest that the point was largely missed. Both &quot;nanokernel&quot; and &quot;picokernel&quot; have subsequently come to have the same meaning expressed by the term microkernel.
* A virtualization layer underneath an operating system, which is more correctly referred to as a hypervisor.
* A hardware abstraction layer that forms the lowest-level part of a kernel, sometimes used to provide real-time functionality to normal operating systems, like Adeos.

There is also at least one case where the term nanokernel is used to refer not to a small kernel, but one that supports a nanosecond clock resolution.

==See also==
*Kernel (operating system)
**Exokernel
**Hybrid kernel
**Loadable kernel module
**Monolithic kernel
*Microservices
*Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate
*Trusted computing base
*Unikernel
*Multi-Environment Real-Time

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Scientific articles about microkernels (on CiteSeerX), including:
** – the basic QNX reference.
** -the basic reliable reference.
** – the basic Mach reference.
* * An assessment of the present and future state of microkernel based OSes as of January 1994
* MicroKernel page from the Portland Pattern Repository
* The Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate
** The Tanenbaum-Torvalds Debate, 1992.01.29
** Tanenbaum, A. S. &quot;Can We Make Operating Systems Reliable and Secure?&quot;.
** Torvalds, L. Linus Torvalds about the microkernels again, 2006.05.09
** Shapiro, J. &quot;Debunking Linus&#x27;s Latest&quot;.
** Tanenbaum, A. S. &quot;Tanenbaum-Torvalds Debate: Part II&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="23" end="34" title="Microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="57" end="65" title="Microkernel" label="μ-kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="97" end="105" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="161" end="177" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="219" end="232" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="245" end="251" title="thread (computing)" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="268" end="295" title="inter-process communication" label="inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="338" end="343" title="Protection ring" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247050" start="347" end="356" title="CPU modes" label="CPU modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="473" end="498" title="kernel mode" label="supervisor or kernel mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="548" end="561" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757693" start="564" end="578" title="protocol stack" label="protocol stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="584" end="595" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="671" end="681" title="user space" label="user space"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="754" end="771" title="monolithic kernel" label="monolithic kernel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="778" end="785" title="MINIX 3" label="MINIX 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q92933" start="933" end="950" title="Per Brinch Hansen" label="Per Brinch Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q928216" start="993" end="1007" title="Regnecentralen" label="Regnecentralen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83511" start="1142" end="1164" title="Zakłady Azotowe Puławy" label="Zakłady Azotowe Puławy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276156" start="1625" end="1656" title="RC 4000 multiprogramming system" label="RC 4000 Multiprogramming System"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="2615" end="2626" title="mono-kernel" label="mono-kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="3501" end="3519" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419757" start="3557" end="3561" title="Exec (Amiga)" label="Exec"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="4062" end="4066" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q129627" start="4078" end="4092" title="Richard Rashid" label="Richard Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="4672" end="4676" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="4725" end="4730" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141941" start="4763" end="4776" title="hybrid kernel" label="hybrid kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14583" start="4784" end="4787" title="XNU" label="XNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237594" start="4832" end="4837" title="OSF/1" label="OSF/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="4845" end="4856" title="Mach kernel" label="Mach kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237594" start="4858" end="4863" title="OSFMK" label="OSFMK"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="4933" end="4936" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965967" start="4938" end="4942" title="tvOS" label="tvOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18012472" start="4948" end="4955" title="watchOS" label="watchOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="4957" end="4967" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q748319" start="4983" end="4989" title="Windows NT 3.1" label="NT 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="5010" end="5020" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q48464" start="5068" end="5076" title="GNU Hurd" label="GNU Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q185576" start="5132" end="5142" title="Arch Linux" label="Arch Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="5147" end="5153" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="5565" end="5578" title="assembly code" label="assembly code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350261" start="5772" end="5781" title="exokernel" label="exokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="5819" end="5829" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="5909" end="5924" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="5931" end="5945" title="L4 microkernel" label="L4 microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="6233" end="6237" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="6304" end="6317" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="6323" end="6334" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="6511" end="6541" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="Berkeley Software Distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="6551" end="6555" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757693" start="6693" end="6717" title="protocol stack" label="TCP/IP networking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="6930" end="6941" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="7241" end="7251" title="user space" label="user space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="7369" end="7380" title="kernel mode" label="kernel mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="7434" end="7449" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="7595" end="7622" title="Inter-process communication" label="Inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859284" start="7729" end="7737" title="message passing" label="messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q764810" start="7739" end="7752" title="Shared memory" label="Shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757693" start="8219" end="8241" title="network protocol stack" label="network protocol stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362921" start="8448" end="8453" title="Polling (computer science)" label="polls"/>
<link wikidata="Q62906" start="9171" end="9185" title="Jochen Liedtke" label="Jochen Liedtke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="9308" end="9322" title="L4 microkernel family" label="L4 microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="9373" end="9391" title="order of magnitude" label="order of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="9690" end="9704" title="context switch" label="context switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q62270" start="10040" end="10061" title="remote procedure call" label="remote procedure call"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="10528" end="10531" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q770573" start="10536" end="10543" title="MINIX 3" label="MINIX 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676413" start="10607" end="10629" title="cycles per instruction" label="cycles per instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="10651" end="10657" title="Ultrix" label="Ultrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="10684" end="10688" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9133389" start="10705" end="10711" title="4.3BSD" label="4.3BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="10712" end="10716" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="10735" end="10745" title="user space" label="user space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11149" end="11161" title="CPU cache#CACHE-MISS" label="cache-misses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412443" start="12212" end="12218" title="signal (computing)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="12626" end="12643" title="denial-of-service" label="denial-of-service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753979" start="12833" end="12841" title="timeout (telecommunication)" label="timeouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="13712" end="13718" title="daemon (computer software)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190017" start="14111" end="14125" title="display server" label="display server"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="14195" end="14198" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="14255" end="14272" title="monolithic kernel" label="monolithic kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182318" start="14696" end="14730" title="Crash-only software" label="stopping and restarting the server"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="14970" end="14976" title="Internet protocol suite" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="15309" end="15322" title="Device driver" label="Device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="15343" end="15363" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q469599" start="16216" end="16221" title="IOMMU" label="IOMMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="16415" end="16439" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="17255" end="17268" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="17376" end="17383" title="thread (computing)" label="threads"/>
<link wikidata="Q865241" start="17387" end="17408" title="scheduler activations" label="scheduler activations"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="17411" end="17438" title="Inter-process communication" label="Inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q92933" start="17541" end="17554" title="Brinch Hansen" label="Brinch Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276156" start="17562" end="17569" title="RC 4000 Multiprogramming System" label="Nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="17603" end="17605" title="VM (operating system)" label="VM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451821" start="18176" end="18210" title="separation of mechanism and policy" label="separation of mechanism and policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="18767" end="18774" title="booting" label="booting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="18815" end="18828" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="19091" end="19106" title="L4 microkernel family" label="L4 microkernels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878937" start="19230" end="19236" title="LynxOS" label="LynxOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="19254" end="19259" title="Minix" label="Minix"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="19294" end="19305" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="19588" end="19591" title="Inter-process communication" label="IPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="20361" end="20365" title="ring (computer security)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247050" start="20369" end="20377" title="CPU modes" label="CPU mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="20557" end="20571" title="context switch" label="context switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="20988" end="20992" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q670316" start="20997" end="21005" title="ChorusOS" label="ChorusOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62906" start="21072" end="21086" title="Jochen Liedtke" label="Jochen Liedtke"/>
<link wikidata="Q352090" start="21218" end="21223" title="CPU cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="21269" end="21283" title="L4 microkernel" label="L4 microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="22180" end="22197" title="Real-time operating system" label="real-time systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="22198" end="22201" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152988" start="22206" end="22215" title="Integrity (operating system)" label="Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083272" start="23184" end="23212" title="principle of least privilege" label="principle of least privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492632" start="23357" end="23379" title="trusted computing base" label="trusted computing base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398001" start="23780" end="23786" title="KeyKOS" label="KeyKOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275806" start="23788" end="23792" title="Extremely Reliable Operating System" label="EROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116124" start="23823" end="23838" title="common criteria" label="common criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q625561" start="23876" end="23902" title="Evaluation Assurance Level" label="Evaluation Assurance Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q94950995" start="24491" end="24494" title="Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures" label="CVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="24504" end="24509" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25178" end="25182" title="L4 microkernel family#High assurance: seL4" label="seL4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094291" start="25360" end="25372" title="capability-based security" label="capabilities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25374" end="25388" title="virtual machines#System virtual machines" label="virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049183" start="25500" end="25515" title="formal methods" label="formal analysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25574" end="25581" title="Coyotos" label="Coyotos"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25583" end="25587" title="L4 microkernel family#High assurance: seL4" label="seL4"/>
<link wikidata="Q23665359" start="25595" end="25600" title="Redox (operating system)" label="Redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="26341" end="26348" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q473800" start="26351" end="26360" title="Amoeba (operating system)" label="Amoeba OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="26374" end="26377" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q16527380" start="26380" end="26386" title="Genode" label="Genode"/>
<link wikidata="Q63986220" start="26389" end="26398" title="HarmonyOS" label="HarmonyOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q123469520" start="26400" end="26414" title="HarmonyOS NEXT" label="HarmonyOS NEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243004" start="26418" end="26425" title="HelenOS" label="HelenOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26428" end="26435" title="Nintendo Switch system software#Technology" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869610" start="26437" end="26468" title="Nintendo Switch system software" label="Nintendo Switch system software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797819" start="26476" end="26497" title="L4 microkernel family" label="L4 microkernel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="26500" end="26504" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q420384" start="26507" end="26515" title="Mac OS 7" label="Mac OS 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q904519" start="26519" end="26527" title="Mac OS 9" label="Mac OS 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722347" start="26529" end="26546" title="Mac OS nanokernel" label="Mac OS nanokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="26550" end="26555" title="Minix" label="Minix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049148" start="26558" end="26564" title="Midori (operating system)" label="Midori"/>
<link wikidata="Q23665359" start="26567" end="26572" title="Redox (operating system)" label="Redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="26575" end="26582" title="Symbian" label="Symbian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26585" end="26591" title="Fuchsia (operating system)#Kernel" label="Zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119302" start="26594" end="26604" title="Phantom OS" label="Phantom OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="27073" end="27077" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="27588" end="27598" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046562" start="27604" end="27630" title="hardware abstraction layer" label="hardware abstraction layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="27703" end="27712" title="Real-time computing" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824314" start="27761" end="27766" title="Adaptive Domain Environment for Operating Systems" label="Adeos"/>
<link wikidata="Q838801" start="27891" end="27901" title="nanosecond" label="nanosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="27935" end="27960" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="Kernel (operating system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350261" start="27963" end="27972" title="Exokernel" label="Exokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141941" start="27975" end="27988" title="Hybrid kernel" label="Hybrid kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739331" start="27991" end="28013" title="Loadable kernel module" label="Loadable kernel module"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="28016" end="28033" title="Monolithic kernel" label="Monolithic kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344624" start="28035" end="28048" title="Microservices" label="Microservices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576065" start="28050" end="28075" title="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate" label="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492632" start="28077" end="28099" title="Trusted computing base" label="Trusted computing base"/>
<link wikidata="Q23672887" start="28101" end="28110" title="Unikernel" label="Unikernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934384" start="28112" end="28139" title="Multi-Environment Real-Time" label="Multi-Environment Real-Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715061" start="28223" end="28232" title="CiteSeerX" label="CiteSeerX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637453" start="28464" end="28491" title="Portland Pattern Repository" label="Portland Pattern Repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576065" start="28498" end="28523" title="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate" label="Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20024" wikidata="Q224814" url="?curid=20024" title="Mach (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Mach]] or Mach number is speed expressed as a multiple of the speed of sound.

Mach may also refer to:
==Computing==
* Mach (kernel), an operating systems kernel technology
* ATI Mach, a 2D GPU chip by ATI
* GNU Mach, the microkernel upon which GNU Hurd is based

==Places==
* Mach, Balochistan, a town in Pakistan
** Mach railway station, a railway station in Machh, Pakistan
* Machynlleth or Mach, a town in Wales
* Mach (crater), a lunar crater
* 3949 Mach, an asteroid

==People==
* Mach (surname)
* Hayato Sakurai (born 1975), Japanese mixed martial artist known as &quot;Mach&quot;
* Mach, a fictional character in &quot;Mach a Šebestová&quot;

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Mach&quot; (song), a 2010 song by Rainbow
* Mach (&quot;Transformers&quot;), a Multiforce character in &quot;Transformers: Victory&quot;
* &quot;M.A.C.H.&quot; (video game)
* M.A.C.H., a fictional series of cyborg and robot agents in &quot;M.A.C.H. 1&quot;

==Other uses==
* Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mACh), of cells
* MACH Alliance, an organization advocating for open technology ecosystems
* Fly Castelluccio &quot;Mach&quot;, an Italian paramotor design
* Vietnamese &quot;mạch&quot;, an obsolete Vietnamese currency unit
* MACH-IV (test), the test used to assess the Machiavellianism construct

==See also==

* Mac (disambiguation)
* Mach O (disambiguation)
* Mach 1 (disambiguation)
* Mach 2 (disambiguation)
* Mach 3 (disambiguation)
* Mach 4 (disambiguation)
* Mach 5 (disambiguation)
* Mach 6 (disambiguation)
* Mach 7 (disambiguation)
* Mach 8 (disambiguation)
* Mach 9 (disambiguation)
* Mach 10 (disambiguation)
* Mache (unit), an obsolete unit of volumic radioactivity 
* Mack (disambiguation)
* Mak (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224814" start="0" end="8" title="Mach (disambiguation)" label="[[Mach]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q224814" start="81" end="85" title="Mach (disambiguation)" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="121" end="134" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach (kernel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q233847" start="177" end="185" title="ATI Mach" label="ATI Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046416" start="210" end="218" title="GNU Mach" label="GNU Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q639806" start="279" end="296" title="Mach, Balochistan" label="Mach, Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18516357" start="320" end="340" title="Mach railway station" label="Mach railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q675460" start="381" end="392" title="Machynlleth" label="Machynlleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434456" start="420" end="433" title="Mach (crater)" label="Mach (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="452" end="461" title="3949 Mach" label="3949 Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876190" start="489" end="503" title="Mach (surname)" label="Mach (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098857" start="506" end="520" title="Hayato Sakurai" label="Hayato Sakurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783385" start="629" end="645" title="Mach a Šebestová" label="Mach a Šebestová"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723304" start="682" end="705" title="Mach (song)" label="&amp;quot;Mach&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007379" start="732" end="763" title="Mach (Transformers)" label="Mach (&amp;quot;Transformers&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712122" start="827" end="860" title="M.A.C.H. (video game)" label="&amp;quot;M.A.C.H.&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712125" start="928" end="938" title="M.A.C.H. 1" label="M.A.C.H. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="963" end="996" title="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q116756594" start="1016" end="1029" title="MACH Alliance" label="MACH Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192396" start="1091" end="1124" title="Fly Castelluccio Mach" label="Fly Castelluccio &amp;quot;Mach&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q67130268" start="1156" end="1183" title="Vietnamese mạch" label="Vietnamese &amp;quot;mạch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130417165" start="1224" end="1238" title="MACH-IV (test)" label="MACH-IV (test)"/>
<link wikidata="Q243909" start="1312" end="1332" title="Mac (disambiguation)" label="Mac (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q77289860" start="1335" end="1358" title="Mach O (disambiguation)" label="Mach O (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723306" start="1361" end="1384" title="Mach 1 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 1 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92767280" start="1387" end="1410" title="Mach 2 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 2 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723302" start="1413" end="1436" title="Mach 3 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 3 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75905079" start="1439" end="1462" title="Mach 4 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 4 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92767294" start="1465" end="1488" title="Mach 5 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 5 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92779991" start="1491" end="1514" title="Mach 6 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 6 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75905082" start="1517" end="1540" title="Mach 7 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 7 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75905086" start="1543" end="1566" title="Mach 8 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 8 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75905090" start="1569" end="1592" title="Mach 9 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 9 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75824121" start="1595" end="1619" title="Mach 10 (disambiguation)" label="Mach 10 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349696" start="1622" end="1634" title="Mache (unit)" label="Mache (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q295966" start="1681" end="1702" title="Mack (disambiguation)" label="Mack (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11766481" start="1705" end="1725" title="Mak (disambiguation)" label="Mak (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20025" wikidata="Q1642862" url="?curid=20025" title="Multihull">
<text>A multihull is a boat or ship with more than one hull, whereas a vessel with a single hull is a monohull. The most common multihulls are catamarans (with two hulls), and trimarans (with three hulls). There are other types, with four or more hulls, but such examples are very rare and tend to be specialised for particular functions.

==Multihull history ==
Single-outrigger boats, double-canoes (catamarans), and double-outrigger boats (trimarans) of the Austronesian peoples are the direct antecedents of modern multihull vessels. They were developed during the Austronesian Expansion (c. 3000 to 1500 BC) which allowed Austronesians to colonize maritime Southeast Asia, Micronesia, Island Melanesia, Madagascar, and Polynesia. These Austronesian vessels are still widely used today by traditional fishermen in Austronesian regions in maritime Southeast Asia, Oceania and Madagascar; as well as areas they were introduced to by Austronesians in ancient times like in the East African coast and in South Asia.

Greek sources also describe large third-century BC catamarans, one built under the supervision of Archimedes, the &quot;Syracusia&quot;, and another reportedly built by Ptolemy IV Philopator of Egypt, the &quot;Tessarakonteres&quot;.

=== Modern developers ===
Modern pioneers of multihull design include James Wharram (UK), Derek Kelsall (UK), Tom Lack (UK), Lock Crowther (Aust), Hedly Nicol (Aust), Malcolm Tennant (NZ), Jim Brown (USA), Arthur Piver (USA), Chris White (US), Ian Farrier (NZ), LOMOcean (NZ), Darren Newton (UK), Jens Quorning (DK) and Dick Newick (USA).

==Multihull types ==
=== Single-outrigger (&quot;proa&quot;) ===
A single-outrigger canoe is a canoe with a slender outrigger (&quot;ama&quot;) attached by two or more struts (&quot;akas&quot;). This craft will normally be propelled by paddles. Single-outrigger canoes that use sails are usually inaccurately referred to by the name &quot;proa&quot;. While single-outrigger canoes and proas both derive stability from the outrigger, the proa has the greater need of the outrigger to counter the heeling effect of the sail. The outrigger on a proa can either be on the lee or windward side, or in a tacking proa, interchangeable. However, more recently, proas tend to keep the outrigger either to leeward or to wind which means that instead of tacking, a &quot;shunt&quot; is required, whereby the bow becomes the stern, and the stern becomes the bow.

===Catamaran (twin-hull)===

A catamaran is a vessel with twin hulls. Commercial catamarans began in 17th century England. Separate attempts at steam-powered catamarans were carried out by the middle of the 20th century. However, success required better materials and more developed hydrodynamic technologies. During the second half of the 20th century catamaran designs flourished. Catamaran configurations are used for racing, sailing, tourist and fishing boats.

The hulls of a catamaran are typically connected by a bridgedeck, although some simpler cruising catamarans simply have a trampoline stretched between the crossbeams (or &quot;akas&quot;). Small beachable catamarans, such as the Hobie Cat, also have only a trampoline between the hulls.

Catamarans derive stability from the distance between the hulls—transverse clearance—the greater this distance, the greater the stability. Typically, catamaran hulls are slim, although they may flare above the waterline to give reserve buoyancy. The vertical clearance between the design waterplane and the bottom of the bridge deck determines the likelihood of contact with waves. Increased vertical clearance diminishes such contact and increases seaworthiness, within limits.

===Trimaran (double-outrigger)===
A trimaran (or double-outrigger) is a vessel with two outrigger floats attached on either side of a main hull by a crossbeam, wing, or other form of superstructure. They are derived from traditional double-outrigger vessels of maritime Southeast Asia. Despite not being traditionally Polynesian, western trimarans use traditional Polynesian terms for the hull (&quot;vaka&quot;), the floats (&quot;ama&quot;), and connectors (&quot;aka&quot;). The word &quot;trimaran&quot; is a portmanteau of &quot;tri&quot; and &quot;(cata)maran&quot;, a term that is thought to have been coined by Victor Tchetchet, a pioneering modern multihull designer, born in Ukraine (at that time part of the Russian Empire).

Some trimaran configurations use the outlying hulls to enhance stability and allow for shallow draft, examples include the experimental ship RV Triton and the &quot;Independence&quot; class of littoral combat ships (US).

===Four and five hulls===

Some multihulls with four (quadrimaran) or five (pentamaran) hulls have been proposed; few have been built. In 2018 a Swiss entrepreneur sought funding to build a sail-driven quadrimaran called &quot;Manta&quot; that would use solar power to scoop plastic from the ocean. &quot;Manta&quot; was still under development as of the end of 2023. A French manufacturer, Tera-4, produces motor quadrimarans which use aerodynamic lift between the four hulls to promote planing and reduce power consumption.

Design concepts for vessels with two pair of outriggers have been referred to as pentamarans. The design concept comprises a narrow, long hull that cuts through waves. The outriggers then provide the stability that such a narrow hull needs. While the aft sponsons act as trimaran sponsons do, the front sponsons do not touch the water normally; only if the ship rolls to one side do they provide added buoyancy to correct the roll. BMT Group, a shipbuilding and engineering company in the UK, has proposed a fast cargo ship and a yacht using this kind of hull.

===SWATH multihulls===

Multihull designs may have hull beams that are slimmer at the water surface (&quot;waterplane&quot;) than underwater. This arrangement allows good wave-piercing, while keeping a buoyant hydrodynamic hull beneath the waterplane. In a catamaran configuration this is called a small waterplane area twin hull, or SWATH. While SWATHs are stable in rough seas, they have the drawbacks, compared with other catamarans, of having a deeper draft, being more sensitive to loading, and requiring more power because of their higher underwater surface areas. Triple-hull configurations of small waterplane area craft had been studied, but not built, as of 2008.

== Performance ==
Each hull of a multihull vessel can be narrower than that of a monohull with the same displacement and long, narrow hulls, a multihull typically produces very small bow waves and wakes, a consequence of a favorable Froude number. Vessels with beamy hulls (typically monohulls) normally create a large bow wave and wake. Such a vessel is limited by its &quot;hull speed&quot;, being unable to &quot;climb over&quot; its bow wave unless it changes from displacement mode to planing mode. Vessels with slim hulls (typically multihulls) will normally create no appreciable bow wave to limit their progress.

In 1978, 101 years after catamarans like &quot;Amaryllis&quot; were banned from yacht racing they returned to the sport. This started with the victory of the trimaran &quot;Olympus Photo&quot;, skippered by Mike Birch in the first Route du Rhum. Thereafter, no open ocean race was won by a monohull. Winning times dropped by 70%, since 1978. Olympus Photo&#x27;s 23-day 6 hr 58&#x27; 35&quot; success dropped to Gitana 11&#x27;s 7d 17h 19&#x27;6&quot;, in 2006. Around 2016 the first large wind driven foil-borne racing catamarans were built. These cats rise onto foils and T-foiled rudders only at higher speeds.

==Sailing multihulls and workboats==
The increasing popularity of catamaran since the 1960s is down to the added space, speed, shallow draft, and lack of heeling underway. The stability of a multihull makes sailing much less tiring for the crew, and is particularly suitable for families. Having no need for ballast for stability, multihulls are much lighter than monohull sailboats; but a multihull&#x27;s fine hull sections mean that one must take care not to overload the vessel. Powerboats catamarans are increasingly used for racing, cruising and as workboats and fishing boats. Speed, the stable working platform, safety, and added space are the prime advantages for power cats.

&quot;The weight of a multihull, of this length, is probably not much more than half the weight of a monohull of the same length and it can be sailed with less crew effort.&quot;

Racing catamarans and trimarans are popular in France, New Zealand and Australia. Cruising cats are commonest in the Caribbean and Mediterranean (where they form the bulk of the charter business) and Australia. Multihulls are less common in the US, perhaps because their increased beam require wider dock/slips. Smaller multihulls may be collapsible and trailerable, and thus suitable for daybooks and racers. Until the 1960s most multihull sailboats (except for beach cats) were built either by their owners or by boat builders; since then companies have been selling mass-produced boats, of which there are more than 150 models.

==See also==

==Notes==
==References and Bibliography==
*
*
* Harvey, Derek, Multihulls for Cruising and Racing, Adlard Coles, London 1990, 

==External links==

*The Multihull Offshore Cruising &amp; Racing Association
*The UK Catamaran Racing Association
*The Multihull Yacht Club of Queensland (Australia) 
*Multihull Boatbuilding Information / Community
*Articles and news on multihulls, profiles of boats, designers, yards, etc. 
*Multihulls designer &amp; builder 
*International Sailing Federation 
*The multihulls reference magazine
*The multihulls reference magazine (Australia) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1642862" start="2" end="11" title="Multihull" label="multihull"/>
<link wikidata="Q35872" start="17" end="21" title="boat" label="boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="25" end="29" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="49" end="53" title="Hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999103" start="96" end="104" title="monohull" label="monohull"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="137" end="146" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q630415" start="170" end="178" title="trimaran" label="trimaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="357" end="378" title="Single-outrigger boat" label="Single-outrigger boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="396" end="405" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q630415" start="437" end="445" title="trimaran" label="trimaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="455" end="475" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="563" end="585" title="Austronesian Expansion" label="Austronesian Expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="647" end="670" title="maritime Southeast Asia" label="maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="672" end="682" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083292" start="684" end="700" title="Island Melanesia" label="Island Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="702" end="712" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="718" end="727" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="861" end="868" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="972" end="983" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="998" end="1008" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="1109" end="1119" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464366" start="1131" end="1140" title="Syracusia" label="Syracusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39595" start="1180" end="1201" title="Ptolemy IV Philopator" label="Ptolemy IV Philopator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1205" end="1210" title="Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434595" start="1222" end="1237" title="Tessarakonteres" label="Tessarakonteres"/>
<link wikidata="Q982987" start="1316" end="1329" title="James Wharram" label="James Wharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560350" start="1336" end="1349" title="Derek Kelsall" label="Derek Kelsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787223" start="1356" end="1364" title="Catalac catamarans" label="Tom Lack"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808759" start="1371" end="1384" title="Lock Crowther" label="Lock Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799980" start="1452" end="1464" title="Arthur Piver" label="Arthur Piver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560238" start="1472" end="1483" title="Chris White (multihull designer)" label="Chris White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436285" start="1490" end="1501" title="Farrier Marine" label="Ian Farrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631456" start="1566" end="1577" title="Richard Cooper Newick" label="Dick Newick"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="1653" end="1675" title="single-outrigger canoe" label="single-outrigger canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535890" start="1925" end="1929" title="proa" label="proa"/>
<link wikidata="Q370367" start="3133" end="3142" title="Hobie Cat" label="Hobie Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760485" start="3641" end="3654" title="seaworthiness" label="seaworthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="4036" end="4046" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700049" start="4067" end="4083" title="Vaka (sailing)" label="&amp;quot;vaka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700049" start="4098" end="4113" title="Ama (sailing)" label="&amp;quot;ama&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700049" start="4132" end="4147" title="Aka (sailing)" label="&amp;quot;aka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578046" start="4291" end="4307" title="Victor Tchetchet" label="Victor Tchetchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="4357" end="4364" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4391" end="4405" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454314" start="4550" end="4559" title="RV Triton" label="RV Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060512" start="4568" end="4592" title="USS Independence (LCS-2)" label="&amp;quot;Independence&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542187" start="4602" end="4623" title="littoral combat ships" label="littoral combat ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836007" start="5590" end="5599" title="BMT Limited" label="BMT Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5647" end="5649" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="5671" end="5681" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="5688" end="5693" title="yacht" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="5776" end="5781" title="Beam (nautical)" label="beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q917479" start="6018" end="6049" title="Small-waterplane-area twin hull" label="small waterplane area twin hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362362" start="6592" end="6596" title="Wake (physics)" label="wake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6628" end="6641" title="Froude number#Ship hydrodynamics" label="Froude number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576862" start="7064" end="7073" title="Amaryllis (catamaran)" label="Amaryllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046440" start="7097" end="7109" title="yacht racing" label="yacht racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142754" start="7190" end="7203" title="Olympus Photo" label="Olympus Photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q833088" start="7248" end="7261" title="Route du Rhum" label="Route du Rhum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20029" wikidata="Q6934622" url="?curid=20029" title="Multics Relational Data Store">
<text>The Multics Relational Data Store, or MRDS for short, was the first commercial relational database management system. It was written in PL/1 by Honeywell for the Multics operating system and first sold in June 1976. Unlike the SQL systems that emerged in the late 1970s and early 80s, MRDS used a command language only for basic data manipulation, equivalent to the codice_1 or codice_2 statements in SQL. Other operations, like creating a new database, or general file management, required the use of a separate command program.

==References==
*Paul McJones, &quot;Multics Relational Data Store (MRDS)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6934622" start="4" end="33" title="Multics Relational Data Store" label="Multics Relational Data Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934622" start="38" end="42" title="Multics Relational Data Store" label="MRDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="79" end="116" title="relational database management system" label="relational database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="136" end="140" title="PL/1" label="PL/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="144" end="153" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="162" end="169" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="170" end="186" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="227" end="230" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20032" wikidata="Q3008" url="?curid=20032" title="Mike Oldfield">
<text>Michael Gordon Oldfield (born 15 May 1953) is an English retired musician, songwriter and producer best known for his debut studio album &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; (1973), which became an unexpected critical and commercial success. Though primarily a guitarist, Oldfield played a range of instruments, which included keyboards and percussion, as well as vocals. He had adopted a range of musical styles throughout his career, including progressive rock, world, folk, classical, electronic, ambient and new age music.

Oldfield took up the guitar at age ten and left school in his teens to embark on a music career. From 1967 to 1970, he and his sister Sally Oldfield were a folk duo, the Sallyangie, after which he performed with Kevin Ayers. In 1971, Oldfield started work on &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; which caught the attention of Richard Branson, who agreed to release it on his new label, Virgin Records. Its opening was used in the horror film &quot;The Exorcist&quot; and the album went on to sell over 2.7 million copies in the UK. Oldfield followed it with &quot;Hergest Ridge&quot; (1974), &quot;Ommadawn&quot; (1975) and &quot;Incantations&quot; (1978), all of which feature longform and mostly instrumental pieces.

In the late 1970s, Oldfield began to tour and release more commercial and song-based music, beginning with &quot;Platinum&quot; (1979), &quot;QE2&quot; (1980) and &quot;Five Miles Out&quot; (1982). His most successful album of this period was &quot;Crises&quot; (1983), which features the worldwide hit single &quot;Moonlight Shadow&quot; with vocalist Maggie Reilly. After signing with WEA in the early 1990s, Oldfield&#x27;s most significant album of the decade was &quot;Tubular Bells II&quot; (1992) and he experimented with virtual reality and gaming content with his MusicVR project. In 2012, he performed at the opening ceremony for the 2012 Olympic Games held in London. Oldfield&#x27;s discography includes 26 studio albums, nine of which have reached the UK top ten. His final album, &quot;Return to Ommadawn,&quot; was released in 2017. Oldfield&#x27;s label announced his retirement in 2023.

==Early life==
Michael Gordon Oldfield was born in Reading, Berkshire, on 15 May 1953, to Raymond Henry Oldfield (1923–2016), an English general practitioner, and Maureen (&quot;née&quot; Liston), an Irish nurse from Charleville, County Cork, who emigrated to England to pursue career in nursing. Oldfield has two elder siblings, sister Sally and brother Terence. When Oldfield was seven, his mother gave birth to a younger brother, David, who had Down syndrome and died in infancy. His mother was prescribed barbiturates, to which she became addicted, and developed mental health problems. She spent much of the rest of her life in mental institutions and died in early 1975, shortly after Oldfield had started writing &quot;Ommadawn&quot;. Oldfield attended Highlands Junior School, followed by St. Edward&#x27;s Preparatory School and Presentation College, all in Reading. When he was thirteen, the family moved to Harold Wood, Essex, and Oldfield attended Hornchurch Grammar School where, having already displayed musical talent, he earned one GCE qualification in English.

Oldfield took up the guitar aged ten, first learning on a 6-string acoustic which his father had given to him. He learned technique by copying parts from songs, by folk guitarists Bert Jansch and John Renbourn, that he played on a portable record player. He tried to learn musical notation but was a &quot;very, very slow&quot; learner, saying: &quot;If I have to, I can write things down. But I don&#x27;t like to.&quot; By the time he was twelve, Oldfield played the electric guitar and performed in local folk and youth clubs and dances, earning as much as £4 () per gig. During a six-month break from music that Oldfield had around this time, he took up painting. In May 1968, when Oldfield turned fifteen, his school headmaster requested that he cut his long hair. Oldfield refused, left abruptly and never returned. It was at this point when he decided to pursue music on a full-time, professional basis.

==Career==
===1968–1972: Early career===
After leaving school Oldfield accepted an invitation from his sister Sally to form a folk duo the Sallyangie, taking its name from her name and Oldfield&#x27;s favourite Jansch tune, &quot;Angie&quot;. They toured England and Paris and signed a deal with Transatlantic Records, for which they recorded one album, &quot;Children of the Sun&quot; (1969). After they split in the following year Oldfield had a nervous breakdown. He auditioned as bassist for Family in 1969 following the departure of Ric Grech, but the group did not share Roger Chapman&#x27;s enthusiasm towards Oldfield&#x27;s performance. Oldfield spent much of the next year living off his father and performing in an electric rock band named Barefoot that included his brother Terry on flute, until the group disbanded in early 1970.

In February 1970, Oldfield auditioned to become the bassist in the Whole World, a new backing band that former Soft Machine vocalist Kevin Ayers was putting together. He landed the position despite the bass being a new instrument for him, but he also played occasional lead guitar and later looked back on this time as providing valuable training on the bass. Oldfield went on to play on Ayers&#x27;s albums &quot;Shooting at the Moon&quot; (1970) and &quot;Whatevershebringswesing&quot; (1971), and played mandolin on &quot;Edgar Broughton Band&quot; (1971). All three albums were recorded at Abbey Road Studios, where Oldfield familiarised himself with a variety of instruments, such as orchestral percussion, piano, Mellotron and harpsichord, and started to write and put down musical ideas of his own. While doing so Oldfield took up work as a reserve guitarist in a stage production of &quot;Hair&quot; at the Shaftesbury Theatre, where he played and gigged with Alex Harvey. After ten performances Oldfield grew bored of the job and was fired after he decided to play his part for &quot;Let the Sunshine In&quot; in 7/8 time.

===1971–1991: Virgin years===
====&quot;Tubular Bells&quot;====
By mid-1971, Oldfield had assembled a demo tape containing sections of a longform instrumental piece initially titled &quot;Opus One&quot;. Attempts to secure a recording deal to record it professionally came to nothing. In September 1971, Oldfield, now a session musician and bassist for the Arthur Louis Band, attended recording sessions at The Manor Studio at Shipton-on-Cherwell, Oxfordshire, owned by businessman Richard Branson and run by engineers Tom Newman and Simon Heyworth. Branson already had several business ventures and was about to launch Virgin Records with Simon Draper. Newman and Heyworth heard some of Oldfield&#x27;s demos and took them to Branson and Draper, who eventually gave Oldfield one week of recording time at The Manor, after which Oldfield had completed what became &quot;Part One&quot; of his composition, &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;. He recorded &quot;Part Two&quot; from February to April 1973. Branson agreed to release &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; as the first record on the Virgin label and secured Oldfield a six-album deal with an additional four albums as optional.

&quot;Tubular Bells&quot; was released on 25 May 1973. Oldfield played more than twenty different instruments in the multi-layered recording, and its style moved through diverse musical genres. Its 2,760,000 UK sales puts it at No. 42 on the list of the best-selling albums in the country. The title track became a top-10 hit single in the US after the opening was used in the film &quot;The Exorcist&quot; in 1973. It is today considered to be a forerunner of the new-age music movement.

====&quot;Hergest Ridge&quot; to &quot;Incantations&quot;====
In 1974, Oldfield played the guitar on the critically acclaimed album &quot;Rock Bottom&quot; by Robert Wyatt.

In late 1974, his follow-up LP, &quot;Hergest Ridge&quot;, was No. 1 in the UK for three weeks before being dethroned by &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;. Although &quot;Hergest Ridge&quot; was released over a year after &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;, it reached No. 1 first. &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; spent 11 weeks (10 of them consecutive) at No. 2 before its one week at the top. Like &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;, &quot;Hergest Ridge&quot; is a two-movement instrumental piece, this time evoking scenes from Oldfield&#x27;s Herefordshire country retreat. It was followed in 1975 by the pioneering world music piece &quot;Ommadawn&quot; released after the death of his mother, Maureen.

In 1975, Oldfield recorded a version of the Christmas piece &quot;In Dulci Jubilo&quot; which charted at No. 4 in the UK.

In 1975, Oldfield received a Grammy award for Best Instrumental Composition in &quot;Tubular Bells – Theme from &quot;The Exorcist&quot;&quot;.

In 1976, Oldfield and his sister joined his friend and band member Pekka Pohjola to play on his album &quot;Mathematician&#x27;s Air Display&quot;, which was released in 1977. The album was recorded and edited at Oldfield&#x27;s Througham Slad Manor in Gloucestershire by Oldfield and Paul Lindsay. Oldfield&#x27;s 1976 rendition of &quot;Portsmouth&quot; remains his best-performing single on the UK Singles Chart, reaching No. 3.

Oldfield recorded the double album &quot;Incantations&quot; between December 1977 and September 1978. This introduced more diverse choral performances from Sally Oldfield, Maddy Prior and the Queen&#x27;s College Girls Choir. When it was released on 1 December 1978, the album went to No. 14 in the UK and reached platinum certification for 300,000 copies sold.

In 1979, Oldfield supported &quot;Incantations&quot; with a European tour that spanned 21 dates between March and May 1979. The tour was documented with the live album and concert film, &quot;Exposed&quot;. Initially marketed as a limited pressing of 100,000 copies, the strength of sales for the album were strong enough for Virgin to abandon the idea shortly after, transferring it to regular production. During the tour Oldfield released the disco-influenced non-album single &quot;Guilty&quot;, for which he went to New York City to find the best session musicians and write a song with them in mind. He wrote a chord chart for the song and presented it to the group, who completed it in the studio. Released in April 1979, the song went to No. 22 in the UK and Oldfield performed the song on the national television show &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;.

Oldfield&#x27;s music was used for the score of &quot;The Space Movie&quot; (1980), a Virgin Films production that celebrated the tenth anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission. In 1979, he recorded a version of the signature tune for the BBC children&#x27;s television programme &quot;Blue Peter&quot;, which was used by the show for 10 years.

====&quot;Platinum&quot; to &quot;Heaven&#x27;s Open&quot;====
Oldfield&#x27;s fifth album, &quot;Platinum&quot;, was released in November 1979 and marked the start of his transition from long compositions towards mainstream and pop music. Oldfield performed across Europe between April and December 1980 with the In Concert 1980 tour.

In 1980, Oldfield released &quot;QE2&quot;, named after the ocean liner, which features a variety of guest musicians including Phil Collins on drums. This was followed by the European Adventure Tour 1981, during which Oldfield accepted an invitation to perform at a free concert celebrating the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana in Guildhall. He wrote a new track, &quot;Royal Wedding Anthem&quot;, for the occasion.

His next album, &quot;Five Miles Out&quot;, followed in March 1982, with the 24-minute track &quot;Taurus II&quot; occupying the whole of side one. The Five Miles Out World Tour 1982 saw Oldfield perform from April to December of that year. &quot;Crises&quot; saw Oldfield continue the pattern of one long composition with shorter songs. The first single from the album, &quot;Moonlight Shadow&quot;, with Maggie Reilly on vocals, became Oldfield&#x27;s most successful single, reaching No. 4 in the UK and No. 1 in nine other countries. The subsequent Crises Tour in 1983 concluded with a concert at Wembley Arena to commemorate the tenth anniversary of &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;. The next album, &quot;Discovery&quot;, continues with this trend, being the first single &quot;To France&quot; and subsequent Discovery Tour 1984.

Oldfield later turned to film and video, writing the score for Roland Joffé&#x27;s acclaimed film &quot;The Killing Fields&quot; and producing substantial video footage for his album &quot;Islands&quot;. &quot;Islands&quot; continued what Oldfield had been doing on the past couple of albums, with an instrumental piece on one side and rock/pop singles on the other. Of these, &quot;Islands&quot;, sung by Bonnie Tyler and &quot;Magic Touch&quot;, with vocals by Max Bacon (in the US version) and Glasgow vocalist Jim Price (Southside Jimmy) in the rest of the world, were the major hits. In the US &quot;Magic Touch&quot; reached the top 10 on the Billboard album rock charts in 1988. During the 1980s, Oldfield&#x27;s then-partner, Norwegian singer Anita Hegerland, contributed vocals to many songs including &quot;Pictures in the Dark&quot;.

Released in July 1989, &quot;Earth Moving&quot; features seven vocalists across the album&#x27;s nine tracks. It is Oldfield&#x27;s first to consist solely of rock and pop songs, several of which were released as singles: &quot;Innocent&quot; and &quot;Holy&quot; in Europe and &quot;Hostage&quot; in the US.

For his next instrumental album, Virgin insisted that Oldfield use the title &quot;Tubular Bells 2&quot;. Oldfield&#x27;s rebellious response was &quot;Amarok&quot;, an hour-long work featuring rapidly changing themes, unpredictable bursts of noise and a hidden Morse code insult, stating &quot;Fuck off RB&quot;, allegedly directed at Branson. Oldfield did everything in his power to make it impossible to make extracts and Virgin returned the favour by barely promoting the album.

in February 1991, Oldfield released his final album for Virgin, &quot;Heaven&#x27;s Open&quot;, under the name &quot;Michael Oldfield&quot;. It marks the first time he handles all lead vocals. In 2013, Oldfield invited Branson to the opening of St. Andrew&#x27;s International School of The Bahamas, where two of Oldfield&#x27;s children were pupils. This was the occasion of the debut of &quot;Tubular Bells for Schools&quot;, a piano solo adaptation of Oldfield&#x27;s work.

===1992–2003: Warner years===
By early 1992, Oldfield had secured Clive Banks as his new manager and had several record label owners listen to his demo of &quot;Tubular Bells II&quot; at his house. Oldfield signed with Rob Dickins of WEA Warner and recorded the album with Trevor Horn as producer. Released in August 1992, the album went to No. 1 in the UK. Its live premiere followed on 4 September at Edinburgh Castle which was released on home video as &quot;Tubular Bells II Live&quot;. Oldfield supported the album with his Tubular Bells II 20th Anniversary Tour in 1992 and 1993, his first concert tour since 1984. By April 1993, the album had sold over three million copies worldwide.

Oldfield continued to embrace new musical styles, with &quot;The Songs of Distant Earth&quot; (based on Arthur C. Clarke&#x27;s novel of the same name) exhibiting a softer new-age sound. In 1994, he also had an asteroid, 5656 Oldfield, named after him.

In 1995, Oldfield continued to embrace new musical styles by producing the Celtic-themed album &quot;Voyager&quot;. In 1992, Oldfield met Luar na Lubre, a Galician Celtic-folk band (from A Coruña, Spain), with the singer Rosa Cedrón. The band&#x27;s popularity grew after Oldfield covered their song &quot;O son do ar&quot; (&quot;The sound of the air&quot;) on his &quot;Voyager&quot; album.

In 1998, Oldfield produced the third &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; album (also premiered at a concert, this time in Horse Guards Parade, London), drawing on the dance music scene at his then new home on the island of Ibiza. This album was inspired by themes from &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;, but differed in lacking a clear two-part structure.

During 1999, Oldfield released two albums. The first, &quot;Guitars&quot;, used guitars as the source for all the sounds on the album, including percussion. The second, &quot;The Millennium Bell&quot;, consisted of pastiches of a number of styles of music that represented various historical periods over the past millennium. The work was performed live in Berlin for the city&#x27;s millennium celebrations in 1999–2000.

He added to his repertoire the MusicVR project, combining his music with a virtual reality-based computer game. His first work on this project is &quot;Tres Lunas&quot; launched in 2002, a virtual game where the player can interact with a world full of new music. This project appeared as a double CD, one with the music and the other with the game.

In 2002 and 2003, Oldfield re-recorded &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; using modern equipment to coincide with the 30th anniversary of the original. He had wanted to do it years before but his contract with Virgin kept him from doing so. This new version featured John Cleese as the Master of Ceremonies, as Viv Stanshall, who spoke on the original, died in the interim. &quot;Tubular Bells 2003&quot; was released in May 2003.

===2004–present: Mercury years===
On 12 April 2004, Oldfield launched his next virtual reality project, &quot;Maestro&quot;, which contains music from the &quot;Tubular Bells 2003&quot; album and some new chillout melodies. The games have since been made available free of charge on Tubular.net.

In 2005, Oldfield signed a deal with Mercury Records UK, who secured the rights to his catalogue when the rights had reverted to himself. Mercury acquired the rights to Oldfield&#x27;s back catalogue, in July 2007. Oldfield released his first album on the Mercury label, &quot;Light + Shade&quot;, in September 2005. It is a double album of music of contrasting mood: relaxed (Light) and upbeat and moody (Shade). In 2006 and 2007, Oldfield headlined the Night of the Proms tour, consisting of 21 concerts across Europe. Also in 2007, Oldfield released his autobiography, &quot;Changeling&quot;.

In March 2008, Oldfield released his first classical album, &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot;; Karl Jenkins assisted with the orchestration. In the first week of release the album topped the UK Classical chart and reached No. 9 on the main UK Album Chart. A single &quot;Spheres&quot;, featuring a demo version of pieces from the album, was released digitally. The album was nominated for a Classical Brit Award, the NS&amp;I Best Album of 2009.

In 2008, when Oldfield&#x27;s original 35-year deal with Virgin Records ended, the rights to &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; and his other Virgin releases were returned to him, and were then transferred to Mercury Records. Mercury announced that his Virgin albums would be reissued with bonus content from 2009. In 2009, Mercury released the compilation album &quot;The Mike Oldfield Collection 1974–1983&quot;, that went to No. 11 in the UK chart.

In 2008, Oldfield contributed a new track, &quot;Song for Survival&quot;, to the charity album &quot;Songs for Survival&quot; in support of Survival International. Oldfield&#x27;s daughter Molly played a large part in the project. In 2010, lyricist Don Black said that he had been working with Oldfield. In 2012, Oldfield was featured on &quot;Journey into Space&quot;, an album by his brother Terry, and on the track &quot;Islanders&quot; by German producer Torsten Stenzel&#x27;s York project. In 2013, Oldfield and York released a remix album entitled &quot;Tubular Beats&quot;.

Oldfield performed live at the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in London. His set included renditions of &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;, &quot;Far Above the Clouds&quot; and &quot;In Dulci Jubilo&quot; during a segment about the National Health Service. This track appears on the officially released soundtrack album &quot;Isles of Wonder&quot;. Later in 2012, the compilation album &quot;Two Sides: The Very Best of Mike Oldfield&quot; was released and reached No. 6 in the UK.

In October 2013, the BBC broadcast &quot;Tubular Bells: The Mike Oldfield Story&quot;, a documentary on Oldfield&#x27;s life and career. Oldfield&#x27;s rock-themed album of songs, titled &quot;Man on the Rocks&quot;, was released on 3 March 2014 by Virgin EMI. The album was produced by Steve Lipson. The album marked a return of Oldfield to a Virgin branded label, through the merger of Mercury Records UK and Virgin Records after Universal Music&#x27;s purchase of EMI. The track &quot;Nuclear&quot; was used for the E3 trailer of &quot;Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain&quot;.

In 2015, Oldfield told Steve Wright on his BBC radio show that a sequel album to &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; was in early development, which he aimed to record on analogue equipment. Later in 2015, Oldfield revealed that he had started on a sequel to &quot;Ommadawn&quot;. The album, named &quot;Return to Ommadawn&quot;, was finished in 2016 and released in January 2017. It went to No. 4 in the UK. Oldfield again hinted at a fourth &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; album when he posted photos of his new equipment, including a new Telecaster guitar.

A 50th anniversary edition of &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; was released on 26 May 2023. It features a new master of the original album along with an additional previously unreleased 8-minute track, the &quot;Introduction to &quot;Tubular Bells 4&quot;&quot;. &quot;Introduction to &quot;Tubular Bells 4&quot;&quot; was recorded by Oldfield as a demo in 2017. His record label indicated that he had decided not to go forward with the &quot;Tubular Bells 4&quot; project and that this &quot;may well be the last piece ever to be recorded by Oldfield&quot;.

==Musicianship==
Oldfield&#x27;s 1970s recordings were characterised by a very broad variety of instrumentation predominantly played by himself, plus assorted guitar sound treatments to suggest other instrumental timbres (such as the &quot;bagpipe&quot;, &quot;mandolin&quot;, &quot;Glorfindel&quot; and varispeed guitars on the original &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;).
During the 1980s Oldfield became expert in the use of digital synthesizers and sequencers (notably the Fairlight CMI) which began to dominate the sound of his recordings: from the late 1990s onwards, he became a keen user of software synthesizers. He has, however, regularly returned to projects emphasising detailed, manually played and part-acoustic instrumentation (such as 1990&#x27;s &quot;Amarok&quot;, 1996&#x27;s &quot;Voyager&quot; and 1999&#x27;s &quot;Guitars&quot;).

While generally preferring the sound of guest vocalists, Oldfield has frequently sung both lead and backup parts for his songs and compositions. He has also contributed experimental vocal effects such as fake choirs and the notorious &quot;Piltdown Man&quot; impression on &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;.

===Guitars===
Over the years, Oldfield has used a range of guitars. Among the more notable of these are:
; 1963 Fender Stratocaster : Serial no. L08044, in salmon pink (fiesta red). Used by Oldfield from 1984 (the &quot;Discovery&quot; album) until 2006 (Night of the Proms, rehearsals in Antwerp). Subsequently, sold for £30,000 at Chandler Guitars.
; 1989 PRS Artist Custom 24 : In amber, used by Oldfield from the late 1980s to the present day.
; 1966 Fender Telecaster : Serial no. 180728, in blonde. Previously owned by Marc Bolan, this was the only electric guitar used on &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;. The guitar was unsold at auction by Bonhams in 2007, 2008 and 2009 at estimated values of, respectively, £25,000–35,000, £10,000–15,000 and £8,000–12,000; Oldfield has since sold it and donated the £6500 received to the charity SANE.
; Various Gibson Les Paul, Zemaitis and SG guitars : Used extensively by Oldfield in the 1970s and 1980s. The most notable Gibson guitar Oldfield favoured in this time period was a 1962 Les Paul/SG Junior model, which was his primary guitar for the recording of &quot;Ommadawn&quot;, among other works. Oldfield is also known to have owned and used an L6-S during that model&#x27;s production run in the mid-1970s. On occasion, Oldfield was also seen playing a black Les Paul Custom, an early reissue model built around 1968.

Oldfield used a modified Roland GP8 effects processor in conjunction with his PRS Artist to get many of his heavily overdriven guitar sounds from the &quot;Earth Moving&quot; album onwards. Oldfield has also been using guitar synthesizers since the mid-1980s, using a 1980s Roland GR-300/G-808 type system, then a 1990s Roland GK2 equipped red PRS Custom 24 (sold in 2006) with a Roland VG8, and most recently a Line 6 Variax.

Oldfield has an unusual playing style, using fingers and long right-hand fingernails and different ways of creating vibrato: a &quot;very fast side-to-side vibrato&quot; and &quot;violinist&#x27;s vibrato&quot;. Oldfield has stated that his playing style originates from his musical roots playing folk music and the bass guitar.

===Keyboards===
Over the years, Oldfield has owned and used a vast number of synthesizers and other keyboard instruments. In the 1980s, he composed the score for the film &quot;The Killing Fields&quot; on a Fairlight CMI. Some examples of keyboard and synthesised instruments which Oldfield has made use of include Sequential Circuits Prophet-5s (notably on &quot;Platinum&quot; and &quot;The Killing Fields&quot;), Roland JV-1080/JV-2080 units (1990s), a Korg M1 (as seen in the &quot;Innocent&quot; video), a Clavia Nord Lead and Steinway pianos. In recent years, he has also made use of software synthesis products, such as Native Instruments.

===Recording===
Oldfield has self-recorded and produced many of his albums, and played the majority of the featured instruments, largely at his home studios. In the 1990s and 2000s he mainly used DAWs such as Apple Logic, Avid Pro Tools and Steinberg Nuendo as recording suites. For composing orchestral music Oldfield has been quoted as using the software notation program Sibelius running on Apple Macintoshes. He also used the FL Studio DAW on his 2005 double album &quot;Light + Shade&quot;. Among the mixing consoles Oldfield has owned are an AMS Neve Capricorn 33238, a Harrison Series X, and a Euphonix System 5-MC.

==Personal life==
===Family===
In 1978, Oldfield married Diana Fuller, a relative of the Exegesis group leader. The marriage lasted for three months. Oldfield recalled that he phoned label boss Richard Branson the day after the ceremony and said he had made a mistake. From 1979 to 1986, Oldfield was in a relationship with Sally Cooper, whom he met through Virgin. They had three children. In 2015, his son Dougal died after collapsing while working at a film production company in London. By the time of birth of their third child, in 1986, the relationship had broken down and they amicably split. Oldfield entered a relationship with Norwegian singer Anita Hegerland that lasted until 1991. The pair met backstage at one of Oldfield&#x27;s gigs while touring Germany in 1984. They lived in Switzerland, France and England. They have two children.

In the late 1990s, Oldfield posted in a lonely hearts column in a local Ibiza newspaper. It was answered by Amy Lauer; the pair dated, but the relationship was troubled by Oldfield&#x27;s bouts of alcohol and substance abuse and it ended after two months. In 2001, Oldfield began counselling and psychotherapy. Between 2002 and 2013, Oldfield was married to Fanny Vandekerckhove, whom he met while living in Ibiza. They have two sons.

===Other===
Oldfield and his siblings were raised as Catholic, their mother&#x27;s faith. 

In June 1978, during the recording of &quot;Incantations&quot;, Oldfield and his siblings completed a three-day Exegesis seminar, a controversial self-assertiveness programme based on Werner Erhard&#x27;s EST training programme. The experience had a significant effect on Oldfield&#x27;s personality, who recalled that he underwent a &quot;rebirth experience&quot; by reliving past fears. &quot;It was like opening some huge cathedral doors and facing the monster, and I saw that the monster was myself as a newborn infant, because I&#x27;d started life in a panic.&quot; Following the Exegesis seminar, the formerly reclusive Oldfield granted press interviews, posed nude for a promotional photo shoot for &quot;Incantations&quot; and went drinking with news reporters. He had also conquered his fear of flying, gained a pilot&#x27;s licence and bought his own plane.

He used drugs in his early life, including LSD, which he said affected his mental health. In the early 1990s, Oldfield set up Tonic, a foundation that sponsored people to receive counselling and therapy.

In 1980, Oldfield, a longtime fan of model aircraft, acquired his pilot&#x27;s licence. He later became a motorcycle enthusiast and has been inspired to write songs from riding them. He has owned various models, including a BMW R1200GS, Suzuki GSX-R750, Suzuki GSX-R1000 and a Yamaha R1.

Oldfield has lived in Nassau, Bahamas, since 2009 and is a Bahamian citizen. He has also lived in Spain, Los Angeles and Monaco. In 2012, Oldfield stated that he had decided to leave England after feeling that the country had become a &quot;nanny state&quot; with too much surveillance and state control. Oldfield has remarked that while he is close to other celebrity residents in the Bahamas, he chose not to live within a wealthy gated community with staff and described his lifestyle as &quot;austere.&quot;

In 2017, Oldfield expressed support for then US President Donald Trump and said he would have played at Trump&#x27;s inauguration if he had been invited to do so. In the same interview, he also stated that he was in favour of Brexit.

==Awards and nominations==
{| class=&quot;wikitable sortable plainrowheaders&quot; 
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Award
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Year
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Nominee(s)
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Category
! scope=&quot;col&quot; | Result
! scope=&quot;col&quot; class=&quot;unsortable&quot;| 
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | APRS Annual Sound Fellowships Lunch
| 2015
| Himself
| Honour Fellowship
|
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | British Academy Film Awards
| 1985
| &quot;The Killing Fields&quot;
| Best Original Music
|
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | Brit Awards
| | 1977
| &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;
| British Album of the Year
|
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | Daily Mirror The British Rock &amp; Pop Awards 
| |1977
| Himself
| Best Instrumentalist
|
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | Golden Globe Awards
| 1985
| &quot;The Killing Fields&quot;
| Best Original Score
|
! scope=&quot;row&quot; rowspan=2|Goldene Europa
| 1987 
| rowspan=2|Himself
| rowspan=2|Best International Artist
| rowspan=2|
| 1998
|-
! scope=&quot;row&quot; rowspan=2|Grammy Awards
| 1975
| &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; 
| Best Instrumental Composition
| rowspan=2|
| 1998
| &quot;Voyager&quot;
| Best New Age Album
|-
! scope=&quot;row&quot;|Grammy Hall of Fame
| 2018
| &quot;Tubular Bells&quot;
| Album Induction
| 
! scope=&quot;row&quot;|Hungarian Music Awards
| 1997
| &quot;Voyager&quot;
| Best Foreign Album
| 
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | Ivor Novello Awards
| 1984
| &quot;Moonlight Shadow&quot;
| Most Performed Work
|
! scope=&quot;row&quot; rowspan=3| NME Awards
| 1975
| rowspan=3|Himself
| rowspan=3|Best Miscellaneous Instrumentalist
| rowspan=3|
| 1976
|-
| 1977
|-
! scope=&quot;row&quot; | Online Film &amp; Television Association
| 1999
| &quot;The X-Files&quot;
| Best Music, Original Sci-Fi/Fantasy/Horror Score
|
==Honours==
* In 1981, Oldfield was awarded the Freedom of the City of London.

==Discography==
Studio albums
* &quot;Tubular Bells&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Hergest Ridge&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Ommadawn&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Incantations&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Platinum&quot; (1979)
* &quot;QE2&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Five Miles Out&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Crises&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Discovery&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Killing Fields&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Islands&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Earth Moving&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Amarok&quot; (1990)

* &quot;Heaven&#x27;s Open&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Tubular Bells II&quot; (1992)
* &quot;The Songs of Distant Earth&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Voyager&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Tubular Bells III&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Guitars&quot; (1999)
* &quot;The Millennium Bell&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Tr3s Lunas&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Tubular Bells 2003&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Light + Shade&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Man on the Rocks&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Return to Ommadawn&quot; (2017)
==Concert tours==
* Tour of Europe 1979 (March–May 1979)
* In Concert 1980 (April–December 1980)
* European Adventure Tour &#x27;81 (March–August 1981)
* Five Miles Out World Tour 1982 (April–December 1982)
* Crises Tour 1983 (May–July 1983)
* Discovery Tour 1984 (August–November 1984)
* Tubular Bells II 20th Anniversary Tour (March–October 1993)
* Live Then &amp; Now &#x27;99 (June–July 1999)
* Nokia Night of the Proms (December 2006)
* Night of the Proms Spain (March 2007)

==Bibliography==
*
*
*Tobal Cayuela,J.J. (2019). &quot;Mike Oldfield. Taurus&quot;. Editorial TBEditores. 
*Campos, Héctor (2018). &quot;Mike Oldfield: La música de los Sueños&quot;. Editorial Círculo Rojo. 
*Capitani, Ettore - Paolucci, Stefano (2020). &quot;Mike Oldfield. In Italia.&quot; Passamonti Editore. .

==Musical scores==
* .Copyright 1973. Text written by Karl Dallas. Analysis by David Bedford. The text of this book originally appeared in &quot;Let It Rock&quot; magazine, December 1974, under the title of &quot;Balm for the Walking Dead&quot;.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
Sources
*

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3008" start="0" end="23" title="Mike Oldfield" label="Michael Gordon Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q826224" start="143" end="156" title="Tubular Bells" label="Tubular Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="435" end="451" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="453" end="458" title="World music" label="world"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="460" end="464" title="Folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="466" end="475" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="477" end="487" title="Electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="489" end="496" title="Ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="501" end="514" title="new age music" label="new age music"/>
<link wikidata="Q253838" start="651" end="665" title="Sally Oldfield" label="Sally Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q488740" start="683" end="697" title="the Sallyangie" label="the Sallyangie"/>
<link wikidata="Q280077" start="729" end="740" title="Kevin Ayers" label="Kevin Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="832" end="847" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="892" end="906" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q274167" start="954" end="966" title="The Exorcist" label="The Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q123543" start="1070" end="1083" title="Hergest Ridge (album)" label="Hergest Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q928165" start="1104" end="1112" title="Ommadawn" label="Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096825" start="1136" end="1148" title="Incantations (album)" label="Incantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q929074" start="1339" end="1347" title="Platinum (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q538705" start="1368" end="1371" title="QE2 (album)" label="QE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q280674" start="1395" end="1409" title="Five Miles Out" label="Five Miles Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q869738" start="1475" end="1481" title="Crises (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006235" start="1542" end="1558" title="Moonlight Shadow" label="Moonlight Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q233919" start="1579" end="1592" title="Maggie Reilly" label="Maggie Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="1613" end="1616" title="Warner Music Group" label="WEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q735357" start="1700" end="1716" title="Tubular Bells II" label="Tubular Bells II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11786770" start="1799" end="1806" title="MusicVR" label="MusicVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="1870" end="1888" title="2012 Olympic Games" label="2012 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008" start="1905" end="1932" title="Mike Oldfield discography" label="Oldfield&amp;#x27;s discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q27430145" start="2026" end="2044" title="Return to Ommadawn" label="Return to Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="2182" end="2200" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="2268" end="2288" title="general practitioner" label="general practitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="2309" end="2312" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066722" start="2348" end="2372" title="Charleville, County Cork" label="Charleville, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q253838" start="2468" end="2473" title="Sally Oldfield" label="Sally"/>
<link wikidata="Q975209" start="2486" end="2493" title="Terry Oldfield" label="Terence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="2579" end="2592" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="2640" end="2651" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q928165" start="2857" end="2865" title="Ommadawn" label="Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739657" start="2891" end="2914" title="The Highlands School, Reading" label="Highlands Junior School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368052" start="2969" end="2989" title="Elvian School" label="Presentation College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998477" start="3049" end="3060" title="Harold Wood" label="Harold Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="3062" end="3067" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370915" start="3091" end="3116" title="Emerson Park Academy" label="Hornchurch Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q646545" start="3179" end="3182" title="General Certificate of Education" label="GCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332953" start="3390" end="3401" title="Bert Jansch" label="Bert Jansch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398824" start="3406" end="3419" title="John Renbourn" label="John Renbourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q488740" start="4257" end="4271" title="the Sallyangie" label="the Sallyangie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12339705" start="4418" end="4439" title="Transatlantic Records" label="Transatlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q720755" start="4482" end="4501" title="Children of the Sun (The Sallyangie album)" label="Children of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="4570" end="4587" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395369" start="4618" end="4624" title="Family (band)" label="Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348821" start="4660" end="4669" title="Ric Grech" label="Ric Grech"/>
<link wikidata="Q720731" start="4699" end="4712" title="Roger Chapman" label="Roger Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q729505" start="5077" end="5089" title="Soft Machine" label="Soft Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q280077" start="5099" end="5110" title="Kevin Ayers" label="Kevin Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492500" start="5380" end="5400" title="Shooting at the Moon (album)" label="Shooting at the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653876" start="5424" end="5447" title="Whatevershebringswesing" label="Whatevershebringswesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337147" start="5491" end="5511" title="Edgar Broughton Band (album)" label="Edgar Broughton Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="5560" end="5578" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="5685" end="5694" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="5699" end="5710" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="5863" end="5867" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461127" start="5881" end="5900" title="Shaftesbury Theatre" label="Shaftesbury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q45375" start="5934" end="5945" title="Alex Harvey (musician)" label="Alex Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="6088" end="6096" title="Time signature" label="7/8 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799557" start="6456" end="6473" title="Arthur Louis" label="Arthur Louis Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q775768" start="6506" end="6522" title="The Manor Studio" label="The Manor Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q964092" start="6526" end="6545" title="Shipton-on-Cherwell" label="Shipton-on-Cherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="6547" end="6558" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="6581" end="6596" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q548513" start="6618" end="6628" title="Tom Newman (musician)" label="Tom Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="6719" end="6733" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q826224" start="7010" end="7023" title="Tubular Bells" label="Tubular Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="7385" end="7408" title="Overdubbing" label="multi-layered recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q274167" start="7656" end="7668" title="The Exorcist" label="The Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="7733" end="7755" title="New-age music" label="new-age music movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q263938" start="7896" end="7907" title="Rock Bottom (album)" label="Rock Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q312693" start="7917" end="7929" title="Robert Wyatt" label="Robert Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123543" start="7970" end="7983" title="Hergest Ridge (album)" label="Hergest Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23129" start="8446" end="8459" title="Herefordshire" label="Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="8519" end="8530" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q928165" start="8543" end="8551" title="Ommadawn" label="Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q76547561" start="8674" end="8689" title="In Dulci Jubilo (Mike Oldfield)" label="In Dulci Jubilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635451" start="8760" end="8806" title="Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition" label="Grammy award for Best Instrumental Composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273929" start="8943" end="8956" title="Pekka Pohjola" label="Pekka Pohjola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750663" start="8984" end="9016" title="Mathematician&amp;#x27;s Air Display" label="Mathematician&amp;#x27;s Air Display"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="9129" end="9144" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232422" start="9215" end="9225" title="Portsmouth (Mike Oldfield single)" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="9274" end="9290" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096825" start="9350" end="9362" title="Incantations (album)" label="Incantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q253838" start="9465" end="9479" title="Sally Oldfield" label="Sally Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q449192" start="9481" end="9492" title="Maddy Prior" label="Maddy Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414026" start="9501" end="9521" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s College, London" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q994189" start="9864" end="9871" title="Exposed (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Exposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616372" start="10157" end="10163" title="Guilty (Mike Oldfield instrumental)" label="Guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="10504" end="10519" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522800" start="10582" end="10597" title="The Space Movie" label="The Space Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933914" start="10614" end="10626" title="Virgin Films" label="Virgin Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="10683" end="10692" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929621" start="10736" end="10754" title="Blue Peter (instrumental)" label="the signature tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247639" start="10810" end="10820" title="Blue Peter" label="Blue Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q929074" start="10968" end="10976" title="Platinum (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008" start="11184" end="11199" title="In Concert 1980" label="In Concert 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q538705" start="11240" end="11243" title="QE2 (album)" label="QE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244204" start="11267" end="11278" title="Queen Elizabeth 2" label="ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="11334" end="11346" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094155" start="11502" end="11542" title="Wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer" label="wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="11546" end="11555" title="Guildhall" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q280674" start="11654" end="11668" title="Five Miles Out" label="Five Miles Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q869738" start="11879" end="11885" title="Crises (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006235" start="12009" end="12025" title="Moonlight Shadow" label="Moonlight Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q233919" start="12038" end="12051" title="Maggie Reilly" label="Maggie Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="12233" end="12246" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q906197" start="12336" end="12345" title="Discovery (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179487" start="12409" end="12418" title="To France" label="To France"/>
<link wikidata="Q634883" start="12511" end="12520" title="The Killing Fields (album)" label="the score"/>
<link wikidata="Q309715" start="12525" end="12537" title="Roland Joffé" label="Roland Joffé"/>
<link wikidata="Q494582" start="12566" end="12584" title="The Killing Fields (movie)" label="The Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091268" start="12651" end="12658" title="Islands (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q606118" start="12845" end="12852" title="Islands (Mike Oldfield song)" label="Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="12868" end="12880" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504545" start="12891" end="12902" title="Magic Touch (Mike Oldfield song)" label="Magic Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912198" start="12925" end="12934" title="Max Bacon" label="Max Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="12959" end="12966" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="13111" end="13138" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard album rock charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q269611" start="13213" end="13228" title="Anita Hegerland" label="Anita Hegerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505157" start="13279" end="13299" title="Pictures in the Dark" label="Pictures in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q976540" start="13337" end="13349" title="Earth Moving" label="Earth Moving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036002" start="13536" end="13544" title="Innocent (Mike Oldfield song)" label="Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505777" start="13561" end="13565" title="(One Glance Is) Holy" label="Holy"/>
<link wikidata="Q455202" start="13770" end="13776" title="Amarok (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Amarok"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="13880" end="13890" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="13954" end="13961" title="Richard Branson" label="Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034694" start="14172" end="14190" title="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Open" label="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q735357" start="14741" end="14757" title="Tubular Bells II" label="Tubular Bells II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340086" start="14799" end="14810" title="Rob Dickins" label="Rob Dickins"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="14814" end="14824" title="Warner Music Group" label="WEA Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="14853" end="14864" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="14983" end="14999" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489748" start="15042" end="15063" title="Tubular Bells II Live" label="Tubular Bells II Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051791" start="15334" end="15360" title="The Songs of Distant Earth (album)" label="The Songs of Distant Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="15377" end="15393" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q472368" start="15401" end="15423" title="Songs of Distant Earth" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="15484" end="15492" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155595" start="15494" end="15507" title="5656 Oldfield" label="5656 Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="15602" end="15608" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q765872" start="15628" end="15635" title="Voyager (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q427266" start="15665" end="15678" title="Luar na Lubre" label="Luar na Lubre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="15714" end="15722" title="A Coruña" label="A Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394583" start="15748" end="15759" title="Rosa Cedrón" label="Rosa Cedrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q971320" start="15948" end="15989" title="Tubular Bells III" label="the third &amp;quot;Tubular Bells&amp;quot; album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489435" start="16011" end="16018" title="Tubular Bells III Live" label="concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254964" start="16033" end="16052" title="Horse Guards Parade" label="Horse Guards Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="16078" end="16089" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q52631" start="16134" end="16139" title="Ibiza" label="Ibiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028638" start="16320" end="16327" title="Guitars (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q531616" start="16435" end="16454" title="The Millennium Bell" label="The Millennium Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128018" start="16475" end="16483" title="pastiche" label="pastiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q516245" start="16599" end="16613" title="The Art in Heaven Concert" label="performed live"/>
<link wikidata="Q11786770" start="16714" end="16721" title="MusicVR" label="MusicVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="16758" end="16773" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q284546" start="16835" end="16845" title="Tres Lunas" label="Tres Lunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q284546" start="17027" end="17031" title="Tres Lunas (video game)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="17292" end="17303" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q249966" start="17336" end="17349" title="Viv Stanshall" label="Viv Stanshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q367140" start="17405" end="17423" title="Tubular Bells 2003" label="Tubular Bells 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="17536" end="17551" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729340" start="17567" end="17574" title="Maestro (video game)" label="Maestro"/>
<link wikidata="Q757143" start="17662" end="17670" title="chillout" label="chillout"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="17791" end="17809" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091553" start="18031" end="18044" title="Light + Shade" label="Light + Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425399" start="18209" end="18227" title="Night of the Proms" label="Night of the Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q860022" start="18332" end="18342" title="Changeling (Mike Oldfield autobiography)" label="Changeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q201246" start="18417" end="18437" title="Music of the Spheres (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q333168" start="18445" end="18457" title="Karl Jenkins" label="Karl Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864836" start="18541" end="18559" title="UK Classical chart" label="UK Classical chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504031" start="18621" end="18628" title="Spheres (song)" label="Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096102" start="18741" end="18755" title="Classic Brit Awards" label="Classical Brit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978242" start="18767" end="18775" title="National Savings and Investments" label="NS&amp;amp;I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751402" start="19157" end="19195" title="The Mike Oldfield Collection 1974–1983" label="The Mike Oldfield Collection 1974–1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561406" start="19342" end="19360" title="Songs for Survival" label="Songs for Survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887464" start="19381" end="19403" title="Survival International" label="Survival International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238931" start="19490" end="19499" title="Don Black (lyricist)" label="Don Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444996" start="19700" end="19715" title="Torsten Stenzel" label="Torsten Stenzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055352" start="19723" end="19727" title="York (group)" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027065" start="19802" end="19815" title="Tubular Beats" label="Tubular Beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="19855" end="19892" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434493" start="19968" end="19988" title="Far Above the Clouds" label="Far Above the Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q76547561" start="20005" end="20020" title="In Dulci Jubilo / On Horseback" label="In Dulci Jubilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="20054" end="20077" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084243" start="20148" end="20163" title="Isles of Wonder (album)" label="Isles of Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492304" start="20214" end="20255" title="Two Sides" label="Two Sides: The Very Best of Mike Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="20326" end="20329" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059199" start="20499" end="20515" title="Man on the Rocks" label="Man on the Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218788" start="20555" end="20565" title="Virgin EMI" label="Virgin EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973201" start="20593" end="20605" title="Steve Lipson" label="Steve Lipson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20845" end="20881" title="Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain" label="Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015589" start="20913" end="20925" title="Steve Wright (DJ)" label="Steve Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q27430145" start="21184" end="21202" title="Return to Ommadawn" label="Return to Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="21415" end="21425" title="Telecaster" label="Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="22457" end="22470" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight CMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897589" start="22579" end="22599" title="software synthesizer" label="software synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="23247" end="23266" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Fender Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q906197" start="23355" end="23364" title="Discovery (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346893" start="23493" end="23496" title="PRS Guitars" label="PRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="23590" end="23607" title="Fender Telecaster" label="Fender Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q287514" start="23660" end="23670" title="Marc Bolan" label="Marc Bolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q892447" start="23777" end="23784" title="Bonhams" label="Bonhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388659" start="23969" end="23973" title="SANE (charity)" label="SANE"/>
<link wikidata="Q322625" start="23985" end="24000" title="Gibson Les Paul" label="Gibson Les Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150951" start="24002" end="24010" title="Zemaitis Guitars" label="Zemaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q940380" start="24015" end="24017" title="Gibson SG" label="SG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559393" start="24161" end="24179" title="Gibson SG Junior" label="Les Paul/SG Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q928165" start="24243" end="24251" title="Ommadawn" label="Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105377" start="24327" end="24331" title="Gibson L6-S" label="L6-S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448320" start="24442" end="24457" title="Gibson Les Paul Custom" label="Les Paul Custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="24527" end="24533" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="24618" end="24627" title="Distortion (music)" label="overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q976540" start="24658" end="24670" title="Earth Moving" label="Earth Moving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527709" start="24721" end="24739" title="guitar synthesizer" label="guitar synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360236" start="24776" end="24789" title="Roland GR-300" label="Roland GR-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826381" start="24914" end="24920" title="Line 6 (company)" label="Line 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997827" start="24921" end="24927" title="Variax" label="Variax"/>
<link wikidata="Q494582" start="25437" end="25455" title="The Killing Fields (film)" label="The Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="25467" end="25480" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight CMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387433" start="25575" end="25604" title="Sequential Circuits Prophet-5" label="Sequential Circuits Prophet-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q929074" start="25618" end="25638" title="Platinum (Mike Oldfield album)" label="&amp;quot;Platinum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q634883" start="25643" end="25673" title="The Killing Fields (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Killing Fields&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q954204" start="25716" end="25723" title="Korg M1" label="Korg M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036002" start="25746" end="25754" title="Innocent (Mike Oldfield song)" label="Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099064" start="25771" end="25777" title="Clavia" label="Clavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099044" start="25778" end="25787" title="Nord Lead" label="Nord Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q156391" start="25792" end="25800" title="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons" label="Steinway"/>
<link wikidata="Q652569" start="25887" end="25905" title="Native Instruments" label="Native Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="26104" end="26108" title="Digital audio workstation" label="DAWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="26117" end="26122" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057445" start="26123" end="26128" title="Logic Pro" label="Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q385452" start="26130" end="26134" title="Avid Technology" label="Avid"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="26135" end="26144" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q686292" start="26149" end="26158" title="Steinberg" label="Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522160" start="26159" end="26165" title="Nuendo" label="Nuendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q240110" start="26282" end="26290" title="Sibelius (software)" label="Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="26308" end="26317" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q740562" start="26338" end="26347" title="FL Studio" label="FL Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091553" start="26383" end="26396" title="Light + Shade" label="Light + Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032966" start="26456" end="26464" title="AMS Neve" label="AMS Neve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665502" start="26484" end="26492" title="Harrison Audio" label="Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410384" start="26509" end="26517" title="Euphonix" label="Euphonix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419957" start="26621" end="26629" title="Exegesis (group)" label="Exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="26726" end="26741" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q269611" start="27187" end="27202" title="Anita Hegerland" label="Anita Hegerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419957" start="28024" end="28032" title="Exegesis (group)" label="Exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714395" start="28096" end="28109" title="Werner Erhard" label="Werner Erhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q76847" start="28117" end="28139" title="Erhard Seminars Training" label="EST training programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="28825" end="28828" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q60055387" start="29024" end="29038" title="model aircraft" label="model aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q796683" start="29211" end="29222" title="BMW R1200GS" label="BMW R1200GS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779147" start="29224" end="29239" title="Suzuki GSX-R750" label="Suzuki GSX-R750"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755865" start="29241" end="29257" title="Suzuki GSX-R1000" label="Suzuki GSX-R1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q604551" start="29264" end="29273" title="Yamaha R1" label="Yamaha R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="29298" end="29313" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau, Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="29397" end="29403" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511637" start="29517" end="29528" title="nanny state" label="nanny state"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="29847" end="29859" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q27824398" start="29893" end="29918" title="First inauguration of Donald Trump" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="30015" end="30021" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810003" start="30357" end="30392" title="Association of Professional Recording Services" label="APRS Annual Sound Fellowships Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="30458" end="30485" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710398" start="30488" end="30492" title="38th British Academy Film Awards" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q494582" start="30501" end="30519" title="The Killing Fields (film)" label="The Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q787098" start="30528" end="30547" title="BAFTA Award for Best Original Music" label="Best Original Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="30576" end="30587" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586123" start="30592" end="30596" title="1977 Brit Awards" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q826224" start="30605" end="30618" title="Tubular Bells" label="Tubular Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816594" start="30627" end="30652" title="Brit Award for British Album of the Year" label="British Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="30681" end="30693" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="30798" end="30817" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275383" start="30820" end="30824" title="42nd Golden Globe Awards" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q494582" start="30833" end="30851" title="The Killing Fields (film)" label="The Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422140" start="30860" end="30879" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q319993" start="30916" end="30930" title="Goldene Europa" label="Goldene Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="31054" end="31067" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542259" start="31070" end="31074" title="1975 Grammy Awards" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848261" start="31083" end="31096" title="Mike Oldfield&amp;#x27;s Single" label="Tubular Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635451" start="31106" end="31135" title="Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition" label="Best Instrumental Composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542315" start="31151" end="31155" title="1998 Grammy Awards" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q765872" start="31164" end="31171" title="Voyager (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593841" start="31180" end="31198" title="Grammy Award for Best New Age Album" label="Best New Age Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="31226" end="31245" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q826224" start="31261" end="31274" title="Tubular Bells" label="Tubular Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q630536" start="31326" end="31348" title="Hungarian Music Awards" label="Hungarian Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q765872" start="31364" end="31371" title="Voyager (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="31428" end="31447" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006235" start="31463" end="31479" title="Moonlight Shadow" label="Moonlight Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="31545" end="31555" title="NME Awards" label="NME Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129381" start="31745" end="31756" title="The X-Files (film)" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="31864" end="31871" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="31879" end="31893" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q826224" start="31934" end="31947" title="Tubular Bells" label="Tubular Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q123543" start="31969" end="31982" title="Hergest Ridge (album)" label="Hergest Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q928165" start="32004" end="32012" title="Ommadawn" label="Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096825" start="32034" end="32046" title="Incantations (album)" label="Incantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q929074" start="32068" end="32076" title="Platinum (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q538705" start="32098" end="32101" title="QE2 (album)" label="QE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q280674" start="32123" end="32137" title="Five Miles Out" label="Five Miles Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q869738" start="32159" end="32165" title="Crises (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q906197" start="32187" end="32196" title="Discovery (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q634883" start="32218" end="32236" title="The Killing Fields (album)" label="The Killing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091268" start="32258" end="32265" title="Islands (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q976540" start="32287" end="32299" title="Earth Moving" label="Earth Moving"/>
<link wikidata="Q455202" start="32321" end="32327" title="Amarok (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Amarok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034694" start="32350" end="32368" title="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Open" label="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q735357" start="32390" end="32406" title="Tubular Bells II" label="Tubular Bells II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051791" start="32428" end="32454" title="The Songs of Distant Earth (album)" label="The Songs of Distant Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q765872" start="32476" end="32483" title="Voyager (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q971320" start="32505" end="32522" title="Tubular Bells III" label="Tubular Bells III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028638" start="32544" end="32551" title="Guitars (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q531616" start="32573" end="32592" title="The Millennium Bell" label="The Millennium Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q284546" start="32614" end="32624" title="Tr3s Lunas" label="Tr3s Lunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q367140" start="32646" end="32664" title="Tubular Bells 2003" label="Tubular Bells 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091553" start="32686" end="32699" title="Light + Shade" label="Light + Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q201246" start="32721" end="32741" title="Music of the Spheres (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Music of the Spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059199" start="32763" end="32779" title="Man on the Rocks" label="Man on the Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27430145" start="32801" end="32819" title="Return to Ommadawn" label="Return to Ommadawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425399" start="33238" end="33256" title="Night of the Proms" label="Night of the Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425399" start="33275" end="33293" title="Night of the Proms" label="Night of the Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091781" start="33683" end="33694" title="Karl Dallas" label="Karl Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q718287" start="33708" end="33721" title="David Bedford" label="David Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532796" start="33774" end="33785" title="Let It Rock (magazine)" label="Let It Rock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20034" wikidata="Q3454656" url="?curid=20034" title="Mutual recursion">
<text>In mathematics and computer science, mutual recursion is a form of recursion where two mathematical or computational objects, such as functions or datatypes, are defined in terms of each other. Mutual recursion is very common in functional programming and in some problem domains, such as recursive descent parsers, where the datatypes are naturally mutually recursive.

==Examples==
===Datatypes===

The most important basic example of a datatype that can be defined by mutual recursion is a tree, which can be defined mutually recursively in terms of a forest (a list of trees). Symbolically:
 f: [t[1], ..., t[k]]
 t: v f
A forest &quot;f&quot; consists of a list of trees, while a tree &quot;t&quot; consists of a pair of a value &quot;v&quot; and a forest &quot;f&quot; (its children). This definition is elegant and easy to work with abstractly (such as when proving theorems about properties of trees), as it expresses a tree in simple terms: a list of one type, and a pair of two types. Further, it matches many algorithms on trees, which consist of doing one thing with the value, and another thing with the children.

This mutually recursive definition can be converted to a singly recursive definition by inlining the definition of a forest:
 t: v [t[1], ..., t[k]]
A tree &quot;t&quot; consists of a pair of a value &quot;v&quot; and a list of trees (its children). This definition is more compact, but somewhat messier: a tree consists of a pair of one type and a list of another, which require disentangling to prove results about.

In Standard ML, the tree and forest datatypes can be mutually recursively defined as follows, allowing empty trees:

datatype &#x27;a tree = Empty | Node of &#x27;a * &#x27;a forest
and &#x27;a forest = Nil | Cons of &#x27;a tree * &#x27;a forest
===Computer functions===
Just as algorithms on recursive datatypes can naturally be given by recursive functions, algorithms on mutually recursive data structures can be naturally given by mutually recursive functions. Common examples include algorithms on trees, and recursive descent parsers. As with direct recursion, tail call optimization is necessary if the recursion depth is large or unbounded, such as using mutual recursion for multitasking. Note that tail call optimization in general (when the function called is not the same as the original function, as in tail-recursive calls) may be more difficult to implement than the special case of tail-recursive call optimization, and thus efficient implementation of mutual tail recursion may be absent from languages that only optimize tail-recursive calls. In languages such as Pascal that require declaration before use, mutually recursive functions require forward declaration, as a forward reference cannot be avoided when defining them.

As with directly recursive functions, a wrapper function may be useful, with the mutually recursive functions defined as nested functions within its scope if this is supported. This is particularly useful for sharing state across a set of functions without having to pass parameters between them.

====Basic examples====
A standard example of mutual recursion, which is admittedly artificial, determines whether a non-negative number is even or odd by defining two separate functions that call each other, decrementing by 1 each time. In C:

bool is_even(unsigned int n) {
 if (n == 0)
 return true;
 else
 return is_odd(n - 1);

bool is_odd(unsigned int n) {
 if (n == 0)
 return false;
 else
 return is_even(n - 1);


These functions are based on the observation that the question &quot;is 4 even?&quot; is equivalent to &quot;is 3 odd?&quot;, which is in turn equivalent to &quot;is 2 even?&quot;, and so on down to 0. This example is mutual single recursion, and could easily be replaced by iteration. In this example, the mutually recursive calls are tail calls, and tail call optimization would be necessary to execute in constant stack space. In C, this would take &quot;O&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) stack space, unless rewritten to use jumps instead of calls. This could be reduced to a single recursive function codice_1. In that case, codice_2, which could be inlined, would call codice_1, but codice_1 would only call itself.

As a more general class of examples, an algorithm on a tree can be decomposed into its behavior on a value and its behavior on children, and can be split up into two mutually recursive functions, one specifying the behavior on a tree, calling the forest function for the forest of children, and one specifying the behavior on a forest, calling the tree function for the tree in the forest. In Python:

def f_tree(tree) -&gt; None:
 f_value(tree.value)
 f_forest(tree.children)

def f_forest(forest) -&gt; None:
 for tree in forest:
 f_tree(tree)

In this case the tree function calls the forest function by single recursion, but the forest function calls the tree function by multiple recursion.

Using the Standard ML datatype above, the size of a tree (number of nodes) can be computed via the following mutually recursive functions:

fun size_tree Empty = 0
 | size_tree (Node (_, f)) = 1 + size_forest f
and size_forest Nil = 0
 | size_forest (Cons (t, f&#x27;)) = size_tree t + size_forest f&#x27;
A more detailed example in Scheme, counting the leaves of a tree:

(define (count-leaves tree)
 (if (leaf? tree)
 1
 (count-leaves-in-forest (children tree))))

(define (count-leaves-in-forest forest)
 (if (null? forest)
 0
 (+ (count-leaves (car forest))
 (count-leaves-in-forest (cdr forest)))))
These examples reduce easily to a single recursive function by inlining the forest function in the tree function, which is commonly done in practice: directly recursive functions that operate on trees sequentially process the value of the node and recurse on the children within one function, rather than dividing these into two separate functions.

====Advanced examples====
A more complicated example is given by recursive descent parsers, which can be naturally implemented by having one function for each production rule of a grammar, which then mutually recurse; this will in general be multiple recursion, as production rules generally combine multiple parts. This can also be done without mutual recursion, for example by still having separate functions for each production rule, but having them called by a single controller function, or by putting all the grammar in a single function.

Mutual recursion can also implement a finite-state machine, with one function for each state, and single recursion in changing state; this requires tail call optimization if the number of state changes is large or unbounded. This can be used as a simple form of cooperative multitasking. A similar approach to multitasking is to instead use coroutines which call each other, where rather than terminating by calling another routine, one coroutine yields to another but does not terminate, and then resumes execution when it is yielded back to. This allows individual coroutines to hold state, without it needing to be passed by parameters or stored in shared variables.

There are also some algorithms which naturally have two phases, such as minimax (min and max), which can be implemented by having each phase in a separate function with mutual recursion, though they can also be combined into a single function with direct recursion.

===Mathematical functions===
In mathematics, the Hofstadter Female and Male sequences are an example of a pair of integer sequences defined in a mutually recursive manner.

Fractals can be computed (up to a given resolution) by recursive functions. This can sometimes be done more elegantly via mutually recursive functions; the Sierpiński curve is a good example.

==Prevalence==
Mutual recursion is very common in functional programming, and is often used for programs written in LISP, Scheme, ML, and similar programming languages. For example, Abelson and Sussman describe how a meta-circular evaluator can be used to implement LISP with an eval-apply cycle. In languages such as Prolog, mutual recursion is almost unavoidable.

Some programming styles discourage mutual recursion, claiming that it can be confusing to distinguish the conditions which will return an answer from the conditions that would allow the code to run forever without producing an answer. Peter Norvig points to a design pattern which discourages the use entirely, stating:
==Terminology==
Mutual recursion is also known as indirect recursion, by contrast with direct recursion, where a single function calls itself directly. This is simply a difference of emphasis, not a different notion: &quot;indirect recursion&quot; emphasises an individual function, while &quot;mutual recursion&quot; emphasises the set of functions, and does not single out an individual function. For example, if &quot;f&quot; calls itself, that is direct recursion. If instead &quot;f&quot; calls &quot;g&quot; and then &quot;g&quot; calls &quot;f,&quot; which in turn calls &quot;g&quot; again, from the point of view of &quot;f&quot; alone, &quot;f&quot; is indirectly recursing, while from the point of view of &quot;g&quot; alone, &quot;g&quot; is indirectly recursing, while from the point of view of both, &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; are mutually recursing on each other. Similarly a set of three or more functions that call each other can be called a set of mutually recursive functions.

==Conversion to direct recursion==
Mathematically, a set of mutually recursive functions are primitive recursive, which can be proven by course-of-values recursion, building a single function &quot;F&quot; that lists the values of the individual recursive function in order: formula_1 and rewriting the mutual recursion as a primitive recursion.

Any mutual recursion between two procedures can be converted to direct recursion by inlining the code of one procedure into the other. If there is only one site where one procedure calls the other, this is straightforward, though if there are several it can involve code duplication. In terms of the call stack, two mutually recursive procedures yield a stack ABABAB..., and inlining B into A yields the direct recursion (AB)(AB)(AB)...

Alternately, any number of procedures can be merged into a single procedure that takes as argument a variant record (or algebraic data type) representing the selection of a procedure and its arguments; the merged procedure then dispatches on its argument to execute the corresponding code and uses direct recursion to call self as appropriate. This can be seen as a limited application of defunctionalization. This translation may be useful when any of the mutually recursive procedures can be called by outside code, so there is no obvious case for inlining one procedure into the other. Such code then needs to be modified so that procedure calls are performed by bundling arguments into a variant record as described; alternately, wrapper procedures may be used for this task.

==See also==
* Cycle detection (graph theory)
* Recursion (computer science)
* Circular dependency

==References==
* 

== External links ==
* Mutual recursion at Rosetta Code
* &quot;Example demonstrating good use of mutual recursion&quot;, &quot;Are there any example of Mutual recursion?&quot;, &quot;Stack Overflow&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="19" end="35" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454656" start="37" end="53" title="Mutual recursion" label="mutual recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="67" end="76" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="229" end="251" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323264" start="289" end="313" title="recursive descent parser" label="recursive descent parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="493" end="497" title="tree (data structure)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663799" start="1216" end="1224" title="Inline expansion" label="inlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q597330" start="1550" end="1561" title="Standard ML" label="Standard ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323264" start="2062" end="2086" title="recursive descent parser" label="recursive descent parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340959" start="2115" end="2137" title="tail call optimization" label="tail call optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="2630" end="2636" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q782471" start="2711" end="2730" title="forward declaration" label="forward declaration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2834" end="2850" title="Recursion (computer science)#Wrapper function" label="wrapper function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075246" start="2915" end="2930" title="nested function" label="nested function"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="3739" end="3755" title="single recursion" label="single recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340959" start="3850" end="3859" title="tail call" label="tail call"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="4902" end="4920" title="multiple recursion" label="multiple recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="5256" end="5262" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323264" start="5942" end="5966" title="recursive descent parser" label="recursive descent parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111781" start="6036" end="6051" title="Production (computer science)" label="production rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="6461" end="6481" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969336" start="6685" end="6709" title="cooperative multitasking" label="cooperative multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339231" start="6764" end="6773" title="coroutine" label="coroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q751319" start="7166" end="7173" title="minimax" label="minimax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623269" start="7410" end="7446" title="Hofstadter Female and Male sequences" label="Hofstadter Female and Male sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q786286" start="7690" end="7706" title="Sierpiński curve" label="Sierpiński curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="7777" end="7799" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="7843" end="7847" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="LISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="7849" end="7855" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q860654" start="7857" end="7859" title="ML (programming language)" label="ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="7873" end="7893" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822248" start="7944" end="7967" title="meta-circular evaluator" label="meta-circular evaluator"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="8045" end="8051" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q92832" start="8329" end="8341" title="Peter Norvig" label="Peter Norvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253831" start="8354" end="8368" title="design pattern" label="design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="8464" end="8482" title="indirect recursion" label="indirect recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="8501" end="8517" title="direct recursion" label="direct recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570472" start="9510" end="9529" title="primitive recursive" label="primitive recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178160" start="9554" end="9580" title="course-of-values recursion" label="course-of-values recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675229" start="10303" end="10317" title="variant record" label="variant record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322511" start="10322" end="10341" title="algebraic data type" label="algebraic data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251733" start="10591" end="10610" title="defunctionalization" label="defunctionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q245595" start="10998" end="11028" title="Cycle detection (graph theory)" label="Cycle detection (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="11031" end="11059" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="Recursion (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205885" start="11062" end="11081" title="Circular dependency" label="Circular dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18056542" start="11145" end="11157" title="Rosetta Code" label="Rosetta Code"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20036" wikidata="Q100023" url="?curid=20036" title="Metasyntactic variable">
<text>A metasyntactic variable is a specific word or set of words identified as a placeholder in computer science and specifically computer programming. These words are commonly found in source code and are intended to be modified or substituted before real-world usage. For example, [[Metasyntactic variable|foo]] and [[Metasyntactic variable|bar]] are used in over 330 Internet Engineering Task Force Requests for Comments, the documents which define foundational internet technologies like HTTP (web), TCP/IP, and email protocols.

By mathematical analogy, a metasyntactic variable is a word that is a variable for other words, just as in algebra letters are used as variables for numbers.

Metasyntactic variables are used to name entities such as variables, functions, and commands whose exact identity is unimportant and serve only to demonstrate a concept, which is useful for teaching programming.

==Common metasyntactic variables==
Since English is the foundation language or lingua franca of most computer programming languages, variables that originate in English are commonly seen even in programs and examples of programs written for other spoken-language audiences.

The variables used in a particular context may depend on subcultures that develop around programming languages.

===General usage===
Metasyntactic variables used commonly across all programming languages include &quot;foobar&quot;, &quot;foo&quot;, &quot;bar&quot;, &quot;baz&quot;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;thud&quot;. Two of these words, &quot;plugh&quot; and &quot;xyzzy&quot;, are taken from the game &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot;.

A fuller reference can be found in &quot;The Hacker&#x27;s Dictionary&quot; from MIT Press.

===Japanese===
In Japanese, the words (ほげ) and (ふが) are commonly used, with other common words and variants being (ぴよ), (ほげら), and (ほげほげ). The origin of as a metasyntactic variable is not known, but it is believed to date to the early 1980s.

===French===
In France, the word &quot;toto&quot; is widely used, with variants &quot;tata&quot;, &quot;titi&quot;, &quot;tutu&quot; as related placeholders. One commonly-raised source for the use of &quot;toto&quot; is a reference to the stock character used to tell jokes with Tête à Toto.

===Turkish===
In Turkey, the words &quot;hede&quot; and &quot;hödö&quot; (usually spelt &quot;hodo&quot; due to ASCII-only naming constraints of programming languages) are well-known metasyntactic variables that stem from popular humorous cartoon magazines of the 90&#x27;s like LeMan. The words do not mean anything, and are used for precisely that reason. The terms were popularized more widely by the actor and stand-up comedian Cem Yılmaz in the late 90&#x27;s and early 2000&#x27;s.

===Italian===
In Italian software programming culture, it is common to encounter names of Walt Disney characters (as found in the Italian versions of the shows) being used as variables. These names often appear in pseudo-code, are referenced in software engineering classes, and are commonly employed when explaining algorithms to colleagues. Among the most frequently used are &quot;pippo&quot; (Goofy), &quot;pluto,&quot; and &quot;paperino&quot; (Donald Duck). 

== Usage examples ==
===C===

In the following example the function name codice_1 and the variable name codice_2 are both metasyntactic variables. Lines beginning with codice_3 are comments.

// The function named foo
int foo(void)
 // Declare the variable bar and set the value to 1
 int bar = 1;

 return bar;


===C++===

Function prototypes with examples of different argument passing mechanisms:

void Foo(Fruit bar);
void Foo(Fruit* bar);
void Foo(const Fruit&amp; bar);
Example showing the function overloading capabilities of the C++ language

void Foo(int bar);
void Foo(int bar, int baz);
void Foo(int bar, int baz, int qux);
===Python===
Spam, ham, and eggs are the principal metasyntactic variables used in the Python programming language. This is a reference to the famous comedy sketch, &quot;Spam&quot;, by Monty Python, the eponym of the language.
In the following example codice_4, codice_5, and codice_6 are metasyntactic variables and lines beginning with codice_7 are comments.

# Define a function named spam
def spam():

 # Define the variable ham
 ham = &quot;Hello World!&quot;

 # Define the variable eggs
 eggs = 1

 return
===IETF Requests for Comments===
Both the IETF RFCs and computer programming languages are rendered in plain text, making it necessary to distinguish metasyntactic variables by a naming convention, since it would not be obvious from context.

Here is an example from the official IETF document explaining the e-mail protocols (from RFC 772 - cited in RFC 3092):
 All is well; now the recipients can be specified.
 S: MRCP TO:&lt;Foo@Y&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;
 R: 200 OK
 S: MRCP TO:&lt;Raboof@Y&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;
 R: 553 No such user here
 S: MRCP TO:&lt;bar@Y&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;
 R: 200 OK
 S: MRCP TO:&lt;@Y,@X,fubar@Z&gt; &lt;CRLF&gt;
 R: 200 OK
 Note that the failure of &quot;Raboof&quot; has no effect on the storage of
 mail for &quot;Foo&quot;, &quot;bar&quot; or the mail to be forwarded to &quot;fubar@Z&quot;
 through host &quot;X&quot;.

(The documentation for texinfo emphasizes the distinction between metavariables and mere variables used in a programming language being documented in some texinfo file as: &quot;Use the @var command to indicate metasyntactic variables. A metasyntactic variable is something that stands for another piece of text. For example, you should use a metasyntactic variable in the documentation of a function to describe the arguments that are passed to that function. Do not use @var for the names of particular variables in programming languages. These are specific names from a program, so @code is correct for them.&quot;)

Another point reflected in the above example is the convention that a metavariable is to be uniformly substituted with the same instance in all its appearances in a given schema. This is in contrast with nonterminal symbols in formal grammars where the nonterminals on the right of a production can be substituted by different instances.

==Example data==
===SQL===
It is common to use the name ACME in example SQL databases and as a placeholder company-name for the purpose of teaching. The term &#x27;ACME Database&#x27; is commonly used to mean a training or example-only set of database data used solely for training or testing. 
ACME is also commonly used in documentation which shows SQL usage examples, a common practice with in many educational texts as well as technical documentation from companies such as Microsoft and Oracle.

==See also==
*Metavariable (logic)
*xyzzy
*Alice and Bob
*John Doe
*Fnord
*Free variables and bound variables
*Gadget
*&quot;Lorem ipsum&quot;
*Nonce word
*Placeholder name
*Widget
*Smurf

==References==
==External links==
*Definition of &quot;metasyntactic variable&quot;, with examples.
*Examples of metasyntactic variables used in &quot;Commonwealth Hackish&quot;, such as &quot;wombat&quot;.
*Variable &quot;foo&quot; and Other Programming Oddities</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q100023" start="2" end="24" title="Metasyntactic variable" label="metasyntactic variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318274" start="76" end="87" title="placeholder name" label="placeholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="91" end="107" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="125" end="145" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="181" end="192" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q860" start="278" end="343" title="Foobar" label="[[Metasyntactic variable|foo]] and [[Metasyntactic variable|bar]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="365" end="396" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="397" end="418" title="Request for Comments" label="Requests for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="487" end="491" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="499" end="505" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="511" end="516" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="517" end="525" title="Communications protocol" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q185816" start="545" end="552" title="analogy" label="analogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823262" start="556" end="569" title="metasyntax" label="metasyntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="599" end="607" title="Variable (mathematics)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="636" end="643" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="678" end="684" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="980" end="993" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="1265" end="1285" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q860" start="1394" end="1400" title="foobar" label="foobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616527" start="1529" end="1529" title="xyzzy (computing)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q379904" start="1650" end="1673" title="Colossal Cave Adventure" label="Colossal Cave Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535068" start="1723" end="1751" title="The Hacker&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="The Hacker&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q73820" start="1763" end="1772" title="MIT Press" label="MIT Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118198" start="2297" end="2308" title="Tête à Toto" label="Tête à Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="2423" end="2428" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q732915" start="2743" end="2753" title="Cem Yılmaz" label="Cem Yılmaz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3638" end="3654" title="Parameter (computer programming)#Argument passing" label="argument passing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091461" start="3763" end="3783" title="function overloading" label="function overloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q606132" start="3915" end="3919" title="Spam (food)" label="Spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170486" start="3921" end="3924" title="ham" label="ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="3930" end="3934" title="Egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="3989" end="4016" title="Python programming language" label="Python programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777591" start="4073" end="4077" title="Spam (Monty Python)" label="Spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="4088" end="4100" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="4458" end="4462" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="4463" end="4466" title="Request for Comments" label="RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="4472" end="4501" title="computer programming language" label="computer programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="4519" end="4529" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="4696" end="4700" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="4725" end="4731" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="5761" end="5770" title="Variable (programming)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q954063" start="6080" end="6091" title="nonterminal" label="nonterminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="6103" end="6118" title="formal grammars" label="formal grammars"/>
<link wikidata="Q288523" start="6271" end="6275" title="Acme Corporation" label="ACME"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="6287" end="6290" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="6291" end="6299" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="6693" end="6702" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="6707" end="6713" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080865" start="6730" end="6750" title="Metavariable (logic)" label="Metavariable (logic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616527" start="6752" end="6757" title="Xyzzy (computing)" label="xyzzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q649676" start="6759" end="6772" title="Alice and Bob" label="Alice and Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="6774" end="6782" title="John Doe" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8582" start="6784" end="6789" title="Fnord" label="Fnord"/>
<link wikidata="Q935944" start="6791" end="6825" title="Free variables and bound variables" label="Free variables and bound variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q339084" start="6827" end="6833" title="Gadget" label="Gadget"/>
<link wikidata="Q152036" start="6841" end="6852" title="Lorem ipsum" label="Lorem ipsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499602" start="6860" end="6870" title="Nonce word" label="Nonce word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318274" start="6872" end="6888" title="Placeholder name" label="Placeholder name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467478" start="6890" end="6896" title="Widget (economics)" label="Widget"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6898" end="6903" title="The Smurfs#Language" label="Smurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="7056" end="7068" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20038" wikidata="Q1156877" url="?curid=20038" title="Mondegreen">
<text>A mondegreen () is a mishearing or misinterpretation of a phrase in a way that gives it a new meaning. Mondegreens are most often created by a person listening to a poem or a song; the listener, being unable to hear a lyric clearly, substitutes words that sound similar and make some kind of sense. The American writer Sylvia Wright coined the term in 1954, recalling a childhood memory of her mother reading the Scottish ballad &quot;The Bonnie Earl o&#x27; Moray&quot;, and mishearing the words &quot;laid him on the green&quot; as &quot;Lady Mondegreen&quot;.

&quot;Mondegreen&quot; was included in the 2000 edition of the &quot;Random House Webster&#x27;s College Dictionary&quot;, and in the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; in 2002. Merriam-Webster&#x27;s &quot;Collegiate Dictionary&quot; added the word in 2008.

==Etymology==
In a 1954 essay in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, Sylvia Wright described how, as a young girl, she misheard the last line of the first stanza from the ballad &quot;The Bonnie Earl o&#x27; Moray&quot; (from Thomas Percy&#x27;s 1765 book &quot;Reliques of Ancient English Poetry&quot;). She wrote:

The correct lines are, &quot;They hae slain the Earl o&#x27; Moray / And &quot;laid him on the green.&quot;&quot; Wright explained the need for a new term:

==Psychology==
People are more likely to notice what they expect rather than things that are not part of their everyday experiences; this is known as confirmation bias. A person may mistake an unfamiliar stimulus for a familiar and more plausible version. For example, to consider a well-known mondegreen in the song &quot;Purple Haze&quot;, one may be more likely to hear Jimi Hendrix singing that he is about to &quot;kiss this guy&quot; than that he is about to &quot;kiss the sky&quot;. Similarly, if a lyric uses words or phrases that the listener is unfamiliar with, or in an uncommon sentence structure, they may be misheard as using more familiar terms.

The creation of mondegreens may be driven in part by cognitive dissonance; the listener finds it psychologically uncomfortable to listen to a song and not make out the words. Steven Connor suggests that mondegreens are the result of the brain&#x27;s constant attempts to make sense of the world by making assumptions to fill in the gaps when it cannot clearly determine what it is hearing. Connor sees mondegreens as the &quot;wrenchings of nonsense into sense&quot;. This dissonance will be most acute when the lyrics are in a language in which the listener is fluent.

On the other hand, Steven Pinker has observed that mondegreen mishearings tend to be &quot;less&quot; plausible than the original lyrics, and that once a listener has &quot;locked in&quot; to a particular misheard interpretation of a song&#x27;s lyrics, it can remain unquestioned, even when that plausibility becomes strained (see mumpsimus). Pinker gives the example of a student &quot;stubbornly&quot; mishearing the chorus to &quot;Venus&quot; (&quot;I&#x27;m your Venus&quot;) as &quot;I&#x27;m your penis&quot;, and being surprised that the song was allowed on the radio. The phenomenon may, in some cases, be triggered by people hearing &quot;what they want to hear&quot;, as in the case of the song &quot;Louie Louie&quot;: parents heard obscenities in the Kingsmen recording where none existed.

James Gleick states that the mondegreen is a distinctly modern phenomenon. Without the improved communication and language standardization brought about by radio, he argues that there would have been no way to recognize and discuss this shared experience. Just as mondegreens transform songs based on experience, a folk song learned by repetition often is transformed over time when sung by people in a region where some of the song&#x27;s references have become obscure. A classic example is &quot;The Golden Vanity&quot;, which contains the line &quot;As she sailed upon the lowland sea&quot;. British immigrants carried the song to Appalachia, where later generations of singers, not knowing what the term &quot;lowland sea&quot; refers to, transformed it over generations from &quot;lowland&quot; to &quot;lonesome&quot;.

== Examples ==
===In songs===

The national anthem of the United States is highly susceptible to the creation of mondegreens, two in the first line. Francis Scott Key&#x27;s &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; begins with the line &quot;O say can you see, by the dawn&#x27;s early light&quot;. This has been misinterpreted (both accidentally and deliberately) as &quot;José, can you see&quot;, another example of the Hobson-Jobson effect, countless times. The second half of the line has been misheard as well, as &quot;by the donzerly light&quot;, or other variants. This has led to many people believing that &quot;donzerly&quot; is an actual word.

Religious songs, learned by ear (and often by children), are another common source of mondegreens. The most-cited example is &quot;Gladly, the cross-eyed bear&quot; (from the line in the hymn &quot;Keep Thou My Way&quot; by Fanny Crosby and Theodore E. Perkins: &quot;Kept by Thy tender care, gladly the cross I&#x27;ll bear&quot;). Jon Carroll and many others quote it as &quot;Gladly the cross &quot;I&#x27;d&quot; bear&quot;; note that the confusion may be heightened by the unusual object-subject-verb (OSV) word order of the phrase. The song &quot;I Was on a Boat That Day&quot; by Old Dominion features a reference to this mondegreen.
Mondegreens expanded as a phenomenon with radio, and, especially, the growth of rock and roll (and even more so with rap). Among the most-reported examples are:

#&quot;There&#x27;s a bathroom on the right&quot; (the line at the end of each verse of &quot;Bad Moon Rising&quot; by Creedence Clearwater Revival: &quot;There&#x27;s a bad moon on the rise&quot;).
#&quot;’Scuse me while I kiss this guy&quot; (from a lyric in the song &quot;Purple Haze&quot; by The Jimi Hendrix Experience: (&quot;’Scuse me while I kiss the sky&quot;).
#&quot;The girl with colitis goes by&quot; (from a lyric in the Beatles song &quot;Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds&quot;: &quot;The girl with kaleidoscope eyes&quot;)

Both Creedence&#x27;s John Fogerty and Hendrix eventually acknowledged these mishearings by deliberately singing the &quot;mondegreen&quot; versions of their songs in concert.

&quot;Blinded by the Light&quot;, a cover of a Bruce Springsteen song by Manfred Mann&#x27;s Earth Band, contains what has been called &quot;probably the most misheard lyric of all time&quot;. The phrase &quot;revved up like a deuce&quot;, altered from Springsteen&#x27;s original &quot;cut loose like a deuce&quot;, both lyrics referring to the hot rodders slang &quot;deuce&quot; (short for deuce coupé) for a 1932 Ford coupé, is frequently misheard as &quot;wrapped up like a douche&quot;. Springsteen himself has joked about the phenomenon, claiming that it was not until Manfred Mann rewrote the song to be about a &quot;feminine hygiene product&quot; that the song became popular.

Another commonly cited example of a song susceptible to mondegreens is Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot;, with the line &quot;here we are now, entertain us&quot; variously being misinterpreted as &quot;here we are now, &quot;in containers&quot;&quot;, and &quot;here we are now, &quot;hot potatoes&quot;&quot;, among other renditions.

In the 2014 song &quot;Blank Space&quot; by Taylor Swift, listeners widely misheard the line &quot;got a long list of ex-lovers&quot; as &quot;all the lonely Starbucks lovers.&quot;

Rap and hip hop lyrics may be particularly susceptible to being misheard because they do not necessarily follow standard pronunciations. The delivery of rap lyrics relies heavily upon an often regional pronunciation or non-traditional accenting (see African-American Vernacular English) of words and their phonemes to adhere to the artist&#x27;s stylizations and the lyrics&#x27; written structure. This issue is exemplified in controversies over alleged transcription errors in Yale University Press&#x27;s 2010 &quot;Anthology of Rap.&quot;

===Standardized and recorded mondegreens===
Sometimes, the modified version of a lyric becomes standard, as is the case with &quot;The Twelve Days of Christmas&quot;. The original has &quot;four colly birds&quot; (&quot;colly&quot; means &quot;black&quot;; compare &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;: &quot;Brief as the lightning in the collied night&quot;); by the turn of the twentieth century, these had been replaced by &quot;calling&quot; birds, which is the lyric used in the now-standard 1909 Frederic Austin version. Another example is found in ELO&#x27;s song &quot;Don&#x27;t Bring Me Down&quot;. The original recorded lyric was &quot;don&#x27;t bring me down, Gruss!&quot;, but fans misheard it as &quot;don&#x27;t bring me down, Bruce!&quot;. Eventually, ELO began playing the song with the mondegreen lyric.

The song &quot;Sea Lion Woman&quot;, recorded in 1939 by Christine and Katherine Shipp, was performed by Nina Simone under the title &quot;See Line Woman&quot;. According to the liner notes from the compilation &quot;A Treasury of Library of Congress Field Recordings&quot;, the correct title of this playground song might also be &quot;See [the] Lyin&#x27; Woman&quot; or &quot;C-Line Woman&quot;. Jack Lawrence&#x27;s misinterpretation of the French phrase &quot;pauvre Jean&quot; (&quot;poor John&quot;) as the identically pronounced &quot;pauvres gens&quot; (&quot;poor people&quot;) led to the translation of &quot;La Goualante du pauvre Jean&quot; (&quot;The Ballad of Poor John&quot;) as &quot;The Poor People of Paris&quot;, a hit song in 1956.

===In literature===

&quot;A Monk Swimming&quot; by author Malachy McCourt is so titled because of a childhood mishearing of a phrase from the Catholic rosary prayer, Hail Mary. &quot;Amongst women&quot; became &quot;a monk swimmin.

The title and plot of the short science fiction story &quot;Come You Nigh: Kay Shuns&quot; (&quot;Com-mu-ni-ca-tions&quot;) by Lawrence A. Perkins, in &quot;Analog Science Fiction and Fact&quot; magazine (April 1970), deals with securing interplanetary radio communications by encoding them with mondegreens.

&quot;Olive, the Other Reindeer&quot; is a 1997 children&#x27;s book by Vivian Walsh, which borrows its title from a mondegreen of the line &quot;all of the other reindeer&quot; in the song &quot;Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer&quot;. The book was adapted into an animated Christmas special in 1999.

The travel guide book series Lonely Planet is named after the misheard phrase &quot;lovely planet&quot; sung by Joe Cocker in Matthew Moore&#x27;s song &quot;Space Captain&quot;.

===In film===
A monologue of mondegreens appears in the 1971 film &quot;Carnal Knowledge&quot;. The camera focuses on actress Candice Bergen laughing as she recounts various phrases that fooled her as a child, including &quot;Round John Virgin&quot; (instead of &quot;&#x27;Round yon virgin...&quot;) and &quot;Gladly, the cross-eyed bear&quot; (instead of &quot;Gladly the cross I&#x27;d bear&quot;). The title of the 2013 film &quot;Ain&#x27;t Them Bodies Saints&quot; is a misheard lyric from a folk song; director David Lowery decided to use it because it evoked the &quot;classical, regional&quot; feel of 1970s rural Texas.

In the 1994 film &quot;The Santa Clause&quot;, a child identifies a ladder that Santa uses to get to the roof from its label: The Rose Suchak Ladder Company. He states that this is &quot;just like the poem&quot;, misinterpreting &quot;out on the lawn there arose such a clatter&quot; from &quot;A Visit from St. Nicholas&quot; as &quot;Out on the lawn, there&#x27;s a Rose Suchak ladder&quot;.

===In television===
Mondegreens have been used in many television advertising campaigns, including:

* An advertisement for the 2012 Volkswagen Passat touting the car&#x27;s audio system shows a number of people singing incorrect versions of the line &quot;Burning out his fuse up here alone&quot; from the Elton John/Bernie Taupin song &quot;Rocket Man&quot;, until a woman listening to the song in a Passat realizes the correct words.
* A 2002 advertisement for T-Mobile shows spokeswoman Catherine Zeta-Jones helping to correct a man who has misunderstood the chorus of Def Leppard&#x27;s &quot;Pour Some Sugar On Me&quot; as &quot;pour some shook up ramen&quot;.
* A series of advertisements for Maxell audio cassette tapes, produced by Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury, shown in 1989 and 1990, featured misheard versions of &quot;Israelites&quot; (e.g., &quot;Me ears are alight&quot;) by Desmond Dekker and &quot;Into the Valley&quot; by the Skids as heard by users of other brands of tape.
* A 1987 series of advertisements for Kellogg&#x27;s &quot;Nut &#x27;n Honey Crunch&quot; featured a joke in which one person asks &quot;What&#x27;s for breakfast?&quot; and is told &quot;Nut &#x27;N&#x27; Honey&quot;, which is misheard as &quot;Nothing, honey&quot;.

===Other notable examples===
The traditional game Chinese whispers (&quot;Telephone&quot; or &quot;Gossip&quot; in North America) involves mishearing a whispered sentence to produce successive mondegreens that gradually distort the original sentence as it is repeated by successive listeners.
Among schoolchildren in the US, daily rote recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance has long provided opportunities for the genesis of mondegreens.

Speech-to-text functionality in modern smartphone messaging apps and search or assist functions may be hampered by faulty speech recognition. It has been noted that in text messaging, users often leave uncorrected mondegreens as a joke or puzzle for the recipient to solve. This wealth of mondegreens has proven to be a fertile ground for study by speech scientists and psychologists.

The video game &quot;Super Mario 64&quot; involved a mishearing during Mario&#x27;s final encounter with Bowser. Charles Martinet, the voice actor for Mario, explained the line was &quot;So long kinga Bowser&quot;, however it was misheard as &quot;So long, gay Bowser&quot;. The misinterpreted line became a meme, in part popularized by the line&#x27;s removal in some updated rereleases of the game.

===Notable collections===

The classicist and linguist Steve Reece has collected examples of English mondegreens in song lyrics, religious creeds and liturgies, commercials and advertisements, and jokes and riddles. He has used this collection to shed light on the process of &quot;junctural metanalysis&quot; during the oral transmission of the ancient Greek epics, the &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey.&quot;

==Reverse mondegreen==
A reverse mondegreen is the intentional production, in speech or writing, of words or phrases that seem to be gibberish but disguise meaning. A prominent example is &quot;Mairzy Doats&quot;, a 1943 novelty song by Milton Drake, Al Hoffman, and Jerry Livingston. The lyrics are a reverse mondegreen, made up of same-sounding words or phrases (sometimes also referred to as &quot;oronyms&quot;), so pronounced (and written) as to challenge the listener (or reader) to interpret them:

::Mairzy doats and dozy doats and liddle lamzy divey
::A kiddley divey too, wouldn&#x27;t you?

The clue to the meaning is contained in the bridge of the song:

::If the words sound queer and funny to your ear, a little bit jumbled and jivey,
::Sing &quot;Mares eat oats and eat oats and little lambs eat ivy.&quot;

That makes it clear that the last line is &quot;A kid&#x27;ll eat ivy, too; wouldn&#x27;t you?&quot;

==Deliberate mondegreen==

Two authors have written books of supposed foreign-language poetry that are actually mondegreens of nursery rhymes in English. Luis van Rooten&#x27;s pseudo-French &quot;Mots D&#x27;Heures: Gousses, Rames&quot; includes critical, historical, and interpretive apparatus, as does John Hulme&#x27;s &quot;Mörder Guss Reims&quot;, attributed to a fictitious German poet. Both titles sound like the phrase &quot;Mother Goose Rhymes&quot;. Both works can also be considered soramimi, which produces different meanings when interpreted in another language. The genre of animutation is based on deliberate mondegreen.

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart produced a similar effect in his canon &quot;Difficile Lectu&quot; (Difficult to Read), which, though ostensibly in Latin, is actually an opportunity for scatological humor in both German and Italian.

Some performers and writers have used deliberate mondegreens to create double entendres. The phrase &quot;if you see Kay&quot; (F-U-C-K) has been employed many times, notably as a line from James Joyce&#x27;s 1922 novel &quot;Ulysses&quot;.

&quot;Mondegreen&quot; is a song by Yeasayer on their 2010 album, &quot;Odd Blood&quot;. The lyrics are intentionally obscure (for instance, &quot;Everybody sugar in my bed&quot; and &quot;Perhaps the pollen in the air turns us into a stapler&quot;) and spoken hastily to encourage the mondegreen effect.

Anguish Languish is an ersatz language created by Howard L. Chace. A play on the words &quot;English Language&quot;, it is based on homophonic transformations of English words and consists entirely of deliberate mondegreens that seem nonsensical in print but are more easily understood when spoken aloud. A notable example is the story &quot;Ladle Rat Rotten Hut&quot; (&quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot;), which appears in his collection of stories and poems, &quot;Anguish Languish&quot; (Prentice-Hall, 1956).

Lady Gaga&#x27;s 2008 hit &quot;Poker Face&quot; allegedly makes a play on this phenomenon, with every second repetition of the phrase &quot;poker face&quot; replaced with &quot;fuck her face&quot;. Apparently, the only radio station that correctly censored the lyrics has been KIIS FM.

== Related linguistic phenomena ==
Closely related categories are Hobson-Jobson, where a word from a foreign language is homophonically translated into one&#x27;s own language, e.g. &quot;&quot; from Spanish , and &quot;soramimi&quot;, a Japanese term for deliberate homophonic misinterpretation of words for humor.

An unintentionally incorrect use of similar-sounding words or phrases, resulting in a changed meaning, is a malapropism. If there is a connection in meaning, it may be called an eggcorn. If a person stubbornly continues to mispronounce a word or phrase after being corrected, that person has committed a mumpsimus.

Related phenomena include:
* Earworm
* Eggcorn
* Holorime
* Homophonic translation
* Hypercorrection
* Phono-semantic matching
* Spoonerism
* Syntactic ambiguity
==Non-English languages==
===Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian===
Queen&#x27;s song &quot;Another One Bites the Dust&quot; has a long-standing history as a mondegreen in Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian, misheard as &quot;&quot;Radovan baca daske&quot; and &quot;Радован баца даске&quot;&quot;, which means &quot;Radovan throws planks&quot;.

===Dutch===
In Dutch, mondegreens are popularly referred to as (&quot;Mommy applejuice&quot;), from the Michael Jackson song &quot;Wanna Be Startin&#x27; Somethin&#x27;&quot; which features the lyrics &quot;Mama-se mama-sa ma-ma-coo-sa&quot;, and was once misheard as . The Dutch radio station 3FM show &quot;Superrradio&quot; (originally &quot;Timur Open Radio&quot;), run by Timur Perlin and Ramon, featured an item in which listeners were encouraged to send in mondegreens under the name &quot;&quot;. The segment was popular for years.

===French===
In French, the phenomenon is also known as , especially when referring to pop songs.

The title of the film (&quot;Life In Pink&quot; literally; &quot;Life Through Rose-Coloured Glasses&quot; more broadly), depicting the life of Édith Piaf, can be mistaken for (&quot;The Pink Airplane&quot;).

The title of the 1983 French novel (&quot;Tea in the Harem of Archi Ahmed&quot;) by Mehdi Charef (and the 1985 movie of the same name) is based on the main character mishearing (&quot;the theorem of Archimedes&quot;) in his mathematics class.

A classic example in French is similar to the &quot;Lady Mondegreen&quot; anecdote: in his 1962 collection of children&#x27;s quotes , the humorist Jean-Charles refers to a misunderstood lyric of &quot;La Marseillaise&quot; (the French national anthem): (&quot;Do you hear those savage soldiers roar?&quot;) is misheard as (&quot;that soldier Séféro&quot;).

===German===
Mondegreens are a well-known phenomenon in German, especially where non-German songs are concerned. They are sometimes called, after a well-known example, -songs (&quot;I got the power&quot;, a song by Snap!, misinterpreted as a German female name). Journalist Axel Hacke published a series of books about them, beginning with (&quot;The White Negro Wumbaba&quot;, a mishearing of the line from &quot;&quot;).

In urban legend, children&#x27;s paintings of nativity scenes, occasionally include next to the Child, Mary, Joseph, and so on, an additional, laughing creature known as the . The reason is to be found in the line (&quot;God&#x27;s Son! Oh, how does love laugh out of Thy divine mouth!&quot;) from the song &quot;Silent Night&quot;. The subject is , a poetic contraction of leaving off the final and the definite article, so that the phrase might be misunderstood as being about a person named laughing &quot;in a loveable manner&quot;. has been used as the title of at least one book about Christmas and Christmas songs.

===Hebrew===
Ghil&#x27;ad Zuckermann mentions the example (, which means &quot;we must be happy&quot;, with a grammatical error) as a mondegreen of the original (, which means &quot;wake up, brothers, with a happy heart&quot;). Although this line is taken from the extremely well-known song &quot;Háva Nagíla&quot; (&quot;Let&#x27;s be happy&quot;), given the Hebrew high-register of ( &quot;wake up!&quot;), Israelis often mishear it.

An Israeli site dedicated to Hebrew mondegreens has coined the term (, Hebrew for &quot;watermelon&quot;) for &quot;mondegreen&quot;, named for a common mishearing of Shlomo Artzi&#x27;s award-winning 1970 song &quot;Ahavtia&quot; (&quot;I loved her&quot;, using a form uncommon in spoken Hebrew).

===Hungarian===

One of the most well-known Hungarian mondegreens is connected to the 1984 song &quot;Live Is Life&quot; by the Austrian band Opus. The gibberish &quot;labadab dab dab&quot; phrase in the song was commonly misunderstood by Hungarians as &quot;levelet kaptam&quot; (Hungarian for &quot;I have received mail&quot;), which was later immortalized by the cult movie &quot;Moscow Square&quot; depicting the life of teenagers in the late 1980s.

=== Indonesian ===
The word &quot;mendengarku&quot; (&quot;hear me&quot;) in Ghea Indrawari&#x27;s song, &quot;Teramini&quot;, is misheard as &quot;mantan aku&quot; (&quot;my ex&quot;) or &quot;makananku&quot; (&quot;my food&quot;).

===Polish===
A paper in phonology cites memoirs of the poet Antoni Słonimski, who confessed that in the recited poem &quot;Konrad Wallenrod&quot; he used to hear &quot;zwierz Alpuhary&quot; (&quot;a beast of Alpujarras&quot;) rather than &quot;z wież Alpuhary&quot; (&quot;from the towers of Alpujarras&quot;).

===Russian===
In 1875 Fyodor Dostoyevsky cited a line from Fyodor Glinka&#x27;s song &quot;Troika&quot; (1825), колокольчик, дар Валдая (&quot;the bell, gift of Valday&quot;), stating that it is usually understood as колокольчик, дарвалдая (&quot;the bell &quot;darvaldaying&quot;&quot;—supposedly an onomatopoeia of ringing sounds).

===Spanish===
The Mexican national anthem contains the verse (&quot;If, however, a foreign enemy would dare&quot;) using and , archaic poetic forms.
Thus, the verse has sometimes been misunderstood as (&quot;Masiosare, a strange enemy&quot;) with , an otherwise unused word, as the name of the enemy.
&quot;Masiosare&quot; has been used in Mexico as a first name for real and fictional people and as a common name ( or the homophone ) for the anthem itself or for a threat against the country.

== See also ==

* eggcorn
* mumpsimus
* &quot;soramimi&quot; – Japanese version of the mondegreen
* Am I Right – website with a large collection of misheard lyrics
* Bennie and the Jets
* Bushism
* Folk etymology
* Mad Gab
* Pareidolia
* Parody music
* Yanny or Laurel
==Notes and references==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citations ===
==Further reading==
* Connor, Steven. &quot;Earslips: Of Mishearings and Mondegreens&quot; , 2009.
* Maria Konnikova. &quot;Excuse Me While I Kiss This Guy&quot;, 2014. Excuse Me While I Kiss This Guy 
* Edwards, Gavin. &quot;Scuse Me While I Kiss This Guy&quot;, 1995. 
* Edwards, Gavin. &quot;When a Man Loves a Walnut&quot;, 1997. 
* Edwards, Gavin. &quot;He&#x27;s Got the Whole World in His Pants&quot;, 1996. 
* Edwards, Gavin. &quot;Deck the Halls with Buddy Holly&quot;, 1998. 
* Gwynne, Fred. &quot;Chocolate Moose for Dinner&quot;, 1988. 
* Norman, Philip. &quot;Your Walrus Hurt the One You Love: Malapropisms, Mispronunciations, and Linguistic Cock-ups&quot;, 1988. .

==External links==

* Snopes.com: &quot;The Lady and the Mondegreen&quot; (misheard Christmas songs).
* Pamela Licalzi O&#x27;Connell: &quot;Sweet Slips of the Ear: Mondegreens &quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 9 April 1998.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1156877" start="2" end="12" title="Mondegreen" label="mondegreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719139" start="435" end="464" title="The Bonnie Earl o&amp;#x27; Moray" label="The Bonnie Earl o&amp;#x27; Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="704" end="729" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="745" end="801" title="Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s Collegiate Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Collegiate Dictionary&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="866" end="888" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="998" end="1004" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q712930" start="1053" end="1065" title="Thomas Percy (bishop of Dromore)" label="Thomas Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142806" start="1089" end="1123" title="Reliques of Ancient English Poetry" label="Reliques of Ancient English Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="1451" end="1468" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241630" start="1624" end="1635" title="Purple Haze" label="Purple Haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="1674" end="1686" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="2017" end="2037" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614579" start="2139" end="2152" title="Steven Connor" label="Steven Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="2554" end="2567" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567372" start="2867" end="2876" title="mumpsimus" label="mumpsimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q749752" start="2971" end="2976" title="Venus (Shocking Blue song)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="3004" end="3009" title="Venus (goddess)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3248" end="3259" title="Louie Louie#Lyrics controversy and investigations" label="Louie Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q970502" start="3300" end="3308" title="The Kingsmen" label="Kingsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113105" start="3340" end="3352" title="James Gleick" label="James Gleick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3655" end="3664" title="Folk music#Traditional folk music" label="folk song"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3696" end="3707" title="Folk process#Operation" label="transformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767634" start="3839" end="3856" title="The Sweet Trinity" label="The Golden Vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="4055" end="4066" title="North Sea" label="lowland sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q320633" start="4316" end="4333" title="Francis Scott Key" label="Francis Scott Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="4347" end="4371" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115272" start="4585" end="4598" title="Hobson-Jobson" label="Hobson-Jobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q257456" start="5044" end="5056" title="Fanny Crosby" label="Fanny Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954781" start="5153" end="5164" title="Jon Carroll" label="Jon Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417850" start="5306" end="5331" title="Object–subject–verb" label="object-subject-verb (OSV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107272255" start="5373" end="5397" title="I Was on a Boat That Day" label="I Was on a Boat That Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685018" start="5407" end="5419" title="Old Dominion (band)" label="Old Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608289" start="5717" end="5732" title="Bad Moon Rising (song)" label="Bad Moon Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="5742" end="5770" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="5920" end="5947" title="The Jimi Hendrix Experience" label="The Jimi Hendrix Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="6016" end="6023" title="colitis" label="colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="6059" end="6066" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q723178" start="6078" end="6107" title="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" label="Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q326538" start="6183" end="6195" title="John Fogerty" label="John Fogerty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6344" end="6364" title="Blinded by the Light#Lyrics" label="Blinded by the Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="6385" end="6402" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926913" start="6411" end="6441" title="Manfred Mann&amp;#x27;s Earth Band" label="Manfred Mann&amp;#x27;s Earth Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="6684" end="6691" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6731" end="6742" title="1932 Ford#Deuce coupe" label="deuce coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673202" start="6817" end="6823" title="douche" label="douche"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="7097" end="7104" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="7118" end="7141" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18441355" start="7402" end="7413" title="Blank Space" label="Blank Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="7423" end="7435" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="7537" end="7546" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002" start="7812" end="7847" title="African-American Vernacular English" label="African-American Vernacular English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="7868" end="7876" title="phonemes" label="phonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="8041" end="8062" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q112577" start="8237" end="8265" title="The Twelve Days of Christmas (song)" label="The Twelve Days of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="8377" end="8407" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306282" start="8614" end="8629" title="Frederic Austin" label="Frederic Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q218255" start="8667" end="8670" title="ELO" label="ELO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035653" start="8689" end="8713" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Bring Me Down (song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Bring Me Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439946" start="8951" end="8965" title="Sea Lion Woman" label="Sea Lion Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="9041" end="9052" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439946" start="9075" end="9089" title="See Line Woman" label="See Line Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452637" start="9335" end="9348" title="Jack Lawrence (songwriter)" label="Jack Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q64705209" start="9637" end="9661" title="The Poor People of Paris" label="The Poor People of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276083" start="9717" end="9732" title="A Monk Swimming" label="A Monk Swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276083" start="9749" end="9764" title="Malachy McCourt" label="Malachy McCourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="10081" end="10112" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog Science Fiction and Fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444868" start="10153" end="10161" title="secure communication" label="securing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937791" start="10306" end="10318" title="Vivian Walsh (author)" label="Vivian Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505842" start="10430" end="10460" title="Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer (song)" label="Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087116" start="10497" end="10523" title="Olive, the Other Reindeer" label="animated Christmas special"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="10563" end="10576" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="10646" end="10656" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768320" start="10660" end="10673" title="Matthew Moore" label="Matthew Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703964" start="10786" end="10802" title="Carnal Knowledge (film)" label="Carnal Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q106942" start="10840" end="10854" title="Candice Bergen" label="Candice Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828123" start="11149" end="11178" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Them Bodies Saints" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Them Bodies Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q497850" start="11368" end="11384" title="The Santa Clause" label="The Santa Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704645" start="11640" end="11665" title="A Visit from St. Nicholas" label="A Visit from St. Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216754" start="11873" end="11890" title="Volkswagen Passat" label="Volkswagen Passat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="12047" end="12057" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q353788" start="12058" end="12071" title="Bernie Taupin" label="Bernie Taupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56070897" start="12083" end="12093" title="Rocket Man (song)" label="Rocket Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q327634" start="12204" end="12212" title="T-Mobile International AG" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="12231" end="12251" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="12313" end="12324" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q128596" start="12338" end="12359" title="Pour Some Sugar On Me" label="Pour Some Sugar On Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913796" start="12440" end="12446" title="Hitachi Maxell" label="Maxell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629577" start="12481" end="12509" title="HHCL" label="Howell Henry Chaldecott Lury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412152" start="12571" end="12581" title="Israelites (song)" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q333598" start="12630" end="12644" title="Desmond Dekker" label="Desmond Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q10536366" start="12655" end="12670" title="Into the Valley" label="Into the Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q547438" start="12680" end="12689" title="the Skids" label="the Skids"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="12771" end="12778" title="Kellogg Company" label="Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q151939" start="13052" end="13068" title="Chinese whispers" label="Chinese whispers"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="13356" end="13376" title="Pledge of Allegiance (United States)" label="Pledge of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="13564" end="13582" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q216995" start="13849" end="13863" title="Super Mario 64" label="Super Mario 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q12379" start="13899" end="13904" title="Mario" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q845864" start="13933" end="13939" title="Bowser" label="Bowser"/>
<link wikidata="Q703384" start="13941" end="13957" title="Charles Martinet" label="Charles Martinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="14136" end="14140" title="Internet meme" label="meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="14369" end="14375" title="creeds" label="creeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="14551" end="14568" title="Oral tradition" label="oral transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="14607" end="14612" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="14629" end="14636" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736951" start="14839" end="14851" title="Mairzy Doats" label="Mairzy Doats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151663" start="14866" end="14878" title="novelty song" label="novelty song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829347" start="14896" end="14906" title="Al Hoffman" label="Al Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q369033" start="14912" end="14928" title="Jerry Livingston" label="Jerry Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="14978" end="14997" title="same-sounding words" label="same-sounding words"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104034" start="15407" end="15411" title="Mare" label="Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="15518" end="15521" title="Goat" label="kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045381" start="15724" end="15739" title="Luis van Rooten" label="Luis van Rooten"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15767" end="15801" title="Mots D&amp;#x27;Heures: Gousses, Rames" label="Mots D&amp;#x27;Heures: Gousses, Rames"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="16004" end="16016" title="Mother Goose" label="Mother Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118002" start="16065" end="16073" title="soramimi" label="soramimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765220" start="16160" end="16171" title="animutation" label="animutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707393" start="16277" end="16292" title="Difficile lectu (Mozart)" label="Difficile Lectu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="16505" end="16520" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="16562" end="16569" title="Fuck" label="F-U-C-K"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="16624" end="16635" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="16660" end="16667" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q367254" start="16712" end="16720" title="Yeasayer" label="Yeasayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077310" start="16748" end="16757" title="Odd Blood" label="Odd Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764013" start="16982" end="16998" title="Anguish Languish" label="Anguish Languish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439556" start="17032" end="17047" title="Howard L. Chace" label="Howard L. Chace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202336" start="17114" end="17139" title="homophonic transformation" label="homophonic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="17358" end="17380" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="17496" end="17505" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q153029" start="17528" end="17538" title="Poker Face (song)" label="Poker Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115272" start="17850" end="17863" title="Hobson-Jobson" label="Hobson-Jobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202336" start="17905" end="17930" title="Homophonic translation" label="homophonically translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118002" start="18004" end="18012" title="soramimi" label="soramimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057682" start="18209" end="18220" title="malapropism" label="malapropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297397" start="18279" end="18286" title="eggcorn" label="eggcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567372" start="18405" end="18414" title="mumpsimus" label="mumpsimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q555631" start="18446" end="18453" title="Earworm" label="Earworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297397" start="18456" end="18463" title="Eggcorn" label="Eggcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613327" start="18466" end="18474" title="Holorime" label="Holorime"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202336" start="18477" end="18499" title="Homophonic translation" label="Homophonic translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q493477" start="18502" end="18517" title="Hypercorrection" label="Hypercorrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128781" start="18520" end="18543" title="Phono-semantic matching" label="Phono-semantic matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133076" start="18546" end="18556" title="Spoonerism" label="Spoonerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456276" start="18559" end="18578" title="Syntactic ambiguity" label="Syntactic ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="18636" end="18641" title="Queen (musical group)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q568065" start="18660" end="18686" title="Another One Bites the Dust" label="Another One Bites the Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069168" start="18880" end="18887" title="Radovan" label="Radovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="19014" end="19029" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q637873" start="19041" end="19078" title="Wanna Be Startin&amp;#x27; Somethin&amp;#x27;" label="Wanna Be Startin&amp;#x27; Somethin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q229452" start="19204" end="19207" title="3FM" label="3FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631" start="19693" end="19703" title="Édith Piaf" label="Édith Piaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372360" start="19843" end="19855" title="Mehdi Charef" label="Mehdi Charef"/>
<link wikidata="Q41180" start="20205" end="20220" title="La Marseillaise" label="La Marseillaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037068" start="20544" end="20559" title="The Power (Snap! song)" label="I got the power"/>
<link wikidata="Q705689" start="20577" end="20582" title="Snap!" label="Snap!"/>
<link wikidata="Q31732" start="20832" end="20846" title="nativity scene" label="nativity scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q172152" start="21099" end="21111" title="Silent Night" label="Silent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q469925" start="21422" end="21445" title="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann" label="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q131718" start="21706" end="21717" title="Hava Nagila" label="Háva Nagíla"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="21934" end="21944" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q966848" start="22013" end="22025" title="Shlomo Artzi" label="Shlomo Artzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q119747" start="22247" end="22259" title="Live Is Life" label="Live Is Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q614439" start="22287" end="22291" title="Opus (Austrian band)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179378" start="22528" end="22541" title="Moscow Square (film)" label="Moscow Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="22858" end="22867" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q598050" start="22894" end="22910" title="Antoni Słonimski" label="Antoni Słonimski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511368" start="22957" end="22973" title="Konrad Wallenrod" label="Konrad Wallenrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q661868" start="23042" end="23052" title="Alpujarras" label="Alpujarras"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="23168" end="23186" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q180545" start="23205" end="23218" title="Fyodor Glinka" label="Fyodor Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="23447" end="23459" title="onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200742" start="23499" end="23522" title="Mexican national anthem" label="Mexican national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200742" start="23788" end="23797" title="Masiosare" label="Masiosare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297397" start="23994" end="24001" title="eggcorn" label="eggcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567372" start="24004" end="24013" title="mumpsimus" label="mumpsimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118002" start="24022" end="24030" title="soramimi" label="soramimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738937" start="24076" end="24086" title="Am I Right" label="Am I Right"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24142" end="24161" title="Bennie and the Jets#Mondegreens in the song" label="Bennie and the Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q509749" start="24164" end="24171" title="Bushism" label="Bushism"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="24174" end="24188" title="Folk etymology" label="Folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725965" start="24191" end="24198" title="Mad Gab" label="Mad Gab"/>
<link wikidata="Q506422" start="24201" end="24211" title="Pareidolia" label="Pareidolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746731" start="24214" end="24226" title="Parody music" label="Parody music"/>
<link wikidata="Q53672376" start="24229" end="24244" title="Yanny or Laurel" label="Yanny or Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614579" start="24336" end="24350" title="Steven Connor" label="Connor, Steven"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563033" start="24415" end="24430" title="Maria Konnikova" label="Maria Konnikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060975" start="24518" end="24532" title="Gavin Edwards (writer)" label="Edwards, Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q222833" start="24802" end="24814" title="Fred Gwynne" label="Gwynne, Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184153" start="24865" end="24879" title="Philip Norman (author)" label="Norman, Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287154" start="25017" end="25027" title="Snopes.com" label="Snopes.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20039" wikidata="Q189057" url="?curid=20039" title="Merge sort">
<text>In computer science, merge sort (also commonly spelled as mergesort and as ) is an efficient, general-purpose, and comparison-based sorting algorithm. Most implementations produce a stable sort, which means that the relative order of equal elements is the same in the input and output. Merge sort is a divide-and-conquer algorithm that was invented by John von Neumann in 1945. A detailed description and analysis of bottom-up merge sort appeared in a report by Goldstine and von Neumann as early as 1948.

==Algorithm==
Conceptually, a merge sort works as follows:
#Divide the unsorted list into &quot;n&quot; sub-lists, each containing one element (a list of one element is considered sorted).
#Repeatedly merge sublists to produce new sorted sublists until there is only one sublist remaining. This will be the sorted list.

===Top-down implementation ===
Example C-like code using indices for top-down merge sort algorithm that recursively splits the list (called &quot;runs&quot; in this example) into sublists until sublist size is 1, then merges those sublists to produce a sorted list. The copy back step is avoided with alternating the direction of the merge with each level of recursion (except for an initial one-time copy, that can be avoided too). 

As a simple example, consider an array with two elements. The elements are copied to B[], then merged back to A[]. If there are four elements, when the bottom of the recursion level is reached, single element runs from A[] are merged to B[], and then at the next higher level of recursion, those two-element runs are merged to A[]. This pattern continues with each level of recursion.
// Array A[] has the items to sort; array B[] is a work array.
void TopDownMergeSort(A[], B[], n)
 CopyArray(A, 0, n, B); // one time copy of A[] to B[]
 TopDownSplitMerge(A, 0, n, B); // sort data from B[] into A[]

// Split A[] into 2 runs, sort both runs into B[], merge both runs from B[] to A[]
// iBegin is inclusive; iEnd is exclusive (A[iEnd] is not in the set).
void TopDownSplitMerge(B[], iBegin, iEnd, A[])
 if (iEnd - iBegin &lt;= 1) // if run size == 1
 return; // consider it sorted
 // split the run longer than 1 item into halves
 iMiddle = (iEnd + iBegin) / 2; // iMiddle = mid point
 // recursively sort both runs from array A[] into B[]
 TopDownSplitMerge(A, iBegin, iMiddle, B); // sort the left run
 TopDownSplitMerge(A, iMiddle, iEnd, B); // sort the right run
 // merge the resulting runs from array B[] into A[]
 TopDownMerge(B, iBegin, iMiddle, iEnd, A);

// Left source half is A[ iBegin:iMiddle-1].
// Right source half is A[iMiddle:iEnd-1 ].
// Result is B[ iBegin:iEnd-1 ].
void TopDownMerge(B[], iBegin, iMiddle, iEnd, A[])
 i = iBegin, j = iMiddle;
 // While there are elements in the left or right runs...
 for (k = iBegin; k &lt; iEnd; k++) {
 // If left run head exists and is &lt;= existing right run head.
 if (i &lt; iMiddle &amp;&amp; (j &gt;= iEnd || A[i] &lt;= A[j])) {
 B[k] = A[i];
 i = i + 1;
 } else {
 B[k] = A[j];
 j = j + 1;
 }

void CopyArray(A[], iBegin, iEnd, B[])
 for (k = iBegin; k &lt; iEnd; k++)
 B[k] = A[k];

Sorting the entire array is accomplished by .

===Bottom-up implementation===

Example C-like code using indices for bottom-up merge sort algorithm which treats the list as an array of &quot;n&quot; sublists (called &quot;runs&quot; in this example) of size 1, and iteratively merges sub-lists back and forth between two buffers:
// array A[] has the items to sort; array B[] is a work array
void BottomUpMergeSort(A[], B[], n)
 // Each 1-element run in A is already &quot;sorted&quot;.
 // Make successively longer sorted runs of length 2, 4, 8, 16... until the whole array is sorted.
 for (width = 1; width &lt; n; width = 2 * width)
 // Array A is full of runs of length width.
 for (i = 0; i &lt; n; i = i + 2 * width)
 // Merge two runs: A[i:i+width-1] and A[i+width:i+2*width-1] to B[]
 // or copy A[i:n-1] to B[] ( if (i+width &gt;= n) )
 BottomUpMerge(A, i, min(i+width, n), min(i+2*width, n), B);
 // Now work array B is full of runs of length 2*width.
 // Copy array B to array A for the next iteration.
 // A more efficient implementation would swap the roles of A and B.
 CopyArray(B, A, n);
 // Now array A is full of runs of length 2*width.
}

// Left run is A[iLeft :iRight-1].
// Right run is A[iRight:iEnd-1 ].
void BottomUpMerge(A[], iLeft, iRight, iEnd, B[])
 i = iLeft, j = iRight;
 // While there are elements in the left or right runs...
 for (k = iLeft; k &lt; iEnd; k++) {
 // If left run head exists and is &lt;= existing right run head.
 if (i &lt; iRight &amp;&amp; (j &gt;= iEnd || A[i] &lt;= A[j])) {
 B[k] = A[i];
 i = i + 1;
 } else {
 B[k] = A[j];
 j = j + 1; 
 } 

void CopyArray(B[], A[], n)
 for (i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)
 A[i] = B[i];


===Top-down implementation using lists ===
Pseudocode for top-down merge sort algorithm which recursively divides the input list into smaller sublists until the sublists are trivially sorted, and then merges the sublists while returning up the call chain.

 function merge_sort(&quot;list&quot; m) is
 // &quot;Base case. A list of zero or one elements is sorted, by definition.&quot;
 if length of m ≤ 1 then
 return m
 // &quot;Recursive case. First, divide the list into equal-sized sublists&quot;
 // &quot;consisting of the first half and second half of the list.&quot;
 // &quot;This assumes lists start at index 0.&quot;
 var left := empty list
 var right := empty list
 for each x with index i in m do
 if i &lt; (length of m)/2 then
 add x to left
 else
 add x to right
 // &quot;Recursively sort both sublists.&quot;
 left := merge_sort(left)
 right := merge_sort(right)
 // Then merge the now-sorted sublists.
 return merge(left, right)

In this example, the function merges the left and right sublists.

 function merge(left, right) is
 var result := empty list
 while left is not empty and right is not empty do
 if first(left) ≤ first(right) then
 append first(left) to result
 left := rest(left)
 else
 append first(right) to result
 right := rest(right)
 // &quot;Either left or right may have elements left; consume them.&quot;
 // &quot;(Only one of the following loops will actually be entered.)&quot;
 while left is not empty do
 append first(left) to result
 left := rest(left)
 while right is not empty do
 append first(right) to result
 right := rest(right)
 return result

===Bottom-up implementation using lists===
Pseudocode for bottom-up merge sort algorithm which uses a small fixed size array of references to nodes, where array[i] is either a reference to a list of size 2&quot;i&quot; or &quot;nil&quot;. &quot;node&quot; is a reference or pointer to a node. The merge() function would be similar to the one shown in the top-down merge lists example, it merges two already sorted lists, and handles empty lists. In this case, merge() would use &quot;node&quot; for its input parameters and return value.

 function merge_sort(&quot;node&quot; head) is
 // return if empty list
 if head = nil then
 return nil
 var &quot;node&quot; array[32]; initially all nil
 var &quot;node&quot; result
 var &quot;node&quot; next
 var &quot;int&quot; i
 result := head
 // merge nodes into array
 while result ≠ nil do
 next := result.next;
 result.next := nil
 for (i = 0; (i &lt; 32) &amp;&amp; (array[i] ≠ nil); i += 1) do
 result := merge(array[i], result)
 array[i] := nil
 // do not go past end of array
 if i = 32 then
 i -= 1
 array[i] := result
 result := next
 // merge array into single list
 result := nil
 for (i = 0; i &lt; 32; i += 1) do
 result := merge(array[i], result)
 return result

=== Top-down implementation in a declarative style ===
Haskell-like pseudocode, showing how merge sort can be implemented in such a language using constructs and ideas from functional programming.
merge_sort :: [a] -&gt; [a]
merge_sort([]) = []
merge_sort([x]) = [x]
merge_sort(xs) = merge(merge_sort(left), merge_sort(right))
 where (left, right) = split(xs, length(xs) / 2)
merge :: ([a], [a]) -&gt; [a]
merge([], xs) = xs
merge(xs, []) = xs
merge(x : xs, y : ys) 
 | if x ≤ y = x : merge(xs, y : ys)
 | else = y : merge(x : xs, ys)
==Analysis==
In sorting &quot;n&quot; objects, merge sort has an average and worst-case performance of O(&quot;n&quot; log &quot;n&quot;) comparisons. If the running time (number of comparisons) of merge sort for a list of length &quot;n&quot; is &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;), then the recurrence relation &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = 2&quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;/2) + &quot;n&quot; follows from the definition of the algorithm (apply the algorithm to two lists of half the size of the original list, and add the &quot;n&quot; steps taken to merge the resulting two lists). The closed form follows from the master theorem for divide-and-conquer recurrences.

The number of comparisons made by merge sort in the worst case is given by the sorting numbers. These numbers are equal to or slightly smaller than (&quot;n&quot; ⌈lg &quot;n&quot;⌉ − 2⌈lg &quot;n&quot;⌉ + 1), which is between (&quot;n&quot; lg &quot;n&quot; − &quot;n&quot; + 1) and (&quot;n&quot; lg &quot;n&quot; + &quot;n&quot; + O(lg &quot;n&quot;)). Merge sort&#x27;s best case takes about half as many iterations as its worst case.

For large &quot;n&quot; and a randomly ordered input list, merge sort&#x27;s expected (average) number of comparisons approaches &quot;α&quot;·&quot;n&quot; fewer than the worst case, where formula_1

In the &quot;worst&quot; case, merge sort uses approximately 39% fewer comparisons than quicksort does in its &quot;average&quot; case, and in terms of moves, merge sort&#x27;s worst case complexity is O(&quot;n&quot; log &quot;n&quot;) - the same complexity as quicksort&#x27;s best case.

Merge sort is more efficient than quicksort for some types of lists if the data to be sorted can only be efficiently accessed sequentially, and is thus popular in languages such as Lisp, where sequentially accessed data structures are very common. Unlike some (efficient) implementations of quicksort, merge sort is a stable sort.

Merge sort&#x27;s most common implementation does not sort in place; therefore, the memory size of the input must be allocated for the sorted output to be stored in (see below for variations that need only &quot;n&quot;/2 extra spaces).

== Natural merge sort ==

A natural merge sort is similar to a bottom-up merge sort except that any naturally occurring runs (sorted sequences) in the input are exploited. Both monotonic and bitonic (alternating up/down) runs may be exploited, with lists (or equivalently tapes or files) being convenient data structures (used as FIFO queues or LIFO stacks). In the bottom-up merge sort, the starting point assumes each run is one item long. In practice, random input data will have many short runs that just happen to be sorted. In the typical case, the natural merge sort may not need as many passes because there are fewer runs to merge. In the best case, the input is already sorted (i.e., is one run), so the natural merge sort need only make one pass through the data. In many practical cases, long natural runs are present, and for that reason natural merge sort is exploited as the key component of Timsort. Example:

 Start : 3 4 2 1 7 5 8 9 0 6
 Select runs : (3 4)(2)(1 7)(5 8 9)(0 6)
 Merge : (2 3 4)(1 5 7 8 9)(0 6)
 Merge : (1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9)(0 6)
 Merge : (0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9)

Formally, the natural merge sort is said to be Runs-optimal, where formula_2 is the number of runs in formula_3, minus one.

Tournament replacement selection sorts are used to gather the initial runs for external sorting algorithms.

== Ping-pong merge sort ==
Instead of merging two blocks at a time, a ping-pong merge merges four blocks at a time. The four sorted blocks are merged simultaneously to auxiliary space into two sorted blocks, then the two sorted blocks are merged back to main memory. Doing so omits the copy operation and reduces the total number of moves by half. An early public domain implementation of a four-at-once merge was by WikiSort in 2014, the method was later that year described as an optimization for patience sorting and named a ping-pong merge. Quadsort implemented the method in 2020 and named it a quad merge.

== In-place merge sort==

One drawback of merge sort, when implemented on arrays, is its working memory requirement. Several methods to reduce memory or make merge sort fully in-place have been suggested:

* suggested an alternative version of merge sort that uses constant additional space.
* Katajainen &quot;et al.&quot; present an algorithm that requires a constant amount of working memory: enough storage space to hold one element of the input array, and additional space to hold pointers into the input array. They achieve an time bound with small constants, but their algorithm is not stable.
* Several attempts have been made at producing an &quot;in-place merge&quot; algorithm that can be combined with a standard (top-down or bottom-up) merge sort to produce an in-place merge sort. In this case, the notion of &quot;in-place&quot; can be relaxed to mean &quot;taking logarithmic stack space&quot;, because standard merge sort requires that amount of space for its own stack usage. It was shown by Geffert &quot;et al.&quot; that in-place, stable merging is possible in time using a constant amount of scratch space, but their algorithm is complicated and has high constant factors: merging arrays of length and can take moves. This high constant factor and complicated in-place algorithm was made simpler and easier to understand. Bing-Chao Huang and Michael A. Langston presented a straightforward linear time algorithm &quot;practical in-place merge&quot; to merge a sorted list using fixed amount of additional space. They both have used the work of Kronrod and others. It merges in linear time and constant extra space. The algorithm takes little more average time than standard merge sort algorithms, free to exploit temporary extra memory cells, by less than a factor of two. Though the algorithm is much faster in a practical way, it is unstable for some lists. But using similar concepts, they have been able to solve this problem. Other in-place algorithms include SymMerge, which takes time in total and is stable. Plugging such an algorithm into merge sort increases its complexity to the non-linearithmic, but still quasilinear, .
* Many applications of external sorting use a form of merge sorting where the input gets split up to a higher number of sublists, ideally to a number for which merging them still makes the currently processed set of pages fit into main memory.
* A modern stable, linear, and in-place merge variant is block merge sort, which creates a section of unique values to use as swap space.
* The space overhead can be reduced to by using binary searches and rotations. This method is employed by the C++ STL library and quadsort.
* An alternative to reduce the copying into multiple lists is to associate a new field of information with each key (the elements in &quot;m&quot; are called keys). This field will be used to link the keys and any associated information together in a sorted list (a key and its related information is called a record). Then the merging of the sorted lists proceeds by changing the link values; no records need to be moved at all. A field which contains only a link will generally be smaller than an entire record so less space will also be used. This is a standard sorting technique, not restricted to merge sort.
* A simple way to reduce the space overhead to &quot;n&quot;/2 is to maintain &quot;left&quot; and &quot;right&quot; as a combined structure, copy only the &quot;left&quot; part of &quot;m&quot; into temporary space, and to direct the &quot;merge&quot; routine to place the merged output into &quot;m&quot;. With this version it is better to allocate the temporary space outside the &quot;merge&quot; routine, so that only one allocation is needed. The excessive copying mentioned previously is also mitigated, since the last pair of lines before the &quot;return result&quot; statement (function &quot; merge &quot;in the pseudo code above) become superfluous.

==Use with tape drives==
An external merge sort is practical to run using disk or tape drives when the data to be sorted is too large to fit into memory. External sorting explains how merge sort is implemented with disk drives. A typical tape drive sort uses four tape drives. All I/O is sequential (except for rewinds at the end of each pass). A minimal implementation can get by with just two record buffers and a few program variables.

Naming the four tape drives as A, B, C, D, with the original data on A, and using only two record buffers, the algorithm is similar to the bottom-up implementation, using pairs of tape drives instead of arrays in memory. The basic algorithm can be described as follows:

# Merge pairs of records from A; writing two-record sublists alternately to C and D.
# Merge two-record sublists from C and D into four-record sublists; writing these alternately to A and B.
# Merge four-record sublists from A and B into eight-record sublists; writing these alternately to C and D
# Repeat until you have one list containing all the data, sorted—in log2(&quot;n&quot;) passes.

Instead of starting with very short runs, usually a hybrid algorithm is used, where the initial pass will read many records into memory, do an internal sort to create a long run, and then distribute those long runs onto the output set. The step avoids many early passes. For example, an internal sort of 1024 records will save nine passes. The internal sort is often large because it has such a benefit. In fact, there are techniques that can make the initial runs longer than the available internal memory. One of them, the Knuth&#x27;s &#x27;snowplow&#x27; (based on a binary min-heap), generates runs twice as long (on average) as a size of memory used.

With some overhead, the above algorithm can be modified to use three tapes. &quot;O&quot;(&quot;n&quot; log &quot;n&quot;) running time can also be achieved using two queues, or a stack and a queue, or three stacks. In the other direction, using &quot;k&quot; &gt; two tapes (and &quot;O&quot;(&quot;k&quot;) items in memory), we can reduce the number of tape operations in &quot;O&quot;(log &quot;k&quot;) times by using a k/2-way merge.

A more sophisticated merge sort that optimizes tape (and disk) drive usage is the polyphase merge sort.

==Optimizing merge sort==

On modern computers, locality of reference can be of paramount importance in software optimization, because multilevel memory hierarchies are used. Cache-aware versions of the merge sort algorithm, whose operations have been specifically chosen to minimize the movement of pages in and out of a machine&#x27;s memory cache, have been proposed. For example, the algorithm stops partitioning subarrays when subarrays of size S are reached, where S is the number of data items fitting into a CPU&#x27;s cache. Each of these subarrays is sorted with an in-place sorting algorithm such as insertion sort, to discourage memory swaps, and normal merge sort is then completed in the standard recursive fashion. This algorithm has demonstrated better performance on machines that benefit from cache optimization. 

==Parallel merge sort==
Merge sort parallelizes well due to the use of the divide-and-conquer method. Several different parallel variants of the algorithm have been developed over the years. Some parallel merge sort algorithms are strongly related to the sequential top-down merge algorithm while others have a different general structure and use the K-way merge method.

=== Merge sort with parallel recursion ===
The sequential merge sort procedure can be described in two phases, the divide phase and the merge phase. The first consists of many recursive calls that repeatedly perform the same division process until the subsequences are trivially sorted (containing one or no element). An intuitive approach is the parallelization of those recursive calls. Following pseudocode describes the merge sort with parallel recursion using the fork and join keywords:
 // &quot;Sort elements lo through hi (exclusive) of array A.&quot;
 algorithm mergesort(A, lo, hi) is
 if lo+1 &lt; hi then // &quot;Two or more elements.&quot;
 mid := ⌊(lo + hi) / 2⌋
 fork mergesort(A, lo, mid)
 mergesort(A, mid, hi)
 join
 merge(A, lo, mid, hi)
This algorithm is the trivial modification of the sequential version and does not parallelize well. Therefore, its speedup is not very impressive. It has a span of formula_4, which is only an improvement of formula_5 compared to the sequential version (see Introduction to Algorithms). This is mainly due to the sequential merge method, as it is the bottleneck of the parallel executions.

=== Merge sort with parallel merging ===

Better parallelism can be achieved by using a parallel merge algorithm. Cormen et al. present a binary variant that merges two sorted sub-sequences into one sorted output sequence.

In one of the sequences (the longer one if unequal length), the element of the middle index is selected. Its position in the other sequence is determined in such a way that this sequence would remain sorted if this element were inserted at this position. Thus, one knows how many other elements from both sequences are smaller and the position of the selected element in the output sequence can be calculated. For the partial sequences of the smaller and larger elements created in this way, the merge algorithm is again executed in parallel until the base case of the recursion is reached.

The following pseudocode shows the modified parallel merge sort method using the parallel merge algorithm (adopted from Cormen et al.).
 * A: Input array
 * B: Output array
 * lo: lower bound
 * hi: upper bound
 * off: offset
 algorithm parallelMergesort(A, lo, hi, B, off) is
 len := hi - lo + 1
 if len == 1 then
 B[off] := A[lo]
 else let T[1..len] be a new array
 mid := ⌊(lo + hi) / 2⌋ 
 mid&#x27; := mid - lo + 1
 fork parallelMergesort(A, lo, mid, T, 1)
 parallelMergesort(A, mid + 1, hi, T, mid&#x27; + 1) 
 join 
 parallelMerge(T, 1, mid&#x27;, mid&#x27; + 1, len, B, off)
In order to analyze a recurrence relation for the worst case span, the recursive calls of parallelMergesort have to be incorporated only once due to their parallel execution, obtaining

formula_6

For detailed information about the complexity of the parallel merge procedure, see Merge algorithm.

The solution of this recurrence is given by

formula_7

This parallel merge algorithm reaches a parallelism of formula_8, which is much higher than the parallelism of the previous algorithm. Such a sort can perform well in practice when combined with a fast stable sequential sort, such as insertion sort, and a fast sequential merge as a base case for merging small arrays.

=== Parallel multiway merge sort ===
It seems arbitrary to restrict the merge sort algorithms to a binary merge method, since there are usually p &gt; 2 processors available. A better approach may be to use a K-way merge method, a generalization of binary merge, in which formula_9 sorted sequences are merged. This merge variant is well suited to describe a sorting algorithm on a PRAM.

==== Basic idea ====

Given an unsorted sequence of formula_10 elements, the goal is to sort the sequence with formula_11 available processors. These elements are distributed equally among all processors and sorted locally using a sequential Sorting algorithm. Hence, the sequence consists of sorted sequences formula_12 of length formula_13. For simplification let formula_10 be a multiple of formula_11, so that formula_16 for formula_17.

These sequences will be used to perform a multisequence selection/splitter selection. For formula_18, the algorithm determines splitter elements formula_19 with global rank formula_20. Then the corresponding positions of formula_21 in each sequence formula_22 are determined with binary search and thus the formula_22 are further partitioned into formula_11 subsequences formula_25 with formula_26.

Furthermore, the elements of formula_27 are assigned to processor formula_28, means all elements between rank formula_29 and rank formula_30, which are distributed over all formula_22. Thus, each processor receives a sequence of sorted sequences. The fact that the rank formula_9 of the splitter elements formula_33 was chosen globally, provides two important properties: On the one hand, formula_9 was chosen so that each processor can still operate on formula_35 elements after assignment. The algorithm is perfectly load-balanced. On the other hand, all elements on processor formula_28 are less than or equal to all elements on processor formula_37. Hence, each processor performs the &quot;p&quot;-way merge locally and thus obtains a sorted sequence from its sub-sequences. Because of the second property, no further &quot;p&quot;-way-merge has to be performed, the results only have to be put together in the order of the processor number.

==== Multi-sequence selection ====
In its simplest form, given formula_11 sorted sequences formula_12 distributed evenly on formula_11 processors and a rank formula_9, the task is to find an element formula_42 with a global rank formula_9 in the union of the sequences. Hence, this can be used to divide each formula_22 in two parts at a splitter index formula_45, where the lower part contains only elements which are smaller than formula_42, while the elements bigger than formula_42 are located in the upper part.

The presented sequential algorithm returns the indices of the splits in each sequence, e.g. the indices formula_45 in sequences formula_22 such that formula_50 has a global rank less than formula_9 and formula_52.
 algorithm msSelect(S : Array of sorted Sequences [S_1..,S_p], k : int) is
 for i = 1 to p do 
 (l_i, r_i) = (0, |S_i|-1)
 while there exists i: l_i &lt; r_i do
 // pick Pivot Element in S_j[l_j], .., S_j[r_j], chose random j uniformly
 v := pickPivot(S, l, r)
 for i = 1 to p do 
 m_i = binarySearch(v, S_i[l_i, r_i]) // sequentially
 if m_1 + ... + m_p &gt;= k then // m_1+ ... + m_p is the global rank of v
 r := m // vector assignment
 else
 l := m 
 return l
For the complexity analysis the PRAM model is chosen. If the data is evenly distributed over all formula_11, the p-fold execution of the &quot;binarySearch&quot; method has a running time of formula_54. The expected recursion depth is formula_55 as in the ordinary Quickselect. Thus the overall expected running time is formula_56.

Applied on the parallel multiway merge sort, this algorithm has to be invoked in parallel such that all splitter elements of rank formula_57 for formula_58 are found simultaneously. These splitter elements can then be used to partition each sequence in formula_11 parts, with the same total running time of formula_60.

==== Pseudocode ====
Below, the complete pseudocode of the parallel multiway merge sort algorithm is given. We assume that there is a barrier synchronization before and after the multisequence selection such that every processor can determine the splitting elements and the sequence partition properly.
 * d: Unsorted Array of Elements
 * n: Number of Elements
 * p: Number of Processors
 * return Sorted Array
 algorithm parallelMultiwayMergesort(d : Array, n : int, p : int) is
 o := new Array[0, n] // the output array
 for i = 1 to p do in parallel // each processor in parallel
 S_i := d[(i-1) * n/p, i * n/p] // Sequence of length n/p
 sort(S_i) // sort locally
 synch
 v_i := msSelect([S_1...,S_p], i * n/p) // element with global rank i * n/p
 synch
 (S_i,1, ..., S_i,p) := sequence_partitioning(si, v_1, ..., v_p) // split s_i into subsequences
 o[(i-1) * n/p, i * n/p] := kWayMerge(s_1,i, ..., s_p,i) // merge and assign to output array
 return o

====Analysis====
Firstly, each processor sorts the assigned formula_61 elements locally using a sorting algorithm with complexity formula_62. After that, the splitter elements have to be calculated in time formula_63. Finally, each group of formula_11 splits have to be merged in parallel by each processor with a running time of formula_65 using a sequential p-way merge algorithm. Thus, the overall running time is given by

formula_66.

==== Practical adaption and application ====
The multiway merge sort algorithm is very scalable through its high parallelization capability, which allows the use of many processors. This makes the algorithm a viable candidate for sorting large amounts of data, such as those processed in computer clusters. Also, since in such systems memory is usually not a limiting resource, the disadvantage of space complexity of merge sort is negligible. However, other factors become important in such systems, which are not taken into account when modelling on a PRAM. Here, the following aspects need to be considered: Memory hierarchy, when the data does not fit into the processors cache, or the communication overhead of exchanging data between processors, which could become a bottleneck when the data can no longer be accessed via the shared memory.

Sanders et al. have presented in their paper a bulk synchronous parallel algorithm for multilevel multiway mergesort, which divides formula_11 processors into formula_68 groups of size formula_69. All processors sort locally first. Unlike single level multiway mergesort, these sequences are then partitioned into formula_68 parts and assigned to the appropriate processor groups. These steps are repeated recursively in those groups. This reduces communication and especially avoids problems with many small messages. The hierarchical structure of the underlying real network can be used to define the processor groups (e.g. racks, clusters...).

=== Further variants ===
Merge sort was one of the first sorting algorithms where optimal speed up was achieved, with Richard Cole using a clever subsampling algorithm to ensure &quot;O&quot;(1) merge. Other sophisticated parallel sorting algorithms can achieve the same or better time bounds with a lower constant. For example, in 1991 David Powers described a parallelized quicksort (and a related radix sort) that can operate in &quot;O&quot;(log &quot;n&quot;) time on a CRCW parallel random-access machine (PRAM) with &quot;n&quot; processors by performing partitioning implicitly. Powers further shows that a pipelined version of Batcher&#x27;s Bitonic Mergesort at &quot;O&quot;((log &quot;n&quot;)2) time on a butterfly sorting network is in practice actually faster than his &quot;O&quot;(log &quot;n&quot;) sorts on a PRAM, and he provides detailed discussion of the hidden overheads in comparison, radix and parallel sorting.

==Comparison with other sort algorithms==
Although heapsort has the same time bounds as merge sort, it requires only Θ(1) auxiliary space instead of merge sort&#x27;s Θ(&quot;n&quot;). On typical modern architectures, efficient quicksort implementations generally outperform merge sort for sorting RAM-based arrays. Quicksorts are preferred when the data size to be sorted is lesser, since the space complexity for quicksort is O(log &quot;n&quot;), it helps in utilizing cache locality better than merge sort (with space complexity O(n)). On the other hand, merge sort is a stable sort and is more efficient at handling slow-to-access sequential media. Merge sort is often the best choice for sorting a linked list: in this situation it is relatively easy to implement a merge sort in such a way that it requires only Θ(1) extra space, and the slow random-access performance of a linked list makes some other algorithms (such as quicksort) perform poorly, and others (such as heapsort) completely impossible.

As of Perl 5.8, merge sort is its default sorting algorithm (it was quicksort in previous versions of Perl). In Java, the Arrays.sort() methods use merge sort or a tuned quicksort depending on the datatypes and for implementation efficiency switch to insertion sort when fewer than seven array elements are being sorted. The Linux kernel uses merge sort for its linked lists.

Timsort, a tuned hybrid of merge sort and insertion sort is used in variety of software platforms and languages including the Java and Android platforms and is used by Python since version 2.3; since version 3.11, Timsort&#x27;s merge policy was updated to Powersort.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*. Also Practical In-Place Mergesort. Also 
*
* 
* 

==External links==

* – graphical demonstration
* Open Data Structures - Section 11.1.1 - Merge Sort, Pat Morin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q189057" start="21" end="31" title="Merge sort" label="merge sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q189057" start="58" end="67" title="Merge sort" label="mergesort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632949" start="115" end="131" title="comparison sort" label="comparison-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q181593" start="132" end="149" title="sorting algorithm" label="sorting algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="182" end="193" title="Sorting algorithm#Stability" label="stable sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q671298" start="302" end="330" title="divide-and-conquer algorithm" label="divide-and-conquer algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="352" end="368" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q93005" start="462" end="471" title="Herman Goldstine" label="Goldstine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341754" start="708" end="713" title="Merge algorithm" label="merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565327" start="867" end="873" title="C-like" label="C-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="4827" end="4837" title="Pseudocode" label="Pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="6424" end="6434" title="Pseudocode" label="Pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848926" start="6609" end="6612" title="Null pointer" label="nil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="7660" end="7667" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="7778" end="7800" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q186094" start="8205" end="8212" title="average performance" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q186094" start="8217" end="8239" title="worst-case performance" label="worst-case performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="8243" end="8244" title="big O notation" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="8426" end="8445" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q922367" start="8749" end="8798" title="master theorem (analysis of algorithms)" label="master theorem for divide-and-conquer recurrences"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277571" start="8880" end="8894" title="sorting number" label="sorting number"/>
<link wikidata="Q581168" start="8965" end="8967" title="Binary logarithm" label="lg"/>
<link wikidata="Q486598" start="9530" end="9539" title="quicksort" label="quicksort"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="9644" end="9645" title="big O notation" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="9914" end="9918" title="Lisp programming language" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q106808243" start="10423" end="10427" title="run of a sequence" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220543" start="10633" end="10644" title="Queue (abstract data type)" label="FIFO queues"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="10648" end="10659" title="Stack (abstract data type)" label="LIFO stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q942403" start="11210" end="11217" title="Timsort" label="Timsort"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11443" end="11447" title="M-optimal sorting" label="Runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829328" start="11521" end="11559" title="Tournament sort" label="Tournament replacement selection sorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480255" start="12129" end="12145" title="patience sorting" label="patience sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q657037" start="12418" end="12426" title="In-place algorithm" label="in-place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="14360" end="14372" title="linearithmic" label="linearithmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="14384" end="14395" title="quasilinear time" label="quasilinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q209687" start="14422" end="14438" title="external sorting" label="external sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q361698" start="14615" end="14620" title="page (computer memory)" label="pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019833" start="14700" end="14716" title="block merge sort" label="block merge sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q209687" start="16226" end="16234" title="External sorting" label="external"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="16272" end="16276" title="disk storage" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q751913" start="16280" end="16284" title="tape drive" label="tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="16344" end="16350" title="primary storage" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q209687" start="16352" end="16368" title="External sorting" label="External sorting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16773" end="16801" title="#Bottom-up_implementation" label="the bottom-up implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092099" start="17356" end="17372" title="hybrid algorithm" label="hybrid algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q803847" start="17875" end="17890" title="binary heap" label="binary min-heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q220543" start="18129" end="18135" title="queue (abstract data type)" label="queues"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="18142" end="18147" title="stack (abstract data type)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111796" start="18386" end="18399" title="k-way merge algorithm" label="k/2-way merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226739" start="18484" end="18504" title="polyphase merge sort" label="polyphase merge sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868547" start="18555" end="18576" title="locality of reference" label="locality of reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156793" start="18611" end="18632" title="software optimization" label="software optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589327" start="18653" end="18671" title="Memory hierarchy" label="memory hierarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="18682" end="18687" title="Cache (computing)" label="Cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117241" start="19118" end="19132" title="insertion sort" label="insertion sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q671298" start="19415" end="19433" title="Divide-and-conquer algorithm" label="divide-and-conquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111796" start="19691" end="19702" title="K-way merge algorithm" label="K-way merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090179" start="20181" end="20194" title="Fork–join model" label="fork and join"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20627" end="20631" title="Analysis of parallel algorithms#Overview" label="span"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141518" start="20728" end="20754" title="Introduction to Algorithms" label="Introduction to Algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341754" start="20958" end="20973" title="merge algorithm" label="merge algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141518" start="20975" end="20988" title="Introduction to Algorithms" label="Cormen et al."/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="22281" end="22300" title="recurrence relation" label="recurrence relation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22539" end="22554" title="Merge algorithm#Parallel merge" label="Merge algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q117241" start="22847" end="22861" title="insertion sort" label="insertion sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111796" start="23142" end="23153" title="K-way merge algorithm" label="K-way merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="23315" end="23319" title="Parallel random-access machine" label="PRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="23454" end="23464" title="Processor (computing)" label="processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q181593" start="23564" end="23581" title="Sorting algorithm" label="Sorting algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="24044" end="24057" title="Binary search algorithm" label="binary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q575614" start="24683" end="24696" title="Load balancing (computing)" label="load-balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111796" start="24853" end="24876" title="K-way merge algorithm" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-way merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="26340" end="26344" title="Parallel random-access machine" label="PRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927837" start="26573" end="26584" title="Quickselect" label="Quickselect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341754" start="28279" end="28300" title="Merge algorithm" label="p-way merge algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="28647" end="28663" title="computer cluster" label="computer cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="28913" end="28917" title="Parallel random-access machine" label="PRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589327" start="28970" end="28986" title="Memory hierarchy" label="Memory hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078004" start="29207" end="29214" title="Peter Sanders (computer scientist)" label="Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004114" start="29254" end="29279" title="bulk synchronous parallel" label="bulk synchronous parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q431000" start="29833" end="29838" title="19-inch rack" label="racks"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="29840" end="29848" title="Computer cluster" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q486598" start="30230" end="30239" title="quicksort" label="quicksort"/>
<link wikidata="Q830223" start="30255" end="30265" title="radix sort" label="radix sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="30330" end="30334" title="CRCW" label="CRCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="30335" end="30365" title="parallel random-access machine" label="parallel random-access machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918918" start="30506" end="30523" title="Bitonic sorter" label="Bitonic Mergesort"/>
<link wikidata="Q646477" start="30583" end="30598" title="sorting network" label="sorting network"/>
<link wikidata="Q474095" start="30844" end="30852" title="heapsort" label="heapsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q486598" start="31021" end="31030" title="quicksort" label="quicksort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="31497" end="31508" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="31810" end="31814" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713118" start="31916" end="31920" title="Java platform" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q117241" start="32055" end="32069" title="insertion sort" label="insertion sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="32129" end="32134" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q942403" start="32181" end="32188" title="Timsort" label="Timsort"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="32349" end="32355" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278607" start="32637" end="32646" title="Pat Morin" label="Pat Morin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20040" wikidata="Q1911088" url="?curid=20040" title="Maule Air">
<text>Maule Air, Inc. is a manufacturer of light, single-engined, short take-off and landing (STOL) aircraft, based in Moultrie, Georgia, U.S. The company delivered 2,500 aircraft in its first 50 years of business.

== History ==
Belford D. Maule (1911–1995) designed his first aircraft, the M-1 starting at age 19. He founded the company Mechanical Products Co. in Napoleon, Michigan to market his own starter design. In 1941 the B.D. Maule Co. was founded, and Maule produced tailwheels and fabric testers. In 1953 he began design work, and started aircraft production with the &quot;Bee-Dee&quot; M-4 in 1957.

The company is a family-owned enterprise. Its owner, June Maule, widow of B. D. Maule, remained directly involved with factory production until her death in 2009 at the age of 92.

== Products ==
The aircraft produced by Maule Air are tube-and-fabric designs and are popular with bush pilots thanks to their very low stall speed, tundra tires and oleo strut landing gear. Most Maules are built with tailwheel or amphibious configurations, although the newer MXT models have tricycle gear.

=== Aircraft models ===
== Gallery ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Maule Air, Inc. website
* Maule aircraft models</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1911088" start="0" end="15" title="Maule Air" label="Maule Air, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q832489" start="88" end="92" title="STOL" label="STOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="94" end="102" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100551" start="113" end="130" title="Moultrie, Georgia" label="Moultrie, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065172" start="286" end="289" title="Maule M-1" label="M-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848741" start="360" end="378" title="Napoleon, Michigan" label="Napoleon, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018516" start="661" end="671" title="June Maule" label="June Maule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850756" start="843" end="858" title="Tube-and-fabric construction" label="tube-and-fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q477799" start="888" end="899" title="bush pilots" label="bush pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="925" end="936" title="stall speed" label="stall speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852906" start="938" end="950" title="tundra tires" label="tundra tires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086401" start="955" end="965" title="oleo strut" label="oleo strut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874355" start="1007" end="1016" title="tailwheel" label="tailwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q474709" start="1020" end="1030" title="amphibious aircraft" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874353" start="1082" end="1095" title="tricycle gear" label="tricycle gear"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20041" wikidata="Q3622151" url="?curid=20041" title="Shoma Morita">
<text>, also read as Shōma Morita, was the founder of Morita therapy, a branch of clinical psychology strongly influenced by Zen Buddhism. In his capacity as the head of psychiatry for a large Tokyo hospital, Morita began developing his methods while working with sufferers of &quot;shinkeishitsu&quot;, or anxiety disorders with a hypochondriac base.

==Theory and methods==
According to Morita, how a person feels is important as a and as an indicator for the present moment, but is uncontrollable: we don&#x27;t create feelings, feelings happen to us. Since feelings do not cause our behavior, we can coexist with unpleasant feelings while still taking constructive action.

The essence of Morita&#x27;s method maybe summarized in three rules: Accept all your feelings, know your purpose(s), and do what needs to be done. When once asked what shy people should do, Morita replied, &quot;Sweat.&quot;

*Accept your feelings - Accepting feelings is not ignoring them or avoiding them, but welcoming them; Vietnamese poet and writer Thich Nhat Hanh recommends we say, &quot;Hello Loneliness, how are you today? Come, sit by me and I will take care of you.&quot; Morita&#x27;s advice: &quot;In feelings, it is best to be wealthy and generous&quot; - that is, have many and let them fly as they wish.
*Know your purpose - Implicit in Morita&#x27;s method, and the traditional Buddhist psychological principles which he adapted, is an independence of thought and action, something a little alien to the Western ideal to &quot;follow our whims and moods&quot;. Morita held that we can no more control our thoughts than we can control the weather, as both are phenomena of most amazingly complex natural systems. And if we have no hope of controlling our emotions, we can hardly be held responsible any more than we can be held responsible for feeling hot or cold. We do, however, have complete dominion over our behavior, and for Morita, that is a sacred responsibility. &quot;What needs doing now?&quot; is like a mantra in his methods.
*Do what needs doing - One can feel crushed and alone or hurt and homicidal while pulling up the weeds in your garden, but one would not be doing it at all if one had not intended to raise flowers. Morita&#x27;s way of treatment is very different from the Western diagnosis/disease model. Morita&#x27;s methods lead his &quot;students&quot; through experiments, and in each assignment, the lesson is not explained by a master, but learned first hand, through the &quot;doing&quot; or &quot;taiken&quot;, that knowledge gained by direct experience.

==Influence==
David K. Reynolds, an American author, synthesized parts of Morita therapy along with the practice of Naikan into Constructive Living, an educational method intended for English-speaking Westerners. Constructive Living has since become extremely popular in Japan, and Reynolds is the only non-Japanese citizen to receive the Kora Prize and the Morita Prize by the Morita Therapy Association of Japan. 

Fritz Perls spent a week in a Morita Hospital in Japan.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3622151" start="15" end="27" title="Shoma Morita" label="Shōma Morita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981893" start="48" end="62" title="Morita therapy" label="Morita therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199906" start="76" end="95" title="clinical psychology" label="clinical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="119" end="122" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="164" end="174" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="187" end="192" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1000" end="1007" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q310913" start="1027" end="1042" title="Nhat Hanh" label="Thich Nhat Hanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="2005" end="2011" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206884" start="2292" end="2301" title="medical diagnosis" label="diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235807" start="2591" end="2608" title="David K. Reynolds" label="David K. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981893" start="2651" end="2665" title="Morita therapy" label="Morita therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362573" start="2693" end="2699" title="Naikan" label="Naikan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2705" end="2724" title="Constructive Living" label="Constructive Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750" start="2994" end="3005" title="Fritz Perls" label="Fritz Perls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="20042" wikidata="Q9034852" url="?curid=20042" title="Montezuma">
<text>Montezuma or Moctezuma may refer to:
==People==
* Moctezuma I (1398–1469), the second Aztec emperor and fifth king of Tenochtitlan
* Moctezuma II (c. 1460–1520), ninth Aztec emperor
** Pedro Moctezuma, a son of Montezuma II
** Isabel Moctezuma (1509/1510–1550/1551), a daughter of Montezuma II
*** Leonor Cortés Moctezuma (c. 1528–?), daughter of Hernán Cortés and Isabel Montezuma
**** Isabel de Tolosa Cortés de Moctezuma (1568–1619/1620), Mexican heiress, great-granddaughter of Montezuma II
* Duke of Moctezuma de Tultengo, a Spanish hereditary title held by descendants of Moctezuma II
* Carlos Montezuma (c. 1860–1923), Yavapai/Apache Native American activist 
* Carlos López Moctezuma (1909–1980), Mexican film actor
* Eduardo Matos Moctezuma (born 1940), Mexican archaeologist
* Esteban Moctezuma (born 1954), Mexican politician
* Julio Rodolfo Moctezuma (1927–2000), Mexican lawyer, politician and banker
* Leonidas de Montezuma (1869–1937), English cricketer
* Moctesuma Esparza (born 1949), American film director
* Moctezuma Serrato (born 1976), Mexican football player
* Montezuma Fuller (1858–1926), American architect

==Places==

===Mexico===
* Moctezuma, Sonora, a municipality
* Moctezuma, San Luis Potosí, a municipality
* Moctezuma River
* Moctezuma River (Sonora)
* Moctezuma metro station, a station on the Mexico City Metro
* Moctezuma (Mexico City Metrobús, Line 4), a BRT station in Mexico City
* Moctezuma (Mexico City Metrobús, Line 5), a BRT station in Mexico City

===United States===
====Inhabited places====
* Montezuma, Tuolumne County, California, a ghost town 
* Montezuma Hills, California
* Montezuma, Colorado, a Statutory Town
* Montezuma County, Colorado
* Montezuma, Georgia, a city
* Montezuma Township, Pike County, Illinois
* Montezuma, Indiana, a town
* Montezuma, Iowa, a city
* Montezuma Township, Gray County, Kansas
** Montezuma, Kansas, a city
* Montezuma, New Mexico, an unincorporated community
* Montezuma, New York, a town
* Montezuma, North Carolina, an unincorporated community
* Montezuma, Ohio, a village
* Montezuma, Virginia, an unincorporated community

====Buildings====
* Montezuma (Norwood, Virginia), a home on the National Register of Historic Places
* Montezuma Castle (hotel), Las Vegas, New Mexico

====Natural formations====
* Montezuma Creek (Utah), a creek in Utah
* Montezuma Marsh, Cayuga Lake, New York
* Montezuma National Forest, Colorado
* Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge, New York
* Montezuma Peak, a mountain in Arizona
* Montezuma Range, Nevada, a mountain range
* Montezuma Well, a natural limestone sinkhole near Rimrock, Arizona

===Other countries===
* Montezuma, Minas Gerais, Brazil
* Montezuma, Costa Rica
* Montezuma Falls, Tasmania, Australia

==Music==
* Montezuma, hero of a 1695 semi-opera &quot;The Indian Queen&quot; by Henry Purcell
* &quot;Motezuma&quot;, a 1733 opera by Antonio Vivaldi (until recently known under the title &quot;Montezuma&quot;)
* &quot;Montezuma&quot; (Graun), a 1755 opera by Carl Heinrich Graun
* &quot;Motezuma&quot;, a 1765 opera by Gian Francesco de Majo
* &quot;Motezuma&quot; (Mysliveček), a 1771 opera by Josef Mysliveček
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, a 1775 opera by Antonio Sacchini
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, a 1780 opera by Giacomo Insanguine
* &quot;Montesuma&quot;, a 1781 opera by Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, by Ignaz von Seyfried (1804)
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, an 1884 opera by Frederick Grant Gleason
* &quot;Montezuma&quot; (Sessions opera), a 1963 opera by Roger Sessions
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, or &quot;La Conquista&quot;, a 2005 opera by Lorenzo Ferrero
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, a 1980 film score by Hans Werner Henze
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, a song from the 1994 album &quot;Apurimac II&quot; by Cusco
* &quot;Montezuma&quot;, a song from the 2011 album &quot;Helplessness Blues&quot; by Fleet Foxes

==Ships==
* , three ships of the United States Navy
* , launched 1899, later RFA &quot;Abadol&quot; and RFA &quot;Oakleaf&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;Montezuma&quot; (TV programme), a 2009 British documentary
* Montezuma (mythology), in the mythology of certain Amerindian tribes of the Southwest United States
* U.D. Moctezuma de Orizaba, a defunct Mexican football team
* Montezuma, a brand of tequila by Barton Brands

==See also==
* &quot;Montezuma&quot; Affair, an 1835 naval battle between Mexico and the US
* Montezuma&#x27;s revenge (disambiguation)
* Halls of Montezuma (disambiguation)
* Montezuma leopard frog, a species of frog 
* Montezuma oropendola, a species of bird
* Montezuma, a synonym of the plant genus &quot;Thespesia&quot;
* Montezuma pine, a species of conifer </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9034852" start="0" end="9" title="Montezuma" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9034852" start="13" end="22" title="Montezuma" label="Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13702" start="50" end="61" title="Moctezuma I" label="Moctezuma I"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="133" end="145" title="Moctezuma II" label="Moctezuma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898692" start="185" end="200" title="Pedro Moctezuma" label="Pedro Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q465561" start="227" end="243" title="Isabel Moctezuma" label="Isabel Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q965442" start="298" end="321" title="Leonor Cortés Moctezuma" label="Leonor Cortés Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077821" start="387" end="423" title="Isabel de Tolosa Cortés de Moctezuma" label="Isabel de Tolosa Cortés de Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093585" start="497" end="526" title="Duke of Moctezuma de Tultengo" label="Duke of Moctezuma de Tultengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q772863" start="593" end="609" title="Carlos Montezuma" label="Carlos Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q450101" start="669" end="691" title="Carlos López Moctezuma" label="Carlos López Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q956157" start="726" end="749" title="Eduardo Matos Moctezuma" label="Eduardo Matos Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322707" start="787" end="804" title="Esteban Moctezuma" label="Esteban Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309510" start="839" end="862" title="Julio Rodolfo Moctezuma" label="Julio Rodolfo Moctezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526580" start="916" end="937" title="Leonidas de Montezuma" label="Leonidas de Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498499" start="971" end="988" title="Moctesuma Esparza" label="Moctesuma Esparza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885949" start="1027" end="1044" title="Moctezuma Serrato" label="Moctezuma Serrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031022" start="1084" end="1100" title="Montezuma Fuller" label="Montezuma Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q27798313" start="1161" end="1178" title="Moctezuma, Sonora" label="Moctezuma, Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849472" start="1197" end="1223" title="Moctezuma, San Luis Potosí" label="Moctezuma, San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179140" start="1242" end="1257" title="Moctezuma River" label="Moctezuma River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887875" start="1260" end="1284" title="Moctezuma River (Sonora)" label="Moctezuma River (Sonora)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357017" start="1287" end="1310" title="Moctezuma metro station" label="Moctezuma metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064456" start="1349" end="1389" title="Moctezuma (Mexico City Metrobús, Line 4)" label="Moctezuma (Mexico City Metrobús, Line 4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064475" start="1422" end="1462" title="Moctezuma (Mexico City Metrobús, Line 5)" label="Moctezuma (Mexico City Metrobús, Line 5)"/>
<link wikidata="Q582753" start="1541" end="1579" title="Montezuma, Tuolumne County, California" label="Montezuma, Tuolumne County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683396" start="1597" end="1612" title="Montezuma Hills" label="Montezuma Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303176" start="1627" end="1646" title="Montezuma, Colorado" label="Montezuma, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q312497" start="1667" end="1693" title="Montezuma County, Colorado" label="Montezuma County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369785" start="1696" end="1714" title="Montezuma, Georgia" label="Montezuma, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9042488" start="1725" end="1766" title="Montezuma Township, Pike County, Illinois" label="Montezuma Township, Pike County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293495" start="1769" end="1787" title="Montezuma, Indiana" label="Montezuma, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911096" start="1798" end="1813" title="Montezuma, Iowa" label="Montezuma, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9042484" start="1824" end="1863" title="Montezuma Township, Gray County, Kansas" label="Montezuma Township, Gray County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739080" start="1867" end="1884" title="Montezuma, Kansas" label="Montezuma, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905523" start="1895" end="1916" title="Montezuma, New Mexico" label="Montezuma, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708715" start="1948" end="1967" title="Montezuma, New York" label="Montezuma, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905513" start="1978" end="2003" title="Montezuma, North Carolina" label="Montezuma, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895212" start="2035" end="2050" title="Montezuma, Ohio" label="Montezuma, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905514" start="2064" end="2083" title="Montezuma, Virginia" label="Montezuma, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905518" start="2134" end="2163" title="Montezuma (Norwood, Virginia)" label="Montezuma (Norwood, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905522" start="2218" end="2242" title="Montezuma Castle (hotel)" label="Montezuma Castle (hotel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905526" start="2296" end="2318" title="Montezuma Creek (Utah)" label="Montezuma Creek (Utah)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905534" start="2338" end="2353" title="Montezuma Marsh" label="Montezuma Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905535" start="2379" end="2404" title="Montezuma National Forest" label="Montezuma National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946206" start="2417" end="2451" title="Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge" label="Montezuma National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49051087" start="2464" end="2478" title="Montezuma Peak" label="Montezuma Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173835" start="2504" end="2519" title="Montezuma Range" label="Montezuma Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905538" start="2548" end="2562" title="Montezuma Well" label="Montezuma Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q22062358" start="2640" end="2663" title="Montezuma, Minas Gerais" label="Montezuma, Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q633703" start="2674" end="2695" title="Montezuma, Costa Rica" label="Montezuma, Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935630" start="2698" end="2713" title="Montezuma Falls" label="Montezuma Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521380" start="2791" end="2807" title="The Indian Queen (opera)" label="The Indian Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949643" start="2839" end="2847" title="Motezuma" label="Motezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q485135" start="2950" end="2979" title="Montezuma (Graun)" label="&amp;quot;Montezuma&amp;quot; (Graun)"/>
<link wikidata="Q721351" start="3057" end="3079" title="Gian Francesco de Majo" label="Gian Francesco de Majo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917206" start="3082" end="3115" title="Motezuma (Mysliveček)" label="&amp;quot;Motezuma&amp;quot; (Mysliveček)"/>
<link wikidata="Q366727" start="3191" end="3207" title="Antonio Sacchini" label="Antonio Sacchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q927177" start="3249" end="3267" title="Giacomo Insanguine" label="Giacomo Insanguine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505202" start="3309" end="3335" title="Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli" label="Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q697804" start="3364" end="3382" title="Ignaz von Seyfried" label="Ignaz von Seyfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497884" start="3432" end="3455" title="Frederick Grant Gleason" label="Frederick Grant Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905519" start="3458" end="3496" title="Montezuma (Sessions opera)" label="&amp;quot;Montezuma&amp;quot; (Sessions opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983712" start="3563" end="3575" title="La Conquista (opera)" label="La Conquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612819" start="3658" end="3678" title="List of compositions by Hans Werner Henze" label="by Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782318" start="3737" end="3748" title="Apurimac II" label="Apurimac II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294742" start="3822" end="3840" title="Helplessness Blues" label="Helplessness Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905517" start="4009" end="4045" title="Montezuma (TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;Montezuma&amp;quot; (TV programme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317756" start="4076" end="4097" title="Montezuma (mythology)" label="Montezuma (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q666689" start="4178" end="4203" title="U.D. Moctezuma de Orizaba" label="U.D. Moctezuma de Orizaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865593" start="4272" end="4285" title="Barton Brands" label="Barton Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201191" start="4302" end="4330" title="Montezuma Affair" label="&amp;quot;Montezuma&amp;quot; Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127192" start="4381" end="4422" title="Montezuma&amp;#x27;s revenge (disambiguation)" label="Montezuma&amp;#x27;s revenge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643161" start="4425" end="4460" title="Halls of Montezuma (disambiguation)" label="Halls of Montezuma (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004323" start="4463" end="4485" title="Montezuma leopard frog" label="Montezuma leopard frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q934975" start="4508" end="4528" title="Montezuma oropendola" label="Montezuma oropendola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149349" start="4596" end="4605" title="Thespesia" label="Thespesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640268" start="4614" end="4628" title="Montezuma pine" label="Montezuma pine"/>
</links>
</doc>
