<doc id="22618" wikidata="Q83055" url="?curid=22618" title="Operation Barbarossa">
<text>Operation Barbarossa was the invasion of the Soviet Union by Nazi Germany and several of its European Axis allies starting on 22 June 1941, during World War II. More than 3.8 million Axis troops invaded the western Soviet Union along a front, with the main goal of capturing territory up to a line between Arkhangelsk and Astrakhan (A-A line). The attack became the largest and costliest military offensive in history, with around 10 million combatants taking part in the opening phase and over 8 million casualties by the end of the operation on 5 December 1941. It marked a major escalation of World War II, opening the Eastern Front—the largest and deadliest land theatre of war in history—and bringing the Soviet Union into the Allied powers.

The operation, code-named after the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa (&quot;red beard&quot;), put into action Nazi Germany&#x27;s ideological goals of eradicating communism and conquering the western Soviet Union to repopulate it with Germans under , which planned for the extermination of the native Slavic peoples by mass deportation to Siberia, Germanisation, enslavement, and genocide. The material targets of the invasion were the agricultural and mineral resources of territories such as Ukraine and Byelorussia and oil fields in the Caucasus. The Axis eventually captured five million Soviet Red Army troops on the Eastern Front and deliberately starved to death or otherwise killed 3.3 million prisoners of war, as well as millions of civilians. Mass shootings and gassing operations, carried out by German paramilitary death squads and collaborators, murdered over a million Soviet Jews as part of the Holocaust. In the two years leading up to the invasion, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union signed political and economic pacts for strategic purposes. Following the Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina in July 1940, the German High Command began planning an invasion of the country, which was approved by Adolf Hitler in December. In early 1941, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, despite receiving intelligence about an imminent attack, did not order a mobilization of the Red Army, fearing that it might provoke Germany. As a result, Soviet forces were largely caught unprepared when the invasion began, with many units positioned poorly and understrength.

The invasion began on 22 June 1941 with a massive ground and air assault, resulting in large territorial gains for the Nazis and their allies. The main part of Army Group South invaded from occupied Poland on 22 June and on 2 July was joined by a combination of German and Romanian forces attacking from Romania. Kiev was captured on 19 September, which was followed by the captures of Kharkov on 24 October and Rostov-on-Don on 20 November, by which time most of Crimea had been captured. Army Group North overran the Baltic lands and on 8 September 1941, began a siege of Leningrad accompanied by Finnish forces, which ultimately lasted until 1944. Army Group Centre, the strongest of the three, captured Smolensk in late July 1941 before beginning its drive on Moscow on 2 October. Facing logistical problems with supply, slowed by muddy terrain, not fully outfitted for Russia&#x27;s brutal winter, and coping with determined Soviet resistance, Army Group Center&#x27;s offensive stalled at the city&#x27;s outskirts by 5 December, at which point the Soviets began a major counteroffensive.

The failure of Operation Barbarossa reversed the fortunes of Nazi Germany. Operationally, it achieved significant victories and occupied some of the most important economic regions of the Soviet Union, captured millions of prisoners, and inflicted heavy casualties. The German high command anticipated a quick collapse of resistance as in the invasion of Poland, but instead the Red Army absorbed the German &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;″s strongest blows and bogged it down in a war of attrition for which Germany was unprepared. Following the heavy losses and logistical strain of Barbarossa, German forces could no longer attack along the entire front, and their subsequent operations—such as Case Blue in 1942 and Operation Citadel in 1943—ultimately failed.

==Background==
===Naming===
The theme of Barbarossa had long been used by the Nazi Party as part of their political imagery, though this was really a continuation of the glorification of the famous Crusader king by German nationalists since the 19th century. According to a Germanic medieval legend, revived in the 19th century by the nationalistic tropes of German Romanticism, the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa—who drowned in Asia Minor while leading the Third Crusade—was not dead but asleep, along with his knights, in a cave in the Kyffhäuser mountains in Thuringia, and would awaken in the hour of Germany&#x27;s greatest need and restore the nation to its former glory. Originally, the invasion of the Soviet Union was codenamed &quot;Operation Otto&quot; (alluding to Holy Roman Emperor Otto the Great&#x27;s expansive campaigns in Eastern Europe), but Hitler had the name changed to &quot;Operation Barbarossa&quot; in December 1940. Hitler had in July 1937 praised Barbarossa as the emperor who first expressed Germanic cultural ideas and carried them to the outside world through his imperial mission. For Hitler, the name Barbarossa signified his belief that the conquest of the Soviet Union would usher in the Nazi &quot;Thousand-Year Reich&quot;.

===Racial policies of Nazi Germany===

As early as 1925, Adolf Hitler vaguely declared in his political manifesto and autobiography &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; that he would invade the Soviet Union, asserting that the German people needed to secure (&#x27;living space&#x27;) to ensure the survival of Germany for generations to come. On 10 February 1939, Hitler told his army commanders that the next war would be &quot;purely a war of [&#x27;worldviews&#x27;]... totally a people&#x27;s war, a racial war&quot;. On 23 November, once World War II had already started, Hitler declared that &quot;racial war has broken out and this war shall determine who shall govern Europe, and with it, the world&quot;. The racial policy of Nazi Germany portrayed the Soviet Union (and all of Eastern Europe) as populated by non-Aryan (&#x27;sub-humans&#x27;), ruled by Jewish Bolshevik conspirators. Hitler claimed in &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; that Germany&#x27;s destiny was to follow the (&#x27;turn to the East&#x27;) as it did &quot;600 years ago&quot; (see ). Accordingly, it was a partially secret but well-documented Nazi policy to kill, deport, or enslave the majority of Russian and other Slavic populations and repopulate the land west of the Urals with Germanic peoples, under (General Plan for the East). The Nazis&#x27; belief in their ethnic superiority pervades official records and pseudoscientific articles in German periodicals, on topics such as &quot;how to deal with alien populations.&quot;
While older histories tended to emphasize the myth of the &quot;clean &quot;Wehrmacht,&quot;&quot; upholding its honor in the face of Hitler&#x27;s fanaticism, the historian Jürgen Förster notes that &quot;In fact, the military commanders were caught up in the ideological character of the conflict, and involved in its implementation as willing participants&quot;. Before and during the invasion of the Soviet Union, German troops were indoctrinated with anti-Bolshevik, anti-Semitic and anti-Slavic ideology via movies, radio, lectures, books, and leaflets. Likening the Soviets to the forces of Genghis Khan, Hitler told the Croatian military leader Slavko Kvaternik that the &quot;Mongolian race&quot; threatened Europe. Following the invasion, many &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; officers told their soldiers to target people who were described as &quot;Jewish Bolshevik subhumans,&quot; the &quot;Mongol hordes,&quot; the &quot;Asiatic flood&quot; and the &quot;Red beast.&quot; Nazi propaganda portrayed the war against the Soviet Union as an ideological war between German National Socialism and Jewish Bolshevism and a racial war between the disciplined Germans and the Jewish, Romani and Slavic . An &#x27;order from the Führer&#x27; stated that the paramilitary SS , which closely followed the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;″s advance, were to execute all Soviet functionaries who were &quot;less valuable Asiatics, Gypsies and Jews.&quot; Six months into the invasion of the Soviet Union, the had murdered more than 500,000 Soviet Jews, a figure greater than the number of Red Army soldiers killed in battle by then. German army commanders cast Jews as the major cause behind the &quot;partisan struggle.&quot; The main guideline for German troops was &quot;Where there&#x27;s a partisan, there&#x27;s a Jew, and where there&#x27;s a Jew, there&#x27;s a partisan&quot; or &quot;The partisan is where the Jew is.&quot; Many German troops viewed the war in Nazi terms and regarded their Soviet enemies as sub-human.

After the war began, the Nazis issued a ban on sexual relations between Germans and foreign slaves. There were regulations enacted against the (&#x27;Eastern workers&#x27;) that included the death penalty for sexual relations with a German. Heinrich Himmler, in his secret memorandum, &quot;Reflections on the Treatment of Peoples of Alien Races in the East&quot; (dated 25 May 1940), outlined the Nazi plans for the non-German populations in the East. Himmler believed the Germanisation process in Eastern Europe would be complete when &quot;in the East dwell only men with truly German, Germanic blood.&quot;

The Nazi secret plan , prepared in 1941 and confirmed in 1942, called for a &quot;new order of ethnographical relations&quot; in the territories occupied by Nazi Germany in Eastern Europe. It envisaged ethnic cleansing, executions and enslavement of the populations of conquered countries, with very small percentages undergoing Germanisation, expulsion into the depths of Russia or other fates, while the conquered territories would be Germanised. The plan had two parts, the (&#x27;small plan&#x27;), which covered actions to be taken during the war and the (&#x27;large plan&#x27;), which covered policies after the war was won, to be implemented gradually over 25 to 30 years.

A speech given by General Erich Hoepner demonstrates the dissemination of the Nazi racial plan, as he informed the 4th Panzer Group that the war against the Soviet Union was &quot;an essential part of the German people&#x27;s struggle for existence&quot; (), also referring to the imminent battle as the &quot;old struggle of Germans against Slavs&quot; and even stated, &quot;the struggle must aim at the annihilation of today&#x27;s Russia and must, therefore, be waged with unparalleled harshness.&quot; Hoepner also added that the Germans were fighting for &quot;the defence of European culture against Moscovite–Asiatic inundation, and the repulse of Jewish Bolshevism ... No adherents of the present Russian-Bolshevik system are to be spared.&quot; Walther von Brauchitsch also told his subordinates that troops should view the war as a &quot;struggle between two different races and [should] act with the necessary severity.&quot; Racial motivations were central to Nazi ideology and played a key role in planning for Operation Barbarossa since both Jews and communists were considered equivalent enemies of the Nazi state. Nazi imperialist ambitions rejected the common humanity of both groups, declaring the supreme struggle for to be a (&#x27;war of annihilation&#x27;).

===German-Soviet relations of 1939–40===

On August 23, 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact in Moscow known as the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact. A secret protocol to the pact outlined an agreement between Germany and the Soviet Union on the division of the eastern European border states between their respective &quot;spheres of influence,&quot; Soviet Union and Germany would partition Poland in the event of an invasion by Germany, and the Soviets would be allowed to overrun Finland, Estonia, Latvia and the region of Bessarabia. On 23 August 1939 the rest of the world learned of this pact but were unaware of the provisions to partition Poland. The pact stunned the world because of the parties&#x27; earlier mutual hostility and their conflicting ideologies. The conclusion of this pact was followed by the German invasion of Poland on 1 September that triggered the outbreak of World War II in Europe, then the Soviet invasion of Poland that led to the annexation of the eastern part of the country. As a result of the pact, Germany and the Soviet Union maintained reasonably strong diplomatic relations for two years and fostered an important economic relationship. The countries entered a trade pact in 1940 by which the Soviets received German military equipment and trade goods in exchange for raw materials, such as oil and wheat, to help the German war effort by circumventing the British blockade of Germany.

Despite the parties&#x27; ostensibly cordial relations, each side was highly suspicious of the other&#x27;s intentions. For instance, the Soviet invasion of Bukovina in June 1940 went beyond their sphere of influence as agreed with Germany. After Germany entered the Axis Pact with Japan and Italy, it began negotiations about a potential Soviet entry into the pact. After two days of negotiations in Berlin from 12 to 14 November 1940, Ribbentrop presented a draft treaty for a Soviet entry into the Axis. However, Hitler had no intention of allowing the Soviet Union into the Axis and in an order stated, &quot;Political conversations designed to clarify the attitude of Russia in the immediate future have been started. Regardless of the outcome of these conversations, all preparations for the East previously ordered orally are to be continued. [Written] directives on that will follow as soon as the basic elements of the army&#x27;s plan for the operation have been submitted to me and approved by me.&quot; There would be no &quot;long-term agreement with Russia&quot; given that the Nazis intended to go to war with them; but the Soviets approached the negotiations differently and were willing to make huge economic concessions to secure a relationship under general terms acceptable to the Germans just a year before. On 25 November 1940, the Soviet Union offered a written counter-proposal to join the Axis if Germany would agree to refrain from interference in the Soviet Union&#x27;s sphere of influence, but Germany did not respond. As both sides began colliding with each other in Eastern Europe, conflict appeared more likely, although they did sign a border and commercial agreement addressing several open issues in January 1941. According to historian Robert Service, Joseph Stalin was convinced that the overall military strength of the Soviet Union was such that he had nothing to fear and anticipated an easy victory should Germany attack; moreover, Stalin believed that since the Germans were still fighting the British in the west, Hitler would be unlikely to open up a two-front war and subsequently delayed the reconstruction of defensive fortifications in the border regions. When German soldiers swam across the Bug River to warn the Red Army of an impending attack, they were shot as enemy agents. Some historians believe that Stalin, despite providing an amicable front to Hitler, did not wish to remain allies with Germany. Rather, Stalin might have had intentions to break off from Germany and proceed with his own campaign against Germany to be followed by one against the rest of Europe. Other historians contend that Stalin did not plan for such an attack in June 1941, given the parlous state of the Red Army at the time of the invasion.

===Axis invasion plans===

Stalin&#x27;s reputation as a brutal dictator contributed both to the Nazis&#x27; justification of their assault and to their expectations of success, as Stalin&#x27;s Great Purge of the 1930s had executed many competent and experienced military officers, leaving Red Army leadership weaker than their German adversary. The Nazis often emphasized the Soviet regime&#x27;s brutality when targeting the Slavs with propaganda. They also claimed that the Red Army was preparing to attack the Germans, and their own invasion was thus presented as a pre-emptive strike.

Hitler also utilised the rising tension between the Soviet Union and Germany over territories in the Balkans as one of the pretexts for the invasion. While no concrete plans had yet been made, Hitler told one of his generals in June 1940 that the victories in Western Europe finally freed his hands for a &quot;final showdown&quot; with Bolshevism. With the successful end to the campaign in France, General Erich Marcks was assigned the task of drawing up the initial invasion plans of the Soviet Union. The first battle plans were entitled &quot;Operation Draft East&quot; (colloquially known as the &quot;Marcks Plan&quot;). His report advocated the A-A line as the operational objective of any invasion of the Soviet Union. This assault would extend from the northern city of Arkhangelsk on the Arctic Sea through Gorky and Rostov to the port city of Astrakhan at the mouth of the Volga on the Caspian Sea. The report concluded that—once established—this military border would reduce the threat to Germany from attacks by enemy bombers.

Although Hitler was warned by many high-ranking military officers, such as Friedrich Paulus, that occupying Western Russia would create &quot;more of a drain than a relief for Germany&#x27;s economic situation,&quot; he anticipated compensatory benefits such as the demobilisation of entire divisions to relieve the acute labour shortage in German industry, the exploitation of Ukraine as a reliable and immense source of agricultural products, the use of forced labour to stimulate Germany&#x27;s overall economy and the expansion of territory to improve Germany&#x27;s efforts to isolate the United Kingdom. Hitler was further convinced that Britain would sue for peace once the Germans triumphed in the Soviet Union, and if they did not, he would use the resources gained in the East to defeat the British Empire.
Hitler received the final military plans for the invasion on 5 December 1940, which the German High Command had been working on since July 1940, under the codename &quot;Operation Otto.&quot; Upon reviewing the plans, Hitler formally committed Germany to the invasion when he issued on 18 December 1940, where he outlined the precise manner in which the operation was to be carried out. Hitler also renamed the operation to &quot;Barbarossa&quot; in honor of medieval Emperor Friedrich I of the Holy Roman Empire, a leader of the Third Crusade in the 12th century. The Barbarossa Decree, issued by Hitler on 30 March 1941, supplemented the Directive by decreeing that the war against the Soviet Union would be one of annihilation and legally sanctioned the eradication of all Communist political leaders and intellectual elites in Eastern Europe. The invasion was tentatively set for May 1941.

According to a 1978 essay by German historian Andreas Hillgruber, the invasion plans drawn up by the German military elite were substantially coloured by hubris, stemming from the rapid defeat of France at the hands of the &quot;invincible&quot; &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and by traditional German stereotypes of Russia as a primitive, backward &quot;Asiatic&quot; country. Red Army soldiers were considered brave and tough, but the officer corps was held in contempt. The leadership of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; paid little attention to politics, culture, and the considerable industrial capacity of the Soviet Union, in favour of a very narrow military view. Hillgruber argued that because these assumptions were shared by the entire military elite, Hitler was able to push through with a &quot;war of annihilation&quot; that would be waged in the most inhumane fashion possible with the complicity of &quot;several military leaders,&quot; even though it was quite clear that this would be in violation of all accepted norms of warfare.

Even so, in autumn 1940, some high-ranking German military officials drafted a memorandum to Hitler on the dangers of an invasion of the Soviet Union. They argued that the eastern territories (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic, and the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic) would only end up as a further economic burden for Germany. It was further argued that the Soviets, in their current bureaucratic form, were harmless and that the occupation would not benefit Germany politically either. Hitler, solely focused on his ultimate ideological goal of eliminating the Soviet Union and Communism, disagreed with economists about the risks and told his right-hand man Hermann Göring, the chief of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, that he would no longer listen to misgivings about the economic dangers of a war with the USSR. It is speculated that this was passed on to General Georg Thomas, who had produced reports that predicted a net economic drain for Germany in the event of an invasion of the Soviet Union unless its economy was captured intact and the Caucasus oilfields seized in the first blow; Thomas revised his future report to fit Hitler&#x27;s wishes. The Red Army&#x27;s ineptitude in the Winter War against Finland in 1939–40 also convinced Hitler of a quick victory within a few months. Neither Hitler nor the General Staff anticipated a long campaign lasting into the winter and therefore, adequate preparations such as the distribution of warm clothing and winterisation of important military equipment like tanks and artillery, were not made.

Further to Hitler&#x27;s Directive, Göring&#x27;s Green Folder, issued in March 1941, laid out the agenda for the next step after the anticipated quick conquest of the Soviet Union. The Hunger Plan outlined how entire urban populations of conquered territories were to be starved to death, thus creating an agricultural surplus to feed Germany and urban space for the German upper class. Nazi policy aimed to destroy the Soviet Union as a political entity in accordance with the geopolitical ideals for the benefit of future generations of the &quot;Nordic master race&quot;. In 1941, Nazi ideologue Alfred Rosenberg—later appointed Reich Minister of the Occupied Eastern Territories—suggested that conquered Soviet territory should be administered in the following (&#x27;Reich Commissionerships&#x27;):

German military planners also researched Napoleon&#x27;s failed invasion of Russia. In their calculations, they concluded that there was little danger of a large-scale retreat of the Red Army into the Russian interior, as it could not afford to give up the Baltic countries, Ukraine, or the Moscow and Leningrad regions, all of which were vital to the Red Army for supply reasons and would thus, have to be defended. Hitler and his generals disagreed on where Germany should focus its energy. Hitler, in many discussions with his generals, repeated his order of &quot;Leningrad first, the Donbas second, Moscow third;&quot; but he consistently emphasized the destruction of the Red Army over the achievement of specific terrain objectives. Hitler believed Moscow to be of &quot;no great importance&quot; in the defeat of the Soviet Union and instead believed victory would come with the destruction of the Red Army west of the capital, especially west of the Western Dvina and Dnieper rivers, and this pervaded the plan for Barbarossa. This belief later led to disputes between Hitler and several German senior officers, including Heinz Guderian, Gerhard Engel, Fedor von Bock and Franz Halder, who believed the decisive victory could only be delivered at Moscow. They were unable to sway Hitler, who had grown overconfident in his own military judgment as a result of the rapid successes in Western Europe.

==German preparations==
The Germans had begun massing troops near the Soviet border even before the campaign in the Balkans had finished. By the third week of February 1941, 680,000 German soldiers were gathered in assembly areas on the Romanian-Soviet border. In preparation for the attack, Hitler had secretly moved upwards of 3 million German troops and approximately 690,000 Axis soldiers to the Soviet border regions. Additional &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; operations included numerous aerial surveillance missions over Soviet territory many months before the attack.

Although the Soviet High Command was alarmed by this, Stalin&#x27;s belief that Nazi Germany was unlikely to attack only two years after signing the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact resulted in slow Soviet preparation. This fact aside, the Soviets did not entirely overlook the threat of their German neighbor. Well before the German invasion, Marshal Semyon Timoshenko referred to the Germans as the Soviet Union&#x27;s &quot;most important and strongest enemy,&quot; and as early as July 1940, the Red Army Chief of Staff, Boris Shaposhnikov, produced a preliminary three-pronged plan of attack for what a German invasion might look like, remarkably similar to the actual attack. Since April 1941, the Germans had begun setting up Operation Haifisch and Operation Harpune to substantiate their claims that Britain was the real target. These simulated preparations in Norway and the English Channel coast included activities such as ship concentrations, reconnaissance flights and training exercises.

The reasons for the postponement of Barbarossa from the initially planned date of 15 May to the actual invasion date of 22 June 1941 (a 38-day delay) are debated. The reason most commonly cited is the unforeseen contingency of invading Yugoslavia and Greece on 6 April 1941 until June 1941. Historian Thomas B. Buell indicates that Finland and Romania, which weren&#x27;t involved in initial German planning, needed additional time to prepare to participate in the invasion. Buell adds that an unusually wet winter kept rivers at full flood until late spring. The floods may have discouraged an earlier attack, even if they occurred before the end of the Balkans Campaign.

The importance of the delay is still debated. William Shirer argued that Hitler&#x27;s Balkan Campaign had delayed the commencement of Barbarossa by several weeks and thereby jeopardised it. Many later historians argue that the 22 June start date was sufficient for the German offensive to reach Moscow by September. Antony Beevor wrote in 2012 about the delay caused by German attacks in the Balkans that &quot;most [historians] accept that it made little difference&quot; to the eventual outcome of Barbarossa.

The Germans deployed one independent regiment, one separate motorised training brigade and 153 divisions for Barbarossa, which included 104 infantry, 19 panzer and 15 motorised infantry divisions in three army groups, nine security divisions to operate in conquered territories, four divisions in Finland and two divisions as reserve under the direct control of OKH. These were equipped with 6,867 armoured vehicles, of which 3,350–3,795 were tanks, 2,770–4,389 aircraft (that amounted to 65 percent of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;), 7,200–23,435 artillery pieces, 17,081 mortars, about 600,000 motor vehicles and 625,000–700,000 horses. Finland slated 14 divisions for the invasion, and Romania offered 13 divisions and eight brigades over the course of Barbarossa. The entire Axis forces, 3.8 million personnel, deployed across a front extending from the Arctic Ocean southward to the Black Sea, were all controlled by the OKH and organised into Army Norway, Army Group North, Army Group Centre and Army Group South, alongside three &quot;Luftflotten&quot; (air fleets, the air force equivalent of army groups) that supported the army groups: Luftflotte 1 for North, Luftflotte 2 for Centre and Luftflotte 4 for South.

Army Norway was to operate in far northern Scandinavia and bordering Soviet territories. Army Group North was to march through Latvia and Estonia into northern Russia, then either take or destroy the city of Leningrad, and link up with Finnish forces. Army Group Centre, the army group equipped with the most armour and air power, was to strike from Poland into Belorussia and the west-central regions of Russia proper, and advance to Smolensk and then Moscow. Army Group South was to strike the heavily populated and agricultural heartland of Ukraine, taking Kiev before continuing eastward over the steppes of southern USSR to the Volga with the aim of controlling the oil-rich Caucasus. Army Group South was deployed in two sections separated by a gap. The northern section, which contained the army group&#x27;s only panzer group, was in southern Poland right next to Army Group Centre, and the southern section was in Romania.

The German forces in the rear (mostly and units) were to operate in conquered territories to counter any partisan activity in areas they controlled, as well as to execute captured Soviet political commissars and Jews. On 17 June, Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) chief Reinhard Heydrich briefed around thirty to fifty commanders on &quot;the policy of eliminating Jews in Soviet territories, at least in general terms&quot;. While the were assigned to the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;″s units, which provided them with supplies such as gasoline and food, they were controlled by the RSHA. The official plan for Barbarossa assumed that the army groups would be able to advance freely to their primary objectives simultaneously, without spreading thin, once they had won the border battles and destroyed the Red Army&#x27;s forces in the border area.

==Soviet preparations==

In 1930, Mikhail Tukhachevsky, a prominent military theorist in tank warfare in the interwar period and later Marshal of the Soviet Union, forwarded a memo to the Kremlin that lobbied for colossal investment in the resources required for the mass production of weapons, pressing the case for &quot;40,000 aircraft and 50,000 tanks.&quot; In the early 1930s, a modern operational doctrine for the Red Army was developed and promulgated in the 1936 Field Regulations in the form of the Deep Battle Concept. Defence expenditure also grew rapidly from just 12 percent of the gross national product in 1933 to 18 percent by 1940.

During Joseph Stalin&#x27;s Great Purge in the late 1930s, which had not ended by the time of the German invasion on 22 June 1941, much of the officer corps of the Red Army was executed or imprisoned. Many of their replacements, appointed by Stalin for political reasons, lacked military competence. Of the five Marshals of the Soviet Union appointed in 1935, only Kliment Voroshilov and Semyon Budyonny survived Stalin&#x27;s purge. Tukhachevsky was killed in 1937. Fifteen of 16 army commanders, 50 of the 57 corps commanders, 154 of the 186 divisional commanders, and 401 of 456 colonels were killed, and many other officers were dismissed. In total, about 30,000 Red Army personnel were executed. Stalin further underscored his control by reasserting the role of political commissars at the divisional level and below to oversee the political loyalty of the army to the regime. The commissars held a position equal to that of the commander of the unit they were overseeing. But in spite of efforts to ensure the political subservience of the armed forces, in the wake of Red Army&#x27;s poor performance in Poland and in the Winter War, about 80 percent of the officers dismissed during the Great Purge were reinstated by 1941. Also, between January 1939 and May 1941, 161 new divisions were activated. Therefore, although about 75 percent of all the officers had been in their position for less than one year at the start of the German invasion of 1941, many of the short tenures can be attributed not only to the purge but also to the rapid increase in the creation of military units.

Beginning in July 1940, the Red Army General Staff developed war plans that identified the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; as the most dangerous threat to the Soviet Union, and that in the case of a war with Germany, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;″s main attack would come through the region north of the Pripyat Marshes into Belorussia, which later proved to be correct. Stalin disagreed, and in October, he authorised the development of new plans that assumed a German attack would focus on the region south of Pripyat Marshes towards the economically vital regions in Ukraine. This became the basis for all subsequent Soviet war plans and the deployment of their armed forces in preparation for the German invasion.

In the Soviet Union, speaking to his generals in December 1940, Stalin mentioned Hitler&#x27;s references to an attack on the Soviet Union in &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; and Hitler&#x27;s belief that the Red Army would need four years to ready itself. Stalin declared &quot;we must be ready much earlier&quot; and &quot;we will try to delay the war for another two years&quot;. As early as August 1940, British intelligence had received hints of German plans to attack the Soviets a week after Hitler informally approved the plans for &quot;Barbarossa&quot; and warned the Soviet Union accordingly. Some of this intelligence was based on Ultra information obtained from broken Enigma traffic. But Stalin&#x27;s distrust of the British led him to ignore their warnings in the belief that they were a trick designed to bring the Soviet Union into the war on their side. Soviet intelligence also received word of an invasion around 20 June from Mao Zedong whose spy, Yan Baohang, had overheard talk of the plans at a dinner with a German military attaché and sent word to Zhou Enlai. The Chinese maintain the tipoff helped Stalin make preparations, though little exists to confirm the Soviets made any real changes upon receiving the intelligence. In early 1941, Stalin&#x27;s own intelligence services and American intelligence gave regular and repeated warnings of an impending German attack. Soviet spy Richard Sorge also gave Stalin the exact German launch date, but Sorge and other informers had previously given different invasion dates that passed peacefully before the actual invasion. Stalin acknowledged the possibility of an attack in general and therefore made significant preparations, but decided not to run the risk of provoking Hitler.

In early 1941, Stalin authorised the State Defence Plan 1941 (DP-41), which along with the Mobilisation Plan 1941 (MP-41), called for the deployment of 186 divisions, as the first strategic echelon, in the four military districts of the western Soviet Union that faced the Axis territories; and the deployment of another 51 divisions along the Dvina and Dnieper Rivers as the second strategic echelon under Stavka control, which in the case of a German invasion was tasked to spearhead a Soviet counteroffensive along with the remaining forces of the first echelon. But on 22 June 1941 the first echelon contained 171 divisions, numbering 2.6–2.9 million; and the second strategic echelon contained 57 divisions that were still mobilising, most of which were still understrength. The second echelon was undetected by German intelligence until days after the invasion commenced, in most cases only when German ground forces encountered them.

At the start of the invasion, the manpower of the Soviet military force that had been mobilised was 5.3–5.5 million, and it was still increasing as the Soviet reserve force of 14 million, with at least basic military training, continued to mobilise. The Red Army was dispersed and still preparing when the invasion commenced. Their units were often separated and lacked adequate transportation. While transportation remained insufficient for Red Army forces, when Operation Barbarossa kicked off, they possessed some 33,000 pieces of artillery, a number far greater than the Germans had at their disposal.

The Soviet Union had around 23,000 tanks available of which 14,700 were combat-ready. Around 11,000 tanks were in the western military districts that faced the German invasion force. Hitler later declared to some of his generals, &quot;If I had known about the Russian tank strength in 1941 I would not have attacked&quot;. However, maintenance and readiness standards were very poor; ammunition and radios were in short supply, and many armoured units lacked the trucks for supplies. The most advanced Soviet tank models—the KV-1 and T-34—which were superior to all current German tanks, as well as all designs still in development as of the summer 1941, were not available in large numbers at the time the invasion commenced. Furthermore, in the autumn of 1939, the Soviets disbanded their mechanised corps and partly dispersed their tanks to infantry divisions; but following their observation of the German campaign in France, in late 1940 they began to reorganise most of their armoured assets back into mechanised corps with a target strength of 1,031 tanks each. But these large armoured formations were unwieldy, and moreover they were spread out in scattered garrisons, with their subordinate divisions up to apart. The reorganisation was still in progress and incomplete when Barbarossa commenced. Soviet tank units were rarely well equipped, and they lacked training and logistical support. Units were sent into combat with no arrangements in place for refuelling, ammunition resupply, or personnel replacement. Often, after a single engagement, units were destroyed or rendered ineffective. The Soviet numerical advantage in heavy equipment was thoroughly offset by the superior training and organisation of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;.

The Soviet Air Force (VVS) held the numerical advantage with a total of approximately 19,533 aircraft, which made it the largest air force in the world in the summer of 1941. About 7,133–9,100 of these were deployed in the five western military districts, and an additional 1,445 were under naval control.

Historians have debated whether Stalin was planning an invasion of German territory in the summer of 1941. The debate began in the late 1980s when Viktor Suvorov published a journal article and later the book &quot;Icebreaker&quot; in which he claimed that Stalin had seen the outbreak of war in Western Europe as an opportunity to spread communist revolutions throughout the continent, and that the Soviet military was being deployed for an imminent attack at the time of the German invasion. This view had also been advanced by former German generals following the war. Suvorov&#x27;s thesis was fully or partially accepted by a limited number of historians, including Valeri Danilov, Joachim Hoffmann, Mikhail Meltyukhov, and Vladimir Nevezhin, and attracted public attention in Germany, Israel, and Russia. It has been strongly rejected by most historians, and &quot;Icebreaker&quot; is generally considered to be an &quot;anti-Soviet tract&quot; in Western countries. David Glantz and Gabriel Gorodetsky wrote books to rebut Suvorov&#x27;s arguments. The majority of historians believe that Stalin was seeking to avoid war in 1941, as he believed that his military was not ready to fight the German forces. The debate on whether Stalin intended to launch an offensive against Germany in 1941 remains inconclusive but has produced an abundance of scholarly literature and helped to expand the understanding of larger themes in Soviet and world history during the interwar period.

==Order of battle==


==Invasion==
At around 01:00 on 22 June 1941, the Soviet military districts in the border area were alerted by NKO Directive No. 1, issued late on the night of 21 June. It called on them to &quot;bring all forces to combat readiness&quot;, but to &quot;avoid provocative actions of any kind&quot;. It took up to two hours for several of the units subordinate to the Fronts to receive the order of the directive, and the majority did not receive it before the invasion commenced. A German communist deserter, Alfred Liskow, had crossed the lines at 21:00 on 21 June and informed the Soviets that an attack was coming at 04:00. Stalin was informed, but apparently regarded it as disinformation. Liskow was still being interrogated when the attack began.

On 21 June, at 13:00 Army Group North received the codeword &quot;Düsseldorf&quot;, indicating Barbarossa would commence the next morning, and passed down its own codeword, &quot;Dortmund&quot;. At around 03:15 on 22 June 1941, the Axis Powers commenced the invasion of the Soviet Union with the bombing of major cities in Soviet-occupied Poland and an artillery barrage on Red Army defences on the entire front. Air-raids were conducted as far as Kronstadt near Leningrad and Sevastopol in the Crimea. At the same time the German declaration of war was presented by Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop. Meanwhile, ground troops crossed the border, accompanied in some locales by Lithuanian and Ukrainian partisans. Roughly three million soldiers of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; went into action and faced slightly fewer Soviet troops at the border. Accompanying the German forces during the initial invasion were Finnish and Romanian units as well.

At around noon, the news of the invasion was broadcast to the population by Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov: &quot;... Without a declaration of war, German forces fell on our country, attacked our frontiers in many places ... The Red Army and the whole nation will wage a victorious Patriotic War for our beloved country, for honour, for liberty ... Our cause is just. The enemy will be beaten. Victory will be ours!&quot; By calling upon the population&#x27;s devotion to their nation rather than the Party, Molotov struck a patriotic chord that helped a stunned people absorb the shattering news. Within the first few days of the invasion, the Soviet High Command and Red Army were extensively reorganised so as to place them on the necessary war footing. Stalin did not address the nation about the German invasion until 3 July, when he also called for a &quot;Patriotic War... of the entire Soviet people&quot;.

In Germany, on the morning of 22 June, Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels announced the invasion to the waking nation in a radio broadcast with Hitler&#x27;s words: &quot;At this moment a march is taking place that, for its extent, compares with the greatest the world has ever seen. I have decided today to place the fate and future of the Reich and our people in the hands of our soldiers. May God aid us, especially in this fight!&quot; Later the same morning, Hitler proclaimed to his colleagues, &quot;Before three months have passed, we shall witness a collapse of Russia, the like of which has never been seen in history&quot;. Hitler also addressed the German people via the radio, presenting himself as a man of peace, who reluctantly had to attack the Soviet Union. Following the invasion, Goebbels instructed that Nazi propaganda use the slogan &quot;European crusade against Bolshevism&quot; to describe the war; subsequently thousands of volunteers and conscripts joined the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;.

==Initial attacks==
The initial momentum of the German ground and air attack completely destroyed the Soviet organisational command and control within the first few hours, paralyzing every level of command from the infantry platoon to the Soviet High Command in Moscow. Moscow failed to grasp the magnitude of the catastrophe that confronted the Soviet forces in the border area, and Stalin&#x27;s first reaction was disbelief. At around 07:15, Stalin issued NKO Directive No. 2, which announced the invasion to the Soviet Armed Forces, and called on them to attack Axis forces wherever they had violated the borders and launch air strikes into the border regions of German territory. At around 09:15, Stalin issued NKO Directive No. 3, signed by Timoshenko, which now called for a general counteroffensive on the entire front &quot;without any regards for borders&quot; that both men hoped would sweep the enemy from Soviet territory. Stalin&#x27;s order, which Timoshenko authorised, was not based on a realistic appraisal of the military situation at hand, but commanders passed it along for fear of retribution if they failed to obey; several days passed before the Soviet leadership became aware of the enormity of the opening defeat.

===Air war===

&quot;Luftwaffe&quot; reconnaissance units plotted Soviet troop concentrations, supply dumps and airfields, and marked them down for destruction. Additional &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; attacks were carried out against Soviet command and control centres to disrupt the mobilisation and organisation of Soviet forces. In contrast, Soviet artillery observers based at the border area had been under the strictest instructions not to open fire on German aircraft prior to the invasion. One plausible reason given for the Soviet hesitation to return fire was Stalin&#x27;s initial belief that the assault was launched without Hitler&#x27;s authorisation. Significant amounts of Soviet territory were lost along with Red Army forces as a result; it took several days before Stalin comprehended the magnitude of the calamity. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; reportedly destroyed 1,489 aircraft on the first day of the invasion and over 3,100 during the first three days. Hermann Göring, Minister of Aviation and Commander-in-Chief of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, distrusted the reports and ordered the figure checked. &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; staffs surveyed the wreckage on Soviet airfields, and their original figure proved conservative, as over 2,000 Soviet aircraft were estimated to have been destroyed on the first day of the invasion. In reality, Soviet losses were likely higher; a Soviet archival document recorded the loss of 3,922 Soviet aircraft in the first three days against an estimated loss of 78 German aircraft. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; reported the loss of only 35 aircraft on the first day of combat. A document from the German Federal Archives puts the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;″s loss at 63 aircraft for the first day.

By the end of the first week, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; had achieved air supremacy over the battlefields of all the army groups, but was unable to extend this air dominance over the vast expanse of the western Soviet Union. According to the war diaries of the German High Command, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; by 5 July had lost 491 aircraft with 316 more damaged, leaving it with only about 70 percent of the strength it had at the start of the invasion.

===Baltic countries===
On 22 June, Army Group North attacked the Soviet Northwestern Front and broke through its 8th and 11th Armies. The Soviets immediately launched a powerful counterattack against the German 4th Panzer Group with the Soviet 3rd and 12th Mechanised Corps, but the Soviet attack was defeated. On 25 June, the 8th and 11th Armies were ordered to withdraw to the Western Dvina River, where it was planned to meet up with the 21st Mechanised Corps and the 22nd and 27th Armies. However, on 26 June, Erich von Manstein&#x27;s LVI Panzer Corps reached the river first and secured a bridgehead across it. The Northwestern Front was forced to abandon the river defences, and on 29 June Stavka ordered the Front to withdraw to the Stalin Line on the approaches to Leningrad. On 2 July, Army Group North began its attack on the Stalin Line with its 4th Panzer Group, and on 8 July captured Pskov, devastating the defences of the Stalin Line and reaching Leningrad oblast. The 4th Panzer Group had advanced about since the start of the invasion and was now only about from its primary objective Leningrad. On 9 July it began its attack towards the Soviet defences along the Luga River in Leningrad oblast.

===Ukraine and Moldavia===

The northern section of Army Group South faced the Southwestern Front, which had the largest concentration of Soviet forces, and the southern section faced the Southern Front. In addition, the Pripyat Marshes and the Carpathian Mountains posed a serious challenge to the army group&#x27;s northern and southern sections respectively. On 22 June, only the northern section of Army Group South attacked, but the terrain impeded their assault, giving the Soviet defenders ample time to react. The German 1st Panzer Group and 6th Army attacked and broke through the Soviet 5th Army. Starting on the night of 23 June, the Soviet 22nd and 15th Mechanised Corps attacked the flanks of the 1st Panzer Group from north and south respectively. Although intended to be concerted, Soviet tank units were sent in piecemeal due to poor coordination. The 22nd Mechanised Corps ran into the 1st Panzer Army&#x27;s III Motorised Corps and was decimated, and its commander killed. The 1st Panzer Group bypassed much of the 15th Mechanised Corps, which engaged the German 6th Army&#x27;s 297th Infantry Division, where it was defeated by antitank fire and &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; attacks. On 26 June, the Soviets launched another counterattack on the 1st Panzer Group from north and south simultaneously with the 9th, 19th and 8th Mechanised Corps, which altogether fielded 1649 tanks, and supported by the remnants of the 15th Mechanised Corps. The battle lasted for four days, ending in the defeat of the Soviet tank units. On 30 June Stavka ordered the remaining forces of the Southwestern Front to withdraw to the Stalin Line, where it would defend the approaches to Kiev.

On 2 July, the southern section of Army Group South—the Romanian 3rd and 4th Armies, alongside the German 11th Army—invaded Soviet Moldavia, which was defended by the Southern Front. Counterattacks by the Front&#x27;s 2nd Mechanised Corps and 9th Army were defeated, but on 9 July the Axis advance stalled along the defences of the Soviet 18th Army between the Prut and Dniester Rivers.

===Belorussia===

In the opening hours of the invasion, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; destroyed the Western Front&#x27;s air force on the ground, and with the aid of Abwehr and their supporting anti-communist fifth columns operating in the Soviet rear paralyzed the Front&#x27;s communication lines, which particularly cut off the Soviet 4th Army headquarters from headquarters above and below it. On the same day, the 2nd Panzer Group crossed the Bug River, broke through the 4th Army, bypassed Brest Fortress, and pressed on towards Minsk, while the 3rd Panzer Group bypassed most of the 3rd Army and pressed on towards Vilnius. Simultaneously, the German 4th and 9th Armies engaged the Western Front forces in the environs of Białystok. On the order of the Western Front commander, Dmitry Pavlov, the 6th and 11th Mechanised Corps and the 6th Cavalry Corps launched a strong counterstrike towards Grodno on 24–25 June in hopes of destroying the 3rd Panzer Group. However, the 3rd Panzer Group had already moved on, with its forward units reaching Vilnius on the evening of 23 June, and the Western Front&#x27;s armoured counterattack instead ran into infantry and antitank fire from the V Army Corps of the German 9th Army, supported by &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; air attacks. By the night of 25 June, the Soviet counterattack was defeated, and the commander of the 6th Cavalry Corps was captured. The same night, Pavlov ordered all the remnants of the Western Front to withdraw to Slonim towards Minsk. Subsequent counterattacks to buy time for the withdrawal were launched against the German forces, but all of them failed. On 27 June, the 2nd and 3rd Panzer Groups met near Minsk and captured the city the next day, completing the encirclement of almost all of the Western Front in two pockets: one around Białystok and another west of Minsk. The Germans destroyed the Soviet 3rd and 10th Armies while inflicting serious losses on the 4th, 11th and 13th Armies, and reported to have captured 324,000 Soviet troops, 3,300 tanks, 1,800 artillery pieces.

A Soviet directive was issued on 29 June to combat the mass panic rampant among the civilians and the armed forces personnel. The order stipulated swift, severe measures against anyone inciting panic or displaying cowardice. The NKVD worked with commissars and military commanders to scour possible withdrawal routes of soldiers retreating without military authorisation. Field expedient general courts were established to deal with civilians spreading rumours and military deserters. On 30 June, Stalin relieved Pavlov of his command, and on 22 July tried and executed him along with many members of his staff on charges of &quot;cowardice&quot; and &quot;criminal incompetence&quot;.

On 29 June, Hitler, through Brauchitsch, instructed Bock to halt the advance of the panzers of Army Group Centre until the infantry formations liquidating the pockets caught up. But Guderian, with the tacit support of Bock and Halder, ignored the instruction and attacked on eastward towards Bobruisk, albeit reporting the advance as a reconnaissance-in-force. He also personally conducted an aerial inspection of the Minsk-Białystok pocket on 30 June and concluded that his panzer group was not needed to contain it, since Hermann Hoth&#x27;s 3rd Panzer Group was already involved in the Minsk pocket. On the same day, some of the infantry corps of the 9th and 4th Armies, having sufficiently liquidated the Białystok pocket, resumed their march eastward to catch up with the panzer groups. On 1 July, Bock ordered the panzer groups to resume their full offensive eastward on the morning of 3 July. But Brauchitsch, upholding Hitler&#x27;s instruction, and Halder, unwillingly going along with it, opposed Bock&#x27;s order. However, Bock insisted on the order by stating that it would be irresponsible to reverse orders already issued. The panzer groups resumed their offensive on 2 July before the infantry formations had sufficiently caught up.

===Northeast Finland===
During German-Finnish negotiations, Finland had demanded to remain neutral unless the Soviet Union attacked them first. Germany therefore sought to provoke the Soviet Union into an attack on Finland. After Germany launched Barbarossa on 22 June, German aircraft used Finnish air bases to attack Soviet positions. The same day the Germans launched Operation Rentier and occupied the Petsamo Province at the Finnish-Soviet border. Simultaneously Finland proceeded to remilitarise the neutral Åland Islands. Despite these actions the Finnish government insisted via diplomatic channels that they remained a neutral party, but the Soviet leadership already viewed Finland as an ally of Germany. Subsequently, the Soviets proceeded to launch a massive bombing attack on 25 June against all major Finnish cities and industrial centres, including Helsinki, Turku and Lahti. During a night session on the same day the Finnish parliament decided to go to war against the Soviet Union.

Finland was divided into two operational zones. Northern Finland was the staging area for Army Norway. Its goal was to execute a two-pronged pincer movement on the strategic port of Murmansk, named Operation Silver Fox. Southern Finland was still under the responsibility of the Finnish Army. The goal of the Finnish forces was, at first, to recapture Finnish Karelia at Lake Ladoga as well as the Karelian Isthmus, which included Finland&#x27;s second largest city Viipuri.

==Further German advances==

On 2 July and through the next six days, a rainstorm typical of Belarusian summers slowed the progress of the panzers of Army Group Centre, and Soviet defences stiffened. The delays gave the Soviets time to organise a massive counterattack against Army Group Centre. The army group&#x27;s ultimate objective was Smolensk, which commanded the road to Moscow. Facing the Germans was an old Soviet defensive line held by six armies. On 6 July, the Soviets launched a massive counter-attack using the V and VII Mechanised Corps of the 20th Army, which collided with the German 39th and 47th Panzer Corps in a battle where the Red Army lost 832 tanks of the 2,000 employed during five days of ferocious fighting. The Germans defeated this counterattack thanks largely to the coincidental presence of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;″s only squadron of tank-busting aircraft. The 2nd Panzer Group crossed the Dnieper River and closed in on Smolensk from the south while the 3rd Panzer Group, after defeating the Soviet counterattack, closed on Smolensk from the north. Trapped between their pincers were three Soviet armies. The 29th Motorised Division captured Smolensk on 16 July yet a gap remained between Army Group Centre. On 18 July, the panzer groups came to within of closing the gap but the trap did not finally close until 5 August, when upwards of 300,000 Red Army soldiers had been captured and 3,205 Soviet tanks were destroyed. Large numbers of Red Army soldiers escaped to stand between the Germans and Moscow as resistance continued.
Four weeks into the campaign, the Germans realised they had grossly underestimated Soviet strength. The German troops had used their initial supplies, and General Bock quickly came to the conclusion that not only had the Red Army offered stiff opposition, but German difficulties were also due to the logistical problems with reinforcements and provisions. Operations were now slowed down to allow for resupply; the delay was to be used to adapt strategy to the new situation. In addition to strained logistics, poor roads made it difficult for wheeled vehicles and foot infantry to keep up with the faster armoured spearheads, and shortages in boots and winter uniforms were becoming apparent. Furthermore, all three army groups had suffered 179,500 casualties by 2 August, and had only received 47,000 replacements.

Hitler by now had lost faith in battles of encirclement as large numbers of Soviet soldiers had escaped the pincers. He now believed he could defeat the Soviet state by economic means, depriving them of the industrial capacity to continue the war. That meant seizing the industrial centre of Kharkov, the Donbas and the oil fields of the Caucasus in the south and the speedy capture of Leningrad, a major centre of military production, in the north.

Halder, Bock, and almost all the German generals involved in Operation Barbarossa argued vehemently in favour of continuing the all-out drive toward Moscow. Besides the psychological importance of capturing the Soviet capital, the generals pointed out that Moscow was a major centre of arms production, the centre of the Soviet communications system and an important transport hub. Intelligence reports indicated that the bulk of the remaining Red Army was deployed near Moscow under Timoshenko for the defence of the capital. Guderian was sent to Hitler by Bock and Halder to argue their case for continuing the assault against Moscow, but Hitler issued an order through Guderian (bypassing Bock and Halder) to send Army Group Centre&#x27;s tanks to the north and south, temporarily halting the drive to Moscow. Convinced by Hitler&#x27;s argument, Guderian returned to his commanding officers as a convert to the Führer&#x27;s plan, which earned him their disdain.

===Northern Finland===
On 29 June, Germany launched its effort to capture Murmansk in a pincer attack. The northern pincer, conducted by Mountain Corps Norway, approached Murmansk directly by crossing the border at Petsamo. However, in mid-July after securing the neck of the Rybachy Peninsula and advancing to the Litsa River the German advance was stopped by heavy resistance from the Soviet 14th Army. Renewed attacks led to nothing, and this front became a stalemate for the remainder of Barbarossa.

The second pincer attack began on 1 July with the German XXXVI Corps and Finnish III Corps slated to recapture the Salla region for Finland and then proceed eastwards to cut the Murmansk railway near Kandalaksha. The German units had great difficulty dealing with the Arctic conditions. After heavy fighting, Salla was taken on 8 July. To keep the momentum the German-Finnish forces advanced eastwards until they were stopped at the town of Kayraly by Soviet resistance. Further south the Finnish III Corps made an independent effort to reach the Murmansk railway through the Arctic terrain. Facing only one division of the Soviet 7th Army it was able to make rapid headway. On 7 August it captured Kestenga while reaching the outskirts of Ukhta. Large Red Army reinforcements then prevented further gains on both fronts, and the German-Finnish force had to go onto the defensive.

===Karelia===
The Finnish plan in the south in Karelia was to advance as swiftly as possible to Lake Ladoga, cutting the Soviet forces in half. Then the Finnish territories east of Lake Ladoga were to be recaptured before the advance along the Karelian Isthmus, including the recapture of Viipuri, commenced. The Finnish attack was launched on 10 July. The Army of Karelia held a numerical advantage versus the Soviet defenders of the 7th Army and 23rd Army, so it could advance swiftly. The important road junction at Loimola was captured on 14 July. By 16 July, the first Finnish units reached Lake Ladoga at Koirinoja, achieving the goal of splitting the Soviet forces. During the rest of July, the Army of Karelia advanced further southeast into Karelia, coming to a halt at the former Finnish-Soviet border at Mansila.

With the Soviet forces cut in half, the attack on the Karelian Isthmus could commence. The Finnish army attempted to encircle large Soviet formations at Sortavala and Hiitola by advancing to the western shores of Lake Ladoga. By mid-August the encirclement had succeeded and both towns were taken, but many Soviet formations were able to evacuate by sea. Further west, the attack on Viipuri was launched. With Soviet resistance breaking down, the Finns were able to encircle Viipuri by advancing to the Vuoksi River. The city itself was taken on 29 August, along with a broad advance on the rest of the Karelian Isthmus. By the beginning of September, Finland had restored its pre-Winter War borders.

===Offensive towards central Russia===

By mid-July, the German forces had advanced within a few kilometers of Kiev below the Pripyat Marshes. The 1st Panzer Group then went south, while the 17th Army struck east and trapped three Soviet armies near Uman. As the Germans eliminated the pocket, the tanks turned north and crossed the Dnieper. Meanwhile, the 2nd Panzer Group, diverted from Army Group Centre, had crossed the river Desna with 2nd Army on its right flank. The two panzer armies now trapped four Soviet armies and parts of two others.

By August, as the serviceability and the quantity of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;″s inventory steadily diminished due to combat, demand for air support only increased as the VVS recovered. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; found itself struggling to maintain local air superiority. With the onset of bad weather in October, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; was on several occasions forced to halt nearly all aerial operations. The VVS, although faced with the same weather difficulties, had a clear advantage thanks to the prewar experience with cold-weather flying, and the fact that they were operating from intact airbases and airports. By December, the VVS had matched the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; and was even pressing to achieve air superiority over the battlefields.

===Leningrad===

For its final attack on Leningrad, the 4th Panzer Group was reinforced by tanks from Army Group Centre. On 8 August, the Panzers broke through the Soviet defences. By the end of August, 4th Panzer Group had penetrated to within of Leningrad. The Finns had pushed southeast on both sides of Lake Ladoga to reach the old Finnish-Soviet frontier.

The Germans attacked Leningrad in August 1941; in the following three &quot;black months&quot; of 1941, 400,000 residents of the city worked to build the city&#x27;s fortifications as fighting continued, while 160,000 others joined the ranks of the Red Army. Nowhere was the Soviet spirit stronger in resisting the Germans than at Leningrad where reserve troops and freshly improvised units, consisting of worker battalions and even schoolboy formations, joined in digging trenches as they prepared to defend the city. On 7 September, the German 20th Motorised Division seized Shlisselburg, cutting off all land routes to Leningrad. The Germans severed the railroads to Moscow and captured the railroad to Murmansk with Finnish assistance to inaugurate the start of a siege that would last for over two years.

At this stage, Hitler ordered the final destruction of Leningrad with no prisoners taken, and on 9 September, Army Group North began the final push. Within ten days it had advanced within of the city. However, the push over the last proved very slow and casualties mounted, so Hitler ordered that Leningrad should not be stormed, but rather starved into submission. Along these lines, the OKH issued Directive No. la on 22 September 1941, which accorded Hitler&#x27;s plans. Deprived of its Panzer forces, Army Group Centre remained static and was subjected to numerous Soviet counterattacks, in particular the Yelnya Offensive, in which the Germans suffered their first major tactical defeat since their invasion began; this Red Army victory also provided an important boost to Soviet morale. These attacks prompted Hitler to concentrate his attention back to Army Group Centre and its drive on Moscow. The Germans ordered the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies to break off their Siege of Leningrad and support Army Group Centre in its attack on Moscow.

===Kiev===

Before an attack on Moscow could begin, operations in Kiev needed to be finished. Half of Army Group Centre had swung to the south in the back of the Kiev position, while Army Group South moved to the north from its Dnieper bridgehead. The encirclement of Soviet forces in Kiev was achieved on 16 September. A battle ensued in which the Soviets were hammered with tanks, artillery, and aerial bombardment. After ten days of vicious fighting, the Germans claimed 665,000 Soviet soldiers captured, although the real figure is probably around 220,000. Soviet losses were 452,720 men, 3,867 artillery pieces and mortars from 43 divisions of the 5th, 21st, 26th, and 37th Soviet Armies. Despite the exhaustion and losses facing some German units (upwards of 75 percent of their men) from the intense fighting, the massive defeat of the Soviets at Kiev and the Red Army losses during the first three months of the assault contributed to the German assumption that Operation Typhoon (the attack on Moscow) could still succeed.

===Sea of Azov===
After operations at Kiev were successfully concluded, Army Group South advanced east and south to capture the industrial Donbas region and the Crimea. The Soviet Southern Front launched an attack on 26 September with two armies on the northern shores of the Sea of Azov against elements of the German 11th Army, which was simultaneously advancing into the Crimea. On 1 October, the 1st Panzer Army under Ewald von Kleist swept south to encircle the two attacking Soviet armies. By 7 October, the Soviet 9th and 18th Armies were isolated and four days later they had been annihilated. The Soviet defeat was total; 106,332 men captured, 212 tanks destroyed or captured in the pocket alone as well as 766 artillery pieces of all types. The death or capture of two-thirds of all Southern Front troops in four days unhinged the Front&#x27;s left flank, allowing the Germans to capture Kharkov on 24 October. Kleist&#x27;s 1st Panzer Army took the Donbas region that same month.

===Central and northern Finland===
In central Finland, the German-Finnish advance on the Murmansk railway had been resumed at Kayraly. A large encirclement from the north and the south trapped the defending Soviet corps and allowed XXXVI Corps to advance further to the east. In early September it reached the old 1939 Soviet border fortifications. On 6 September the first defence line at the Voyta River was breached, but further attacks against the main line at the Verman River failed. With Army Norway switching its main effort further south, the front stalemated in this sector. Further south, the Finnish III Corps launched a new offensive towards the Murmansk railway on 30 October, bolstered by fresh reinforcements from Army Norway. Against Soviet resistance, it was able to come within of the railway, when the Finnish High Command ordered a stop to all offensive operations in the sector on 17 November. The United States of America applied diplomatic pressure on Finland not to disrupt Allied aid shipments to the Soviet Union, which caused the Finnish government to halt the advance on the Murmansk railway. With the Finnish refusal to conduct further offensive operations and German inability to do so alone, the German-Finnish effort in central and northern Finland came to an end.

===Karelia===
Germany had pressured Finland to enlarge its offensive activities in Karelia to aid the Germans in their Leningrad operation. Finnish attacks on Leningrad itself remained limited. Finland stopped its advance just short of Leningrad and had no intentions to attack the city. The situation was different in eastern Karelia. The Finnish government agreed to restart its offensive into Soviet Karelia to reach Lake Onega and the Svir River. On 4 September, this new drive was launched on a broad front. Albeit reinforced by fresh reserve troops, heavy losses elsewhere on the front meant that the Soviet defenders of the 7th Army were not able to resist the Finnish advance. Olonets was taken on 5 September. On 7 September, Finnish forward units reached the Svir River. Petrozavodsk, the capital city of the Karelo-Finnish SSR, fell on 1 October. From there the Army of Karelia moved north along the shores of Lake Onega to secure the remaining area west of Lake Onega, while simultaneously establishing a defensive position along the Svir River. Slowed by winter&#x27;s onset they nevertheless continued to advance slowly during the following weeks. Medvezhyegorsk was captured on 5 December and Povenets fell the next day. On 7 December, Finland halted all offensive operations and went onto the defensive.

==Battle of Moscow==

After Kiev, the Red Army no longer outnumbered the Germans and there were no more trained reserves directly available. To defend Moscow, Stalin could field 800,000 men in 83 divisions, but no more than 25 divisions were fully effective. Operation Typhoon, the drive to Moscow, began on 30 September 1941. In front of Army Group Centre was a series of elaborate defence lines, the first centred on Vyazma and the second on Mozhaysk. Russian peasants began fleeing ahead of the advancing German units, burning their harvested crops, driving their cattle away, and destroying buildings in their villages as part of a scorched-earth policy designed to deny to the Nazi war machine needed supplies and foodstuffs.

The first blow took the Soviets completely by surprise when the 2nd Panzer Group, returning from the south, took Oryol, just south of the Soviet first main defence line. Three days later, the Panzers pushed on to Bryansk, while the 2nd Army attacked from the west. The Soviet 3rd and 13th Armies were now encircled. To the north, the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies attacked Vyazma, trapping the 19th, 20th, 24th and 32nd Armies. Moscow&#x27;s first line of defence had been shattered. The pocket eventually yielded over 500,000 Soviet prisoners, bringing the tally since the start of the invasion to three million. The Soviets now had only 90,000 men and 150 tanks left for the defence of Moscow.

The German government now publicly predicted the imminent capture of Moscow and convinced foreign correspondents of an impending Soviet collapse. On 13 October, the 3rd Panzer Group penetrated to within of the capital. Martial law was declared in Moscow. Almost from the beginning of Operation Typhoon, however, the weather worsened. Temperatures fell while there was continued rainfall. This turned the unpaved road network into mud and slowed the German advance on Moscow. Additional snows fell which were followed by more rain, creating a glutinous mud that German tanks had difficulty traversing, which the Soviet T-34, with its wider tread, was better suited to navigate. At the same time, the supply situation for the Germans rapidly deteriorated. On 31 October, the German Army High Command ordered a halt to Operation Typhoon while the armies were reorganised. The pause gave the Soviets, far better supplied, time to consolidate their positions and organise formations of newly activated reservists. In little over a month, the Soviets organised eleven new armies that included 30 divisions of Siberian troops. These had been freed from the Soviet Far East after Soviet intelligence assured Stalin that there was no longer a threat from the Japanese. During October and November 1941, over 1,000 tanks and 1,000 aircraft arrived along with the Siberian forces to assist in defending the city.

With the ground hardening due to the cold weather, the Germans resumed the attack on Moscow on 15 November. Although the troops themselves were now able to advance again, there had been no improvement in the supply situation; only 135,000 of the 600,000 trucks that had been available on 22 June 1941 were available by 15 November 1941. Ammunition and fuel supplies were prioritised over food and winter clothing, so many German troops looted supplies from local populations, but could not fill their needs.

Facing the Germans were the 5th, 16th, 30th, 43rd, 49th, and 50th Soviet Armies. The Germans intended to move the 3rd and 4th Panzer Armies across the Moscow Canal and envelop Moscow from the northeast. The 2nd Panzer Group would attack Tula and then close on Moscow from the south. As the Soviets reacted to their flanks, the 4th Army would attack the centre. In two weeks of fighting, lacking sufficient fuel and ammunition, the Germans slowly crept towards Moscow. In the south, the 2nd Panzer Group was being blocked. On 22 November, Soviet Siberian units, augmented by the 49th and 50th Soviet Armies, attacked the 2nd Panzer Group and inflicted a defeat on the Germans. The 4th Panzer Group pushed the Soviet 16th Army back, however, and succeeded in crossing the Moscow Canal in an attempt to encircle Moscow.

On 2 December, part of the 258th Infantry Division advanced to within of Moscow. They were so close that German officers claimed they could see the spires of the Kremlin, but by then the first blizzards had begun. A reconnaissance battalion managed to reach the town of Khimki, only about from the Soviet capital. It captured the bridge over the Moscow-Volga Canal as well as the railway station, which marked the easternmost advance of German forces. In spite of the progress made, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; was not equipped for such severe winter warfare. The Soviet army was better adapted to fighting in winter conditions, but faced production shortages of winter clothing. The German forces fared worse, with deep snow further hindering equipment and mobility. Weather conditions had largely grounded the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, preventing large-scale air operations. Newly created Soviet units near Moscow now numbered over 500,000 men, who despite their inexperience, were able to halt the German offensive by 5 December due to superior defensive fortifications, the presence of skilled and experienced leadership like Zhukov, and the poor German situation. On 5 December, the Soviet defenders launched a massive counterattack as part of the Soviet winter counteroffensive. The offensive halted on 7 January 1942, after having pushed the German armies back from Moscow. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; had lost the Battle for Moscow, and the invasion had cost the German Army over 830,000 men.

==Aftermath==
With the failure of the Battle of Moscow, all German plans for a quick defeat of the Soviet Union had to be revised. The Soviet counter-offensives in December 1941 caused heavy casualties on both sides, but ultimately eliminated the German threat to Moscow. Attempting to explain matters, Hitler issued &quot;Führer Directive No. 39&quot;, which cited the early onset of winter and the severe cold as the primary reasons for the failed campaign, whereas the main reasons were German military unpreparedness, poor intelligence of actual Soviet strength, extensive logistical difficulties, high levels of attrition and heavy casualties, and overextension of German forces within the vast Soviet territories. On 22 June 1941, the &quot;Heer&quot; as a whole had 209 divisions at its disposal, 163 of which were offensively capable. On 31 March 1942, less than one year after the invasion of the Soviet Union, the army was reduced to fielding 58 offensively capable divisions. The Red Army&#x27;s tenacity and ability to counter-attack effectively took the Germans as much by surprise as their own initial attack had the Soviets. Spurred on by the successful defence and in an effort to imitate the Germans, Stalin wanted to begin his own counteroffensive, not just against the German forces around Moscow, but against their armies in the north and south. Anger over the failed German offensives caused Hitler to relieve Brauchitsch of command and in his place, Hitler assumed personal control of the German Army on 19 December 1941, a decision that would progressively prove fatal to Germany&#x27;s war effort and contribute to its eventual defeat.

The Soviet Union had suffered heavily from the conflict, losing huge tracts of territory, and vast losses in men and materiel. Nonetheless, the Red Army proved capable of countering the German offensives, particularly as the Germans began experiencing irreplaceable shortages in manpower, armaments, provisions, and fuel.

=== Subsequent German offensives ===
Despite the rapid relocation of Red Army armaments production east of the Urals and a dramatic increase of production in 1942, especially of armour, new aircraft types and artillery, the &quot;Heer&quot; (German army) was able to mount another large-scale offensive in June 1942, although on a much reduced front than the previous summer. Hitler, having realised that Germany&#x27;s oil supply was severely depleted, attempted to utilise Army Group South to capture the oil fields of Baku in the new offensive, codenamed Case Blue. Again, the Germans quickly overran great expanses of Soviet territory, but they failed to achieve their ultimate goal of the oil fields of Baku, culminating in their disastrous defeat at the Battle of Stalingrad in February 1943 and withdrawal from the Caucasus.

By 1943, Soviet armaments production was fully operational and increasingly outproducing the German war economy. The final major German offensive in the Eastern theatre of World War II took place during July–August 1943 with the launch of Operation Citadel, an assault on the Kursk salient. Approximately one million German troops confronted a Soviet force over 2.5 million strong. The Soviets, well aware of the attack in advance and fully prepared for it, prevailed in the Battle of Kursk. Following the German defeat, the Soviets launched Operation Kutuzov, a counter-offensive employing six million men along a front towards the Dnieper River as they drove the Germans westwards.

Employing increasingly ambitious and tactically sophisticated offensives, along with making operational improvements in secrecy and deception, by the summer of 1944, the Red Army was eventually able to regain much of the area previously conquered by the Germans. The destruction of Army Group Centre, the outcome of Operation Bagration in 1944, proved to be a decisive success and additional Soviet offensives against the German Army Groups North and South in the autumn of 1944 put the German war machine into further retreat. By January 1945, what had been the Eastern Front was now controlled by the Soviets, whose military might was aimed at the German capital of Berlin. Hitler committed suicide on 30 April 1945 in order to avoid capture by the Soviets, and the war in Europe finally ended with the total defeat and capitulation of Nazi Germany in May 1945.

===War crimes===
While the Soviet Union had not signed the Geneva Convention, Germany had signed the treaty and was thus obligated to offer Soviet POWs humane treatment according to its provisions (as they generally did with other Allied POWs). According to the Soviets, they had not signed the Geneva Conventions in 1929 due to Article 9 which, by imposing racial segregation of POWs into different camps, contravened the Soviet constitution. Article 82 of the convention specified that &quot;In case, in time of war, one of the belligerents is not a party to the Convention, its provisions shall nevertheless remain in force as between the belligerents who are parties thereto.&quot; Despite such mandates, Hitler called for the battle against the Soviet Union to be a &quot;struggle for existence&quot; and emphasized that the Soviet armies were to be &quot;annihilated&quot;, a mindset that contributed to war crimes against Soviet prisoners of war. A memorandum from 16 July 1941, recorded by Martin Bormann, quotes Hitler saying, &quot;The giant [occupied] area must naturally be pacified as quickly as possible; this will happen at best if anyone who just looks funny should be shot&quot;. Conveniently for Germany, the fact that the Soviets failed to sign the convention played into their hands as they justified their behavior accordingly. Even if the Soviets had signed, it is highly unlikely that this would have stopped the Nazis&#x27; genocidal policies towards combatants, civilians, and prisoners of war.

Before the war, Hitler had issued the notorious Commissar Order, which called for all Soviet political commissars taken prisoner at the front to be shot immediately without trial. German soldiers participated in these mass killings along with members of the , sometimes reluctantly, claiming &quot;military necessity&quot;. On the eve of the invasion, German soldiers were informed that their battle &quot;demands ruthless and vigorous measures against Bolshevik inciters, guerrillas, saboteurs, Jews and the complete elimination of all active and passive resistance&quot;. Collective punishment was authorised against partisan attacks; if a perpetrator could not be quickly identified, burning villages and mass executions were considered acceptable reprisals. Although the majority of German soldiers accepted these crimes as justified due to Nazi propaganda, which depicted the Red Army as , a few prominent German officers openly protested against them. An estimated two million Soviet prisoners of war died of starvation during Barbarossa alone. By the end of the war, 58 percent of all Soviet prisoners of war had died in German captivity.

Organised crimes against civilians, including women and children, were carried out on a huge scale by the German police and military forces, as well as the local collaborators. Under the command of the Reich Security Main Office, the killing squads conducted large-scale massacres of Jews and communists in conquered Soviet territories. Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg puts the number of Jews murdered by &quot;mobile killing operations&quot; at 1,400,000. The original instructions to kill &quot;Jews in party and state positions&quot; were broadened to include &quot;all male Jews of military age&quot; and then expanded once more to &quot;all male Jews regardless of age&quot;. By the end of July, the Germans were regularly killing women and children. On 18 December 1941, Himmler and Hitler discussed the &quot;Jewish question&quot;, and Himmler noted the meeting&#x27;s result in his appointment book: &quot;To be annihilated as partisans&quot;. According to Christopher Browning, &quot;annihilating Jews and solving the so-called &#x27;Jewish question&#x27; under the cover of killing partisans was the agreed-upon convention between Hitler and Himmler&quot;. In accordance with Nazi policies against &quot;inferior&quot; Asian peoples, Turkmens were also persecuted. According to a post-war report by Prince Veli Kajum Khan, they were imprisoned in concentration camps in terrible conditions, where those deemed to have &quot;Mongolian&quot; features were murdered daily. Asians were also targeted by the and were the subjects of lethal medical experiments and murder at a &quot;pathological institute&quot; in Kiev. Hitler received reports of the mass killings conducted by the which were first conveyed to the RSHA, where they were aggregated into a summary report by Gestapo Chief Heinrich Müller.
Burning houses suspected of being partisan meeting places and poisoning water wells became common practice for soldiers of the German 9th Army. At Kharkov, the fourth largest city in the Soviet Union, food was provided only to the small number of civilians who worked for the Germans, with the rest designated to slowly starve. Thousands of Soviets were deported to Germany for use as slave labour beginning in 1942.

The citizens of Leningrad were subjected to heavy bombardment and a siege that would last 872 days and starve more than a million people to death, of whom approximately 400,000 were children below the age of 14. The German-Finnish blockade cut off access to food, fuel and raw materials, and rations reached a low, for the non-working population, of (five thin slices) of bread and a little watery soup per day. Starving Soviet civilians began to eat their domestic animals, along with hair tonic and Vaseline. Some desperate citizens resorted to cannibalism; Soviet records list 2,000 people arrested for &quot;the use of human meat as food&quot; during the siege, 886 of them during the first winter of 1941–42. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; planned to seal off Leningrad, starve out the population, and then demolish the city entirely.

====Sexual violence====

Rape was a widespread phenomenon in the East as German soldiers regularly committed violent sexual acts against Soviet women. Whole units were occasionally involved in the crime with upwards of one-third of the instances being gang rape. Historian Hannes Heer relates that in the world of the eastern front, where the German army equated Russia with Communism, everything was &quot;fair game&quot;; thus, rape went unreported unless entire units were involved. Frequently in the case of Jewish women, they were murdered immediately after acts of sexual violence. Historian Birgit Beck emphasizes that military decrees, which served to authorise wholesale brutality on many levels, essentially destroyed the basis for any prosecution of sexual offenses committed by German soldiers in the East. She also contends that detection of such instances was limited by the fact that sexual violence was often inflicted in the context of billets in civilian housing.

=== Nazi plunder of Eastern Europe ===

After the initiation of Operation Barbarossa, Eastern Europe was relentlessly plundered by Nazi German forces. In 1943 alone, 9,000,000 tons of cereals, of fodder, of potatoes, and of meats were sent back to Germany. During the course of the German occupation, some 12 million pigs and 13 million sheep were seized by Nazi forces. The value of this plunder is estimated at 4 billion Reichsmarks. This relatively low number in comparison to the occupied nations of Western Europe can be attributed to the indiscriminate scorched-earth policy pursued by Nazi Germany in the Eastern Front.

==Historical significance==
Barbarossa was the largest military operation in history—more men, tanks, guns and aircraft were deployed than in any other offensive. The invasion opened the Eastern Front, the war&#x27;s largest theatre, which saw clashes of unprecedented violence and destruction for four years and killed over 26 million Soviet people, including about 8.6 million Red Army soldiers. More died fighting on the Eastern Front than in all other fighting across the globe during World War II. Damage to both the economy and landscape was enormous, as approximately 1,710 Soviet towns and 70,000 villages were razed.

Barbarossa and the subsequent German defeat changed the political landscape of Europe, dividing it into Eastern and Western blocs. The political vacuum left in the eastern half of the continent was filled by the USSR when Stalin secured his territorial prizes of 1944–1945 and firmly placed the Red Army in Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the eastern half of Germany. Stalin&#x27;s fear of resurgent German power and his distrust of his erstwhile allies contributed to Soviet pan-Slavic initiatives and a subsequent alliance of Slavic states. The historians David Glantz and Jonathan House assert that Barbarossa influenced not only Stalin but subsequent Soviet leaders, claiming it &quot;colored&quot; their strategic mindsets for the &quot;next four decades&quot;. As a result, the Soviets instigated the creation of &quot;an elaborate system of buffer and client states, designed to insulate the Soviet Union from any possible future attack&quot;. In the ensuing Cold War, Eastern Europe became a Soviet sphere of influence, and Western Europe aligned itself with the United States.

==See also==
* A-A line
* Black Sea campaigns
** Romanian Navy during World War II
* Kantokuen
* Lend-Lease
* Operation Silver Fox
* Order No. 270
* Timeline of the Eastern Front of World War II
* Final Solution
* Satellite state#Post-World War II
==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Further reading===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* Marking 70 Years to Operation Barbarossa on the Yad Vashem website
* Operation Barbarossa original reports and pictures from &quot;The Times&quot;
* &quot;Operation Barbarossa&quot;: , lecture by David Stahel, author of &quot;Operation Barbarossa and Germany&#x27;s Defeat in the East&quot; (2009); via the official channel of Muskegon Community College</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="0" end="20" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q467011" start="29" end="37" title="invasion" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="45" end="57" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="61" end="73" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="102" end="113" title="Axis powers" label="Axis allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="147" end="159" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="306" end="317" title="Arkhangelsk" label="Arkhangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927" start="322" end="331" title="Astrakhan" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q280577" start="333" end="341" title="A-A line" label="A-A line"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="622" end="635" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="667" end="681" title="theatre of war" label="theatre of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="732" end="745" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="763" end="773" title="Code-name" label="code-named"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="784" end="802" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="803" end="823" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="918" end="927" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091543" start="971" end="981" title="Repopulation" label="repopulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="990" end="997" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1056" end="1070" title="Slavs" label="Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="1094" end="1101" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="1103" end="1116" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="1135" end="1143" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="1249" end="1256" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="1261" end="1272" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Byelorussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="1295" end="1303" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="1354" end="1362" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715064" start="1408" end="1444" title="German mistreatment of Soviet prisoners of war" label="starved to death or otherwise killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="1509" end="1523" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Mass shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="1528" end="1546" title="Gas chamber" label="gassing operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137429" start="1639" end="1650" title="Soviet Jews" label="Soviet Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1662" end="1675" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="1756" end="1772" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="signed political"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424276" start="1777" end="1791" title="Nazi–Soviet economic relations (1934–41)" label="economic pacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="1830" end="1883" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="1902" end="1921" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="German High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1987" end="1999" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2042" end="2055" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="2496" end="2512" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q162284" start="2649" end="2666" title="Battle of Kiev (1941)" label="Kiev was captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q697658" start="2710" end="2729" title="First Battle of Kharkov" label="captures of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q169436" start="2748" end="2761" title="Battle of Rostov (1941)" label="Rostov-on-Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q700937" start="2800" end="2824" title="Crimean campaign" label="Crimea had been captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q163084" start="2826" end="2842" title="Army Group North" label="Army Group North"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="2901" end="2919" title="siege of Leningrad" label="siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="2987" end="3004" title="Army Group Centre" label="Army Group Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q162357" start="3034" end="3051" title="Battle of Smolensk (1941)" label="captured Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="3087" end="3106" title="Battle of Moscow" label="its drive on Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="3775" end="3793" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="3846" end="3855" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="3904" end="3920" title="Attrition warfare" label="war of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="4120" end="4129" title="Case Blue" label="Case Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136088" start="4142" end="4159" title="Operation Citadel" label="Operation Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="4266" end="4276" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="4547" end="4565" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4571" end="4589" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="4590" end="4610" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="4655" end="4668" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131291" start="4686" end="4755" title="king asleep in mountain" label="asleep, along with his knights, in a cave in the Kyffhäuser mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="4759" end="4768" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117287" start="4940" end="4954" title="Operation Otto" label="Operation Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="4993" end="5007" title="Otto the Great" label="Otto the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q649117" start="5432" end="5451" title="New Order (Nazism)" label="Thousand-Year Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5517" end="5529" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="5598" end="5608" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5640" end="5652" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="5951" end="5961" title="racial war" label="racial war"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="6165" end="6194" title="racial policy of Nazi Germany" label="racial policy of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="6311" end="6327" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="6837" end="6853" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q973290" start="6998" end="7050" title="myth of the clean Wehrmacht" label="myth of the &amp;quot;clean &amp;quot;Wehrmacht,&amp;quot;&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717180" start="7126" end="7140" title="Jürgen Förster" label="Jürgen Förster"/>
<link wikidata="Q83834" start="7408" end="7422" title="Anti-Sovietism" label="anti-Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="7424" end="7436" title="anti-Semitic" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406911" start="7441" end="7452" title="anti-Slavic" label="anti-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="7550" end="7562" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="7580" end="7587" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q532975" start="7605" end="7621" title="Slavko Kvaternik" label="Slavko Kvaternik"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="8632" end="8640" title="Partisan (military)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="9053" end="9059" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="9202" end="9218" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="9435" end="9448" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="9775" end="9791" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q57367" start="10281" end="10294" title="Erich Hoepner" label="Erich Hoepner"/>
<link wikidata="Q168248" start="10370" end="10386" title="4th Panzer Group" label="4th Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="11010" end="11033" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="Walther von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="11680" end="11703" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944647" start="11834" end="11847" title="Border states (Eastern Europe)" label="border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="11879" end="11899" title="spheres of influence" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="12039" end="12046" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="12048" end="12055" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="12057" end="12063" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="12082" end="12092" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="12314" end="12324" title="Ideology" label="ideologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="12374" end="12399" title="German invasion of Poland" label="German invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="12446" end="12468" title="World War II in Europe" label="World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="12479" end="12504" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424276" start="12699" end="12733" title="Nazi–Soviet economic relations (1934–41)" label="an important economic relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552224" start="12759" end="12777" title="German-Soviet Commercial Agreement (1940)" label="trade pact in 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="12923" end="12933" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q115702" start="12963" end="12982" title="Blockade of Germany (1939–45)" label="blockade of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="13142" end="13150" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="13252" end="13261" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Axis Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749007" start="13293" end="13350" title="German–Soviet Axis talks" label="negotiations about a potential Soviet entry into the pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214352" start="14654" end="14685" title="German–Soviet Border and Commercial Agreement" label="border and commercial agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749421" start="14757" end="14771" title="Robert Service (historian)" label="Robert Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="14773" end="14786" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="15226" end="15235" title="Bug River" label="Bug River"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="15248" end="15256" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="15956" end="15967" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q718833" start="16252" end="16283" title="Soviet offensive plans controversy" label="preparing to attack the Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377327" start="16332" end="16343" title="pre-emptive war" label="pre-emptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="16733" end="16751" title="Battle of France" label="campaign in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q66119" start="16761" end="16773" title="Erich Marcks" label="Erich Marcks"/>
<link wikidata="Q280577" start="17006" end="17014" title="A-A line" label="A-A line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="17133" end="17144" title="Arkhangelsk" label="Arkhangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="17152" end="17162" title="Arctic Sea" label="Arctic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="17171" end="17176" title="Nizhny Novgorod" label="Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="17181" end="17187" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927" start="17208" end="17217" title="Astrakhan" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="17238" end="17243" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="17251" end="17262" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="17385" end="17392" title="bombers" label="bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q57160" start="17470" end="17486" title="Friedrich Paulus" label="Friedrich Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q934433" start="17661" end="17675" title="demobilisation" label="demobilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337691" start="17717" end="17732" title="labour shortage" label="labour shortage"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="17773" end="17780" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="17851" end="17864" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="18196" end="18210" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="18300" end="18319" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="German High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595054" start="18781" end="18798" title="Barbarossa decree" label="Barbarossa Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229607" start="18988" end="19015" title="Commissar" label="Communist political leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q68400" start="19153" end="19171" title="Andreas Hillgruber" label="Andreas Hillgruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="20336" end="20371" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="20377" end="20415" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130280" start="20421" end="20455" title="Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192180" start="20461" end="20494" title="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173761" start="20504" end="20540" title="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="20935" end="20949" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q85963" start="21139" end="21151" title="Georg Thomas" label="Georg Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="21466" end="21476" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026478" start="21738" end="21751" title="winterisation" label="winterisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q879910" start="21862" end="21888" title="Göring&amp;#x27;s Green Folder" label="Göring&amp;#x27;s Green Folder"/>
<link wikidata="Q546403" start="22012" end="22023" title="Hunger Plan" label="Hunger Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="22305" end="22317" title="geopolitics" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327314" start="22376" end="22382" title="Nordicism" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="22383" end="22394" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="22426" end="22442" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="22673" end="22714" title="French invasion of Russia" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s failed invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="23221" end="23227" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="23591" end="23604" title="Daugava (river)" label="Western Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="23609" end="23616" title="Dnieper River" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="23763" end="23777" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104051" start="23779" end="23792" title="Gerhard Engel" label="Gerhard Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70534" start="23794" end="23808" title="Fedor von Bock" label="Fedor von Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q57174" start="23813" end="23825" title="Franz Halder" label="Franz Halder"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="24141" end="24164" title="Balkans Campaign (World War II)" label="campaign in the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="24526" end="24545" title="Reconnaissance" label="aerial surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q191702" start="24952" end="24969" title="Semyon Timoshenko" label="Semyon Timoshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q48047" start="25125" end="25143" title="Boris Shaposhnikov" label="Boris Shaposhnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097109" start="25333" end="25351" title="Operation Haifisch" label="Operation Haifisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696738" start="25356" end="25373" title="Operation Harpune" label="Operation Harpune"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="25469" end="25475" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="25484" end="25499" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="25830" end="25849" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invading Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="25854" end="25860" title="Battle of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q327287" start="26323" end="26337" title="William Shirer" label="William Shirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="26594" end="26607" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="26944" end="26950" title="panzer" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="26958" end="26976" title="motorised infantry" label="motorised infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17493956" start="27014" end="27032" title="Security Division (Wehrmacht)" label="security divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="27153" end="27156" title="OKH" label="OKH"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="27675" end="27684" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771854" start="27736" end="27747" title="Army Norway (Wehrmacht)" label="Army Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q163084" start="27749" end="27765" title="Army Group North" label="Army Group North"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="27767" end="27784" title="Army Group Centre" label="Army Group Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="27789" end="27805" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115386" start="27823" end="27846" title="luftflotte" label="&amp;quot;Luftflotten&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q658967" start="27933" end="27945" title="Luftflotte 1" label="Luftflotte 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q699708" start="27957" end="27969" title="Luftflotte 2" label="Luftflotte 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q702863" start="27985" end="27997" title="Luftflotte 4" label="Luftflotte 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="28053" end="28064" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15054934" start="28069" end="28097" title="Northwest Russia" label="bordering Soviet territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="28218" end="28227" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="28372" end="28382" title="Belorussia" label="Belorussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="28445" end="28453" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="28570" end="28574" title="Kiev" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="28611" end="28617" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="28690" end="28698" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="29048" end="29056" title="Soviet partisans" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q820204" start="29106" end="29150" title="Commissar Order" label="execute captured Soviet political commissars"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="29173" end="29199" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="29213" end="29230" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q142141" start="29821" end="29841" title="Mikhail Tukhachevsky" label="Mikhail Tukhachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="29876" end="29888" title="armoured warfare" label="tank warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="29896" end="29911" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q125168" start="29922" end="29949" title="Marshal of the Soviet Union" label="Marshal of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140224" start="30191" end="30199" title="Military doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194366" start="30296" end="30315" title="Soviet deep battle" label="Deep Battle Concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="30383" end="30405" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q186185" start="30803" end="30821" title="Kliment Voroshilov" label="Kliment Voroshilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q242474" start="30826" end="30841" title="Semyon Budyonny" label="Semyon Budyonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="31205" end="31224" title="political commissar" label="political commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q117504" start="32320" end="32335" title="Pripyat Marshes" label="Pripyat Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="33368" end="33373" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="33407" end="33413" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="33672" end="33682" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="33765" end="33781" title="military attaché" label="military attaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="33799" end="33809" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="34008" end="34028" title="intelligence service" label="intelligence service"/>
<link wikidata="Q44580" start="34133" end="34146" title="Richard Sorge" label="Richard Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140332" start="34691" end="34709" title="Military districts of the Soviet Union" label="military districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q540951" start="34887" end="34893" title="Stavka" label="Stavka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144991" start="35581" end="35594" title="military reserve force" label="reserve force"/>
<link wikidata="Q622299" start="36555" end="36559" title="KV-1" label="KV-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="36564" end="36568" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781069" start="36821" end="36837" title="Mechanised corps (Soviet Union)" label="mechanised corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="37799" end="37802" title="Voenno-Vozdushnye Sily" label="VVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130786" start="38231" end="38245" title="Viktor Suvorov" label="Viktor Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636040" start="38299" end="38309" title="Icebreaker (Suvorov)" label="Icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911128" start="38755" end="38769" title="Valeri Danilov" label="Valeri Danilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q75663" start="38771" end="38787" title="Joachim Hoffmann" label="Joachim Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q371516" start="38789" end="38807" title="Mikhail Meltyukhov" label="Mikhail Meltyukhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315638" start="38813" end="38830" title="Vladimir Nevezhin" label="Vladimir Nevezhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q356036" start="39057" end="39069" title="David Glantz" label="David Glantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q328328" start="39074" end="39092" title="Gabriel Gorodetsky" label="Gabriel Gorodetsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723074" start="40099" end="40112" title="Alfred Liskow" label="Alfred Liskow"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="40792" end="40801" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="40821" end="40831" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q113702347" start="40868" end="40893" title="German declaration of war on the Soviet Union" label="German declaration of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="40928" end="40950" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q132899" start="41396" end="41414" title="Vyacheslav Molotov" label="Vyacheslav Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="42288" end="42303" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q315329" start="43181" end="43206" title="Waffen-SS foreign volunteers and conscripts" label="volunteers and conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="43366" end="43385" title="command and control" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q698081" start="45466" end="45486" title="Ministry of Aviation (Nazi Germany)" label="Minister of Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q700332" start="45491" end="45538" title="Oberkommando der Luftwaffe" label="Commander-in-Chief of the &amp;quot;Luftwaffe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q685753" start="46117" end="46140" title="German Federal Archives" label="German Federal Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="46283" end="46296" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788866" start="46455" end="46466" title="war diary" label="war diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="46474" end="46493" title="OKW" label="German High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528565" start="46837" end="46859" title="Battle of Raseiniai" label="powerful counterattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="47182" end="47200" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Erich von Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q702612" start="47409" end="47420" title="Stalin Line" label="Stalin Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214" start="47567" end="47572" title="Pskov" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191" start="47631" end="47647" title="Leningrad oblast" label="Leningrad oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q14684" start="47850" end="47860" title="Luga River" label="Luga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="48128" end="48148" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="48412" end="48428" title="1st Panzer Group" label="1st Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="49692" end="49707" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="49929" end="49933" title="Prut River" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="49938" end="49946" title="Dniester River" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q152993" start="50118" end="50124" title="Abwehr" label="Abwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q210404" start="50371" end="50387" title="2nd Panzer Group" label="2nd Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q23868" start="50448" end="50462" title="Brest Fortress" label="Brest Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="50487" end="50492" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q223458" start="50504" end="50520" title="3rd Panzer Group" label="3rd Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="50574" end="50581" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="50681" end="50690" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q342557" start="50737" end="50750" title="Dmitry Pavlov (general)" label="Dmitry Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="50852" end="50858" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q30678285" start="51739" end="51746" title="Pocket (military)" label="pockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="52235" end="52239" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="53029" end="53052" title="reconnaissance-in-force" label="reconnaissance-in-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q57150" start="53217" end="53229" title="Hermann Hoth" label="Hermann Hoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343764" start="54314" end="54331" title="Operation Rentier" label="Operation Rentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367345" start="54349" end="54365" title="Pechengsky District" label="Petsamo Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357148" start="54432" end="54470" title="Operation Kilpapurjehdus" label="remilitarise the neutral Åland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763" start="55126" end="55134" title="Murmansk" label="Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="55142" end="55162" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="Operation Silver Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="55315" end="55326" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="55410" end="55417" title="Vyborg" label="Viipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q702612" start="55833" end="55858" title="Stalin line" label="old Soviet defensive line"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="58097" end="58104" title="Kharkov" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655561" start="59361" end="59382" title="Mountain Corps Norway" label="Mountain Corps Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q973752" start="59500" end="59517" title="Rybachy Peninsula" label="Rybachy Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654758" start="59539" end="59550" title="Zapadnaya Litsa River" label="Litsa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659337" start="59618" end="59627" title="14th Army (Soviet Union)" label="14th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025052" start="59786" end="59797" title="XXXVI Mountain Corps (Wehrmacht)" label="XXXVI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450779" start="59802" end="59819" title="Finnish III Corps (Continuation War)" label="Finnish III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q936067" start="59844" end="59849" title="Salla" label="Salla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751620" start="59907" end="59923" title="Kirov Railway" label="Murmansk railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q144264" start="59929" end="59940" title="Kandalaksha" label="Kandalaksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q252952" start="60170" end="60177" title="Kayraly" label="Kayraly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453119" start="60360" end="60368" title="7th Army (Soviet Union)" label="7th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236657" start="60469" end="60474" title="Kalevala, Russia" label="Ukhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499340" start="61059" end="61068" title="23rd Army (Soviet Union)" label="23rd Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q196397" start="61589" end="61598" title="Sortavala" label="Sortavala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991812" start="61603" end="61610" title="Hiitola" label="Hiitola"/>
<link wikidata="Q819448" start="61939" end="61951" title="Vuoksi River" label="Vuoksi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q208499" start="62388" end="62392" title="Uman" label="Uman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210842" start="64349" end="64372" title="20th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="20th Motorised Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339" start="64380" end="64392" title="Shlisselburg" label="Shlisselburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q714211" start="65225" end="65241" title="Yelnya Offensive" label="Yelnya Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="65587" end="65605" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q996524" start="65898" end="65908" title="bridgehead" label="bridgehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="66632" end="66649" title="Operation Typhoon" label="Operation Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="66856" end="66862" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="66971" end="66982" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q155434" start="67014" end="67023" title="11th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="11th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="67095" end="67110" title="1st Panzer Army" label="1st Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57137" start="67117" end="67133" title="Paul Ludwig Ewald von Kleist" label="Ewald von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="67149" end="67157" title="pincer movement" label="encircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q684480" start="67216" end="67219" title="9th Army (Soviet Union)" label="9th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977778" start="67224" end="67235" title="18th Army (Soviet Union)" label="18th Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="67352" end="67356" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="67415" end="67424" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q697658" start="67585" end="67592" title="First Battle of Kharkov" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107883" start="68156" end="68168" title="Verman River" label="Verman River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166162" start="69406" end="69416" title="Lake Onega" label="Lake Onega"/>
<link wikidata="Q213067" start="69425" end="69435" title="Svir River" label="Svir River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49583" start="69671" end="69678" title="Olonets" label="Olonets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895" start="69767" end="69779" title="Petrozavodsk" label="Petrozavodsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186888" start="69805" end="69823" title="Karelo-Finnish Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Karelo-Finnish SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q158411" start="70148" end="70162" title="Medvezhyegorsk" label="Medvezhyegorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638275" start="70194" end="70202" title="Povenets" label="Povenets"/>
<link wikidata="Q102307" start="70726" end="70732" title="Vyazma" label="Vyazma"/>
<link wikidata="Q159139" start="70751" end="70759" title="Mozhaysk" label="Mozhaysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="70943" end="70964" title="scorched-earth policy" label="scorched-earth policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118" start="71152" end="71157" title="Oryol" label="Oryol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801" start="71252" end="71259" title="Bryansk" label="Bryansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="71951" end="71962" title="Martial law" label="Martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q745709" start="72157" end="72165" title="Rasputitsa" label="into mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q741351" start="73795" end="73807" title="Moscow Canal" label="Moscow Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770" start="73881" end="73885" title="Tula, Russia" label="Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="74624" end="74631" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74732" end="74738" title="Khimki#History" label="Khimki"/>
<link wikidata="Q750633" start="75496" end="75529" title="Defence in depth" label="superior defensive fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="75587" end="75593" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75710" end="75740" title="Battle of Moscow#Soviet counter-offensive" label="Soviet winter counteroffensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="75995" end="76011" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="77735" end="77743" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="78171" end="78175" title="German Army (1935–1945)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666778" start="78448" end="78466" title="Petroleum industry in Azerbaijan" label="oil fields of Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="78499" end="78508" title="Case Blue" label="Case Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="78635" end="78644" title="oil field" label="oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="78649" end="78653" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="78701" end="78721" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136088" start="79013" end="79030" title="Operation Citadel" label="Operation Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="79050" end="79055" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030752" start="79056" end="79063" title="Salient (military)" label="salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="79249" end="79264" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q672571" start="79316" end="79333" title="Operation Kutuzov" label="Operation Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="79775" end="79794" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993476" start="80142" end="80159" title="Death of Adolf Hitler" label="committed suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="80682" end="80700" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q752646" start="81185" end="81196" title="war of annihilation" label="annihilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715064" start="81234" end="81276" title="German atrocities committed against Soviet prisoners of war" label="war crimes against Soviet prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="81322" end="81336" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="81772" end="81781" title="genocidal" label="genocidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="81993" end="82023" title="Summary execution" label="shot immediately without trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="82835" end="82851" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="83148" end="83167" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="local collaborators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="83263" end="83271" title="massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="83285" end="83295" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="83329" end="83338" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q213553" start="83349" end="83361" title="Raul Hilberg" label="Raul Hilberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q127273780" start="83579" end="83591" title="Military-age male" label="military age"/>
<link wikidata="Q59098" start="83958" end="83978" title="Christopher Browning" label="Christopher Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="84237" end="84245" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="84771" end="84778" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="84785" end="84800" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q275151" start="84936" end="84944" title="9th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="9th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q185120" start="85721" end="85729" title="Vaseline" label="Vaseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192354" start="86308" end="86317" title="gang rape" label="gang rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q87652" start="86329" end="86340" title="Hannes Heer" label="Hannes Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308509" start="87009" end="87015" title="billet" label="billet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="87598" end="87619" title="scorched-earth policy" label="scorched-earth policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="87854" end="87867" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4374773" start="88046" end="88063" title="World War II casualties of the Soviet Union" label="Red Army soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656481" start="88893" end="88907" title="Jonathan House" label="Jonathan House"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="89166" end="89172" title="Buffer state" label="buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="89177" end="89183" title="client state" label="client"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="89284" end="89292" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="89318" end="89344" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q280577" start="89420" end="89428" title="A-A line" label="A-A line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383231" start="89431" end="89450" title="Black Sea Campaigns (1941-44)" label="Black Sea campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q42172623" start="89454" end="89487" title="Romanian Navy during World War II" label="Romanian Navy during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656000" start="89490" end="89499" title="Kantokuen" label="Kantokuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="89502" end="89512" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="89515" end="89535" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="Operation Silver Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q717489" start="89538" end="89551" title="Order No. 270" label="Order No. 270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159013" start="89554" end="89599" title="Timeline of the Eastern Front of World War II" label="Timeline of the Eastern Front of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="89602" end="89616" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89619" end="89652" title="Satellite state#Post-World War II" label="Satellite state#Post-World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="90092" end="90102" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="90175" end="90184" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215573" start="90240" end="90252" title="David Stahel" label="David Stahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942755" start="90371" end="90397" title="Muskegon Community College" label="Muskegon Community College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22621" wikidata="Q55643" url="?curid=22621" title="Oceania">
<text>Oceania ( , ) is a geographical region including Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. Spanning the Eastern and Western hemispheres, at the centre of the water hemisphere, Oceania is estimated to have a land area of about and a population of around 46.3 million as of 2024. Oceania is the smallest continent in land area and the second-least populated after Antarctica.

Oceania has a diverse mix of economies from the highly developed and globally competitive financial markets of Australia, French Polynesia, Hawaii, New Caledonia, and New Zealand, which rank high in quality of life and Human Development Index, to the much less developed economies of Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Western New Guinea. The largest and most populous country in Oceania is Australia, and the largest city is Sydney. Puncak Jaya in Indonesia is the highest peak in Oceania at .

The first settlers of Australia, New Guinea, and the large islands just to the east arrived more than 60,000 years ago. Oceania was first explored by Europeans from the 16th century onward. Portuguese explorers, between 1512 and 1526, reached the Tanimbar Islands, some of the Caroline Islands and west New Guinea. Spanish and Dutch explorers followed, then British and French. On his first voyage in the 18th century, James Cook, who later arrived at the highly developed Hawaiian Islands, went to Tahiti and followed the east coast of Australia for the first time. The arrival of European settlers in subsequent centuries resulted in a significant alteration in the social and political landscape of Oceania. The Pacific theatre saw major action during the First and Second World Wars.

The rock art of Aboriginal Australians is the longest continuously practiced artistic tradition in the world. Most Oceanian countries are parliamentary democracies, with tourism serving as a large source of income for the Pacific island nations.

==Definitions and extent==
===Characteristics===
Definitions of Oceania vary. The broadest definition encompasses the many islands between mainland Asia and the Americas. The island nation of Australia is the only piece of land in the area which is large enough to typically be considered a continent. The culture of the people who lived on these islands was often distinct from that of Asia and pre-Columbian America. Before Europeans arrived in the area, the sea shielded Australia and south central Pacific islands from cultural influences that spread through large continental landmasses and adjacent islands. The islands of the Malay Archipelago, north of Australia, mainly lie on the continental shelf of Asia, and their inhabitants had more exposure to mainland Asian culture as a result of this closer proximity.

The geographer Conrad Malte-Brun coined the French expression &quot;Terres océaniques&quot; (Oceanic lands) 1804. In 1814 another French cartographer, Adrien-Hubert Brué, coined from this expression the shorter &quot;Océanie&quot;, which derives from the Latin word , and this from the Greek word (&quot;ōkeanós&quot;), &quot;ocean&quot;. The term &quot;Oceania&quot; is used because, unlike the other continental groupings, it is the ocean that links the parts of the region together. John Eperjesi&#x27;s 2005 book &quot;The Imperialist Imaginary&quot; says that it has &quot;been used by Western cartographers since the mid-19th century to give order to the complexities of the Pacific area.&quot;

In the 19th century, many geographers divided Oceania into mostly racially based subdivisions: &quot;Australasia&quot;, &quot;Malesia&quot; (encompassing the Malay Archipelago), &quot;Melanesia&quot;, &quot;Micronesia&quot; and &quot;Polynesia&quot;. The 2011 book &quot;Maritime Adaptations of the Pacific&quot;, by Richard W. Casteel and Jean-Claude Passeron, states that, &quot;for the purpose of anthropology, Oceania has long been a continent like Africa, Asia and America.&quot; Scottish geographer John Bartholomew wrote in 1873 that, &quot;the New World consists of North America, and the peninsula of South America attached to it. These divisions [are] generally themselves spoken as continents, and to them has been added another, embracing the large island of Australia and numerous others in the [Pacific] Ocean, under the name of Oceania. There are thus six great divisions of the earth — Europe, Asia, Africa, North America, South America and Oceania.&quot; American author Samuel Griswold Goodrich wrote in his 1854 book &quot;History of All Nations&quot; that, &quot;geographers have agreed to consider the island world of the Pacific Ocean as a third continent, under the name Oceania.&quot; In this book, the other two continents were categorized as being the New World (the Americas) and the Old World (Afro-Eurasia). In his 1879 book &quot;Australasia&quot;, British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace commented that, &quot;Oceania is the word often used by continental geographers to describe the great world of islands we are now entering upon&quot; and that &quot;Australia forms its central and most important feature.&quot; He did not explicitly label Oceania a continent in the book, but did note that it was one of the six major divisions of the world. &quot;The Oxford Handbook of World History&quot; (2011) describes the areas encompassed in Oceania as being &quot;afterthoughts in world history texts, lumped together and included at the end of global surveys as areas largely marginal to the main events of world history&quot;. 

In most non-English-speaking countries Oceania is treated as a continent in the sense that it is &quot;one of the parts of the world&quot;, and Australia is only seen as an island nation. In other non-English-speaking countries Australia and Eurasia are thought of as continents, while Asia, Europe, and Oceania are regarded as &quot;parts of the world&quot;. Nevertheless, various writers from English-speaking countries have described Oceania as a continent over the years. Prior to the 1950s, before the popularization of the theory of plate tectonics, Antarctica, Australia, and Greenland were sometimes described as island continents, but none were usually taught as one of the world&#x27;s continents in the English-speaking countries. In his 1961 book &quot;The United States and the Southwest Pacific&quot;, American author Clinton Hartley Grattan commented that, &quot;the use of the word Oceania to cover Australia, New Zealand, and the [Pacific] islands now has a slightly old-fashioned flavor.&quot; Australia is a founding member of the Pacific Islands Forum in 1971, and at times has been interpreted as the largest Pacific island. Some geographers group the Australian tectonic plate with others in the Pacific to form a geological continent. &quot;National Geographic&quot; states that the term Oceania &quot;establishes the Pacific Ocean as the defining characteristic of the continent.&quot; Others have labelled it as the &quot;liquid continent&quot;. The Pacific Ocean itself has been labelled as a &quot;continent of islands&quot;, and contains approximately 25,000, which is more than all the other major oceans combined. In a 1991 article, American archeologist Toni L. Carrell wrote, &quot;the immensity of and great distances within the Pacific Basin often make it difficult to conceptualize the basin as a single earth feature.&quot;

Oceania&#x27;s subregions of Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia cover two major plates; the Australian Plate (also known as the Indo-Australian Plate) and the Pacific Plate, in addition to two minor plates; the Nazca Plate and the Philippine Sea Plate. The Australian Plate includes Australia, Fiji, New Caledonia, Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, and parts of New Zealand. The Pacific Plate covers the Solomon Islands and parts of New Zealand, as well as Micronesia (excluding the westernmost islands near the Philippine Sea Plate) and Polynesia (excluding Easter Island). The Nazca Plate, which includes Easter Island, neighbours the South American Plate, and is still considered to be a separate tectonic plate, despite only containing a handful of islands.
The new terms Near Oceania and Remote Oceania were proposed in 1973 by anthropologists Roger Green and Andrew Pawley. By their definition, Near Oceania consists of New Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago and the Solomon Islands, with the exception of the Santa Cruz Islands. They are designed to dispel the outdated categories of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia; many scholars now replace those categories with Green&#x27;s terms since the early 1990s, but the old categories are still used in science, popular culture and general usage.

===Boundaries===
Islands at the geographic extremes of Oceania are generally considered to be the Bonin Islands, a politically integral part of Japan; Hawaii, a state of the United States; Clipperton Island, a possession of France; the Juan Fernández Islands, belonging to Chile; and Macquarie Island, belonging to Australia.

====United Nations interpretation====


The United Nations (UN) has used its own geopolitical definition of Oceania since its foundation in 1947, which utilizes four of the five subregions from the 19th century: Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. This definition consists of discrete political entities, and so excludes the Bonin Islands, Hawaii, Clipperton Island and the Juan Fernández Islands, along with Easter Island — which was annexed by Chile in 1888. It is used in statistical reports, by the International Olympic Committee, and by many atlases. The UN categorizes Oceania, and by extension the Pacific area, as one of the major continental divisions of the world, along with Africa, Asia, Europe and the Americas. Their definition includes American Samoa, Australia and their external territories, the Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, French Polynesia, Fiji, Guam, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, the Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Pitcairn Islands, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Wallis and Futuna, and the United States Minor Outlying Islands (Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Midway Atoll, Palmyra Atoll, and Wake Island). The original UN definition of Oceania from 1947 included these same countries and semi-independent territories, which were mostly still colonies at that point. Hawaii had not yet become a U.S. state in 1947, and as such was part of the original UN definition of Oceania. The island states of Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Singapore and Taiwan, all located within the bounds of the Pacific or associated marginal seas, are excluded from the UN definition. The states of Hong Kong and Malaysia, located in both mainland Asia and marginal seas of the Pacific, are also excluded, as are Brunei, East Timor and Indonesian New Guinea/Western New Guinea. The CIA World Factbook also categorizes Oceania as one of the major continental divisions of the world, but the name &quot;Australia and Oceania&quot; is used. Their definition does not include all of Australia&#x27;s external territories, but is otherwise the same as the UN&#x27;s definition, and is also used for statistical purposes. The Pacific Islands Forum expanded during the early 2010s, and areas that were already included in the UN definition of Oceania, such as French Polynesia, gained membership.

====Early interpretations====
French writer Gustave d&#x27;Eichthal remarked in 1844 that, &quot;the boundaries of Oceania are in reality those of the great ocean itself.&quot; Conrad Malte-Brun in 1824 defined Oceania as covering Australia, New Zealand, the islands of Polynesia (which then included all the Pacific islands) and the Malay Archipelago. American lexicographer Joseph Emerson Worcester wrote in 1840 that Oceania is &quot;a term applied to a vast number of islands which are widely dispersed in the Pacific Ocean [...] they are considered as forming a fifth grand division of the world.&quot; He also viewed Oceania as covering Australia, New Zealand, the Malay Archipelago and the islands of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. In 1887, the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland referred to Australia as the area&#x27;s westernmost land, while in 1870, British Reverend Alexander Mackay identified the Bonin Islands as its northernmost point, and Macquarie Island as its southernmost point. The Bonin Islands at that time were a possession of Britain; Macquarie Island, to the south of Tasmania, is a subantarctic island in the Pacific. It was politically associated with Australia and Tasmania by 1870.

Alfred Russel Wallace believed in 1879 that Oceania extended to the Aleutian Islands, which are among the northernmost islands of the Pacific. The islands, now politically associated with Alaska, have historically had inhabitants that were related to Indigenous Americans, in addition to having non-tropical biogeography similar to that of Alaska and Siberia. Wallace insisted while the surface area of this wide definition was greater than that of Asia and Europe combined, the land area was only a little greater than that of Europe. American geographer Sophia S. Cornell claimed that the Aleutian Islands were not part of Oceania in 1857. She stated that Oceania was divided up into three groups; Australasia (which included Australia, New Zealand, and the Melanesian islands), Malesia (which included all present-day countries within the Malay Archipelago, not the modern country of Malaysia) and Polynesia (which included both the Polynesian and Micronesian islands in her definition). Aside from mainland Australia, areas that she identified as of high importance were Borneo, Hawaii, Indonesia&#x27;s Java and Sumatra, New Guinea, New Zealand, the Philippines, French Polynesia&#x27;s Society Islands, Tasmania, and Tonga.

American geographer Jesse Olney&#x27;s 1845 book &quot;A Practical System of Modern Geography&quot; stated that it &quot;comprises the numerous isles of the Pacific, lying south east of Asia.&quot; Olney divided up Oceania into three groups; Australasia (which included Australia, New Guinea, and New Zealand), Malesia and Polynesia (which included the combined islands of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia in his definition). Publication &quot;Missionary Review of the World&quot; claimed in 1895 that Oceania was divided up into five groups; Australasia, Malesia, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. It did not consider Hawaii to be part of Polynesia, due to its geographic isolation, commenting that Oceania also included, &quot;isolated groups and islands, such as the Hawaiian and Galápagos.&quot; In 1876, French geographer Élisée Reclus labelled Australia&#x27;s flora as &quot;one of the most characteristic on the globe&quot;, adding that &quot;the Hawaiian archipelago also constitutes a separate vegetation zone; of all tropical insular groups it possesses the relatively largest number of endemic plants. In the Galápagos group also more than half of the species are of local origin.&quot; Rand McNally &amp; Company, an American publisher of maps and atlases, claimed in 1892 that, &quot;Oceania comprises the large island of Australia and the innumerable islands of the Pacific Ocean&quot; and also that the islands of the Malay Archipelago &quot;should be grouped in with Asia.&quot; British linguist Robert Needham Cust argued in 1887 that the Malay Archipelago should be excluded since it had participated in Asian civilization. Cust considered Oceania&#x27;s four subregions to be Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia. New Zealand was categorized by him as being in Polynesia; and the only country in his definition of Australasia was Australia. His definition of Polynesia included both Easter Island and Hawaii, which had not yet been annexed by either Chile or the United States.

The &quot;Journal of the Royal Statistical Society&quot; stated in 1892 that Australia was a large island within Oceania rather than a small continent. It additionally commented: It is certainly not necessary to consider the Hawaiian Islands and Australia as being in the same part of the world, it is however permissible to unite in one group all the islands which are scattered over the great ocean. It should be remarked that if we take the Malay Archipelago away from Oceania, as do generally the German geographers, the insular world contained in the great ocean is cut in two, and the least populated of the five parts of the world is diminished in order to increase the number of inhabitants of the most densely populated continent. Regarding Australia and the Pacific, &quot;Chambers&#x27;s New Handy Volume American Encyclopædia&quot; observed in 1885 that, &quot;the whole region has sometimes been called Oceania, and sometimes Australasia—generally, however, in modern times, to the exclusion of the islands in the [Malay] archipelago, to which certain writers have given the name of Malesia.&quot; It added there was controversy over the exact limits of Oceania, saying that, &quot;scarcely any two geographers appear to be quite agreed upon the subject&quot;. British physician and ethnologist James Cowles Prichard claimed in 1847 that the Aleutian Islands and the Kuril Islands form &quot;the northern boundary of this fifth region of the world, and with the coasts of Asia and America completing its literal termination.&quot; However, he wrote that these islands &quot;are not usually reckoned as belonging to it, because they are known to be inhabited by races of people who came immediately from the adjacent continents and are unconnected with those tribes of the human race who peopled the remote islands of this great ocean.&quot; He added that Hawaii was the most northerly area to be inhabited by races associated with Oceania.

The 1926 book &quot;Modern World History, 1776–1926&quot;, by Alexander Clarence Flick, considered Oceania to include all islands in the Pacific, and associated the term with the Malay Archipelago, the islands of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia, the Aleutian Islands, Japan&#x27;s Ryukyu Islands, Taiwan and the Kuril Islands. He further included in his definition Sakhalin, an island which is geologically part of the Japanese Archipelago, but that has been administered by Russia since World War II. Hong Kong, partly located in another marginal sea of the Pacific (the South China Sea) was also included in his definition. Australia and New Zealand were grouped together by Flick as Australasia, and categorized as being in the same area of the world as the islands of Oceania. Flick estimated this definition of Oceania had a population of 70,000,000, and commented that, &quot;brown and yellow races constitute the vast majority&quot; and that the minority of whites were mainly &quot;owners and rulers&quot;. Hutton Webster&#x27;s 1919 book &quot;Medieval and Modern History &quot; also considered Oceania to encompass all islands in the Pacific, stating that, &quot;the term Oceania, or Oceanica, in its widest sense applies to all the Pacific Islands.&quot; Webster broke Oceania up into two subdivisions; the continental group, which included Australia, the Japanese archipelago, the Malay Archipelago and Taiwan, and the oceanic group, which included New Zealand and the islands of Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia.

Charles Marion Tyler&#x27;s 1885 book &quot;The Island World of the Pacific Ocean&quot; considered Oceania to ethnographically encompass Australia, New Zealand, the Malay Archipelago, and the islands of Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. However, Tyler included other Pacific islands in his book as well, such as the Aleutian Islands, the Bonin Islands, the Japanese archipelago, the Juan Fernández Islands, the Kuril Islands, the Ryukyu Islands, Taiwan, California&#x27;s Channel Islands and Farallon Islands, Canada&#x27;s Vancouver Island and Queen Charlotte Islands (now known as Haida Gwaii), Chile&#x27;s Chiloé Island, Ecuador&#x27;s Galápagos Islands, Mexico&#x27;s Guadalupe Island, Revillagigedo Islands, San Benito Islands and Tres Marías Islands, and Peru&#x27;s Chincha Islands. Islands in marginal seas of the Pacific were also covered in the book, including Alaska&#x27;s Pribilof Islands and China&#x27;s Hainan. Tyler additionally profiled the Anson Archipelago, which during the 19th century was a designation for a widely scattered group of purported islands in the Northwestern Pacific Ocean between Japan and Hawaii. The Anson archipelago included phantom islands such as Ganges Island and Los Jardines which were proven to not exist, as well as real islands such as Marcus Island and Wake Island. Tyler described Australia as &quot;the leviathan of the island groups of the world&quot;. In his 1857 book &quot;A Treatise on Physical Geography&quot;, Francis B. Fogg commented that &quot;the Pacific and its dependencies may be said to contain that portion of the globe termed Oceanica or &#x27;the Maritime World&#x27;, which is divided into Australasia, Malesia and Polynesia.&quot; Fogg defined Polynesia as covering the combined islands of Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia, as well as the Ryukyu Islands. He added that, &quot;besides the proceeding, the Pacific contains many other islands, of which the most important are Hainan and Formosa, on the coast of China, the Japan isles, the Kuriles, the Aleutian Islands (stretching from the New World to the Old), Vancouver Island, the Galápagos, Juan Fernández and Chiloé.&quot; Scottish academic John Merry Ross in 1879 considered Polynesia to cover the entire South and Central Pacific area, not just islands ethnographically within Polynesia. He wrote in &quot;The Globe Encyclopedia of Universal Information&quot; that, &quot;literally interpreted, the name would include all the groups from Sumatra to the Galápagos, together with Australia.&quot; Ross further wrote, &quot;and to this vast region the term Oceania has been applied. It is more usual at the present time, however, to exclude the [Malay] archipelago.&quot;

====Historical and contemporary interpretations====
In a 1972 article for the &quot;Music Educators Journal&quot; titled &quot;Musics of Oceania&quot;, author Raymond F. Kennedy wrote: Many meanings have been given to the word Oceania. The most inclusive–but not always the most useful–embraces about 25,000 land areas between Asia and the Americas. A more popular and practical definition excludes Indonesia, East Malaysia (Borneo), the Philippines, Taiwan, Japan, and other islands closely related to the Asian mainland, as well as the Aleutians and the small island groups situated near the Americas. Thus, Oceania most commonly refers to the land areas of the South and Central Pacific. Kennedy defined Oceania as including Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. The U.S. Government Publishing Office&#x27;s &quot;Area Handbook for Oceania&quot; from 1971 states that Australia and New Zealand are the principal large sovereignties of the area. It further states: In its broadest definition Oceania embraces all islands and island groups of the Pacific Ocean that lie between Asia and the two American continents. In popular usage, however, the designation has a more restricted application. The islands of the North Pacific, such as the Aleutians and the Kuriles, usually are excluded. In addition, the series of sovereign island nations fringing Asia (Japan, Taiwan, the Philippines, East Malaysia, the Republic of Indonesia) are not ordinarily considered to be part of the area. In 1948, American military journal &quot;Armed Forces Talk&quot; broke the islands of the Pacific up into five major subdivisions; Indonesia, Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia and the non-tropical Islands. The Indonesia subdivision consisted of the islands of the Malay Archipelago, while the non-tropical islands were categorized as being North Pacific islands such as Alaska&#x27;s Kodiak archipelago, the Aleutian Islands, Japan, the Kuril Islands, and Sakhalin. Japan&#x27;s Bonin and Ryukyu Islands are also considered to be subtropical islands, with the main Japanese archipelago being non-tropical. The journal associated the term Oceania with the Melanesian, Micronesian, and Polynesian subdivisions, but not with the Indonesian or non-tropical subdivisions. The &quot;Pacific Islands Handbook&quot; (1945), by Robert William Robson, stated that, &quot;Pacific Islands generally are regarded as Pacific islands lying within the tropics. There are a considerable number of Pacific Islands outside the tropics. Most of them have little economic or political importance.&quot; He noted the political significance of the Aleutian Islands, which were invaded by the Japanese military in World War II, and categorized New Zealand&#x27;s Antipodes Islands, Auckland Islands, Bounty Islands, Campbell Islands, Chatham Island and Kermadec Islands as being non-tropical islands of the South Pacific, along with Australia&#x27;s Lord Howe Island and Norfolk Island. The Kermadec Islands, Lord Howe Island and Norfolk Island are also considered to be subtropical islands. Other non-tropical areas below the equator, such as Chiloé Island, Macquarie Island, Tasmania, and the southern portions of mainland Australia and New Zealand, were not included in this category.

According to the 1998 book &quot;Encyclopedia of Earth and Physical Sciences&quot;, Oceania refers to Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia, and more than 10,000 islands scattered across the Pacific Ocean. It notes that, &quot;the term [has] also come under scrutiny by many geographers. Some experts insist that Oceania encompasses even the cold Aleutian Islands and the islands of Japan. Disagreement also exists over whether or not Indonesia, the Philippines and Taiwan should be included in Oceania.&quot; The Japanese Archipelago, the Malay Archipelago and Taiwan and other islands near China are often deemed as a geological extension of Asia, since they do not have oceanic geology, instead being detached fragments of the Eurasian continent that were once physiographically connected. Certain Japanese islands off the main archipelago are not geologically associated with Asia. The book &quot;The World and Its Peoples: Australia, New Zealand, Oceania&quot; (1966) asserts that, &quot;Japan, Taiwan, the Aleutian Islands, Indonesia, the Philippines and Malaysia [and] the Pacific archipelagos bordering upon the Far East Asian mainland are excluded from Oceania&quot;, and that &quot;all the islands lying between Australia and the Americas, including Australia, are part of Oceania.&quot; Furthermore, the book adds that Hawaii is still within Oceania, despite being politically integrated into the U.S., and that the Pacific Ocean &quot;gives unity to the whole&quot; since &quot;all these varied lands emerge from or border upon the Pacific.&quot;

The 1876 book &quot;The Countries of the World&quot;, by British scientist and explorer Robert Brown, labelled the Malay Archipelago as Northwestern Oceania, but Brown still noted that these islands belonged more to the Asian continent. They are now often referred to as Maritime Southeast Asia, with Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Singapore being founding members of the ASEAN regional organization for Southeast Asia in 1967 (Brunei and East Timor did not exist as independent nations at that point). Brown also categorized Japan and Taiwan as being in the same part of the world as the islands of Oceania, and excluded them from &quot;The Countries of the World: Volume 5&quot;, which covered mainland Asia and Hong Kong. However, Brown did not explicitly associate Japan or Taiwan with the term Oceania. He divided Oceania into two subregions: Eastern Oceania, which included the islands of Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia, and Southwestern Oceania, which included Australia and New Zealand. The Galápagos Islands, the Juan Fernández Islands and the Revillagigedo Islands were identified as the easternmost areas of Oceania in the book. Brown wrote, &quot;they lie nearest the American continent of all oceanic islands, and though rarely associated with Polynesia, and never appearing to have been inhabited by any aboriginal races, are, in many ways, remarkable and interesting.&quot; Brown went on to add, &quot;the small islands lying off the continent, like the Queen Charlotte&#x27;s in the North Pacific, the Farallones off California, and the Chinchas off Peru are—to all intents and purposes, only detached bits of the adjoining shores. But in the case of the Galápagos, at least, this is different.&quot; The Juan Fernández Islands and the neighbouring Desventuradas Islands are today seen as the easternmost extension of the Indo-West Pacific biogeographic region. The islands lie on the Nazca Plate with Easter Island and the Galápagos Islands, and have a significant south central Pacific component to their marine fauna. According to scientific journal &quot;PLOS One&quot;, the Humboldt Current helps create a biogeographic barrier between the marine fauna of these islands and South America. Chile&#x27;s government have occasionally considered them to be within Oceania along with Easter Island. Chile&#x27;s government also categorize Easter Island, the Desventuradas Islands and the Juan Fernández Islands as being part of a region titled Insular Chile. They further include in this region Salas y Gómez, a small uninhabited island to the east of Easter Island. &quot;PLOS One&quot; describe Insular Chile as having &quot;cultural and ecological connections to the broader insular Pacific.&quot;


In her 1997 book &quot;Australia and Oceania&quot;, Australian historian Kate Darian-Smith defined the area as covering Australia, New Zealand and the islands of the Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia. She excluded Hawaii from her definition, but not Easter Island. The International Union for Conservation of Nature stated in a 1986 report that they include Easter Island in their definition of Oceania &quot;on the basis of its Polynesian and biogeographic affinities even though it is politically apart&quot;, further noting that other oceanic islands administered by Latin American countries had been included in definitions of Oceania. In 1987, &quot;The Journal of Australasian Cave Research&quot; described Oceania as being &quot;the region from Irian Jaya (Western New Guinea, a province of New Guinea) in the west to Galápagos Islands (Equador) and Easter Island (Chile) in the east.&quot; In a 1980 report on venereal diseases in the South Pacific, the &quot;British Journal of Venereal Diseases&quot; categorized the Desventuradas Islands, Easter Island, the Galápagos Islands and the Juan Fernández Islands as being in an eastern region of the South Pacific, along with areas such as Pitcairn Islands and French Polynesia, but noted that the Galápagos Islands were not a member of the South Pacific Commission, like other islands in the South Pacific. The South Pacific Commission is a developmental organization formed in 1947 and is currently known as the Pacific Community; its members include Australia and other Pacific Islands Forum members. In a 1947 article on the formation of the South Pacific Commission for the &quot;Pacific Affairs&quot; journal, author Roy E. James stated the organization&#x27;s scope encompassed all non-self governing islands below the equator to the east of Papua New Guinea (which itself was included in the scope and then known as Dutch New Guinea). Easter Island and the Galápagos Islands were defined by James as falling within the organization&#x27;s geographical parameters. The 2007 book &quot;Asia in the Pacific Islands: Replacing the West&quot;, by New Zealand Pacific scholar Ron Crocombe, defined the term &quot;Pacific Islands&quot; as being islands in the South Pacific Commission, and stated that such a definition &quot;does not include Galápagos and other [oceanic] islands off the Pacific coast of the Americas; these were uninhabited when Europeans arrived, then integrated with a South American country and have almost no contact with other Pacific Islands.&quot; He adds, &quot;Easter Island still participates in some Pacific Island affairs because its people are Polynesian.&quot;

Thomas Sebeok&#x27;s two volume 1971 book &quot;Linguistics in Oceania&quot; defines Easter Island, the Galápagos Islands, the Juan Fernández Islands, Costa Rica&#x27;s Cocos Island and Colombia&#x27;s Malpelo Island (all oceanic) as making up a Spanish language segment of Oceania. Cocos Island and Malpelo Island are the only landmasses located on the Cocos Plate, which is to the north of the Nazca Plate. The book observed that a native Polynesian language was still understood on Easter Island, unlike with the other islands, which were uninhabited when discovered by Europeans and mostly being used as prisons for convicts. Additionally, the book includes Taiwan and the entire Malay Archipelago as part of Oceania. While not oceanic in nature, Taiwan and Malay Archipelago countries like Indonesia and the Philippines share Austronesian ethnolinguistic origins with Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia, hence their inclusion in the book. Hainan, which neighbours Taiwan, also has Austronesian ethnolinguistic origins, although it was not included in the book. The book defined Oceania&#x27;s major subregions as being Australia, Indonesia (which included all areas associated with the Malay Archipelago), Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. In 2010, Australian historian Bronwen Douglas claimed in &quot;The Journal of Pacific History&quot; that &quot;a strong case could be made for extending Oceania to at least Taiwan, the homeland of the Austronesian language family whose speakers colonized significant parts of the region about 6,000 years ago.&quot; For political reasons, Taiwan was a member of the Oceania Football Confederation during the 1970s and 1980s, rather than the Asian Football Confederation.

Ian Todd&#x27;s 1974 book &quot;Island Realm: A Pacific Panorama&quot; also defines oceanic Latin American islands as making up a Spanish language segment of Oceania, and included the Desventuradas Islands, Easter Island, the Galápagos Islands, Guadalupe Island, the Juan Fernández Islands, the Revillagigedo Islands and Salas y Gómez. Cocos Island and Malpelo Island were not explicitly referenced in the book, despite being areas which would fall within this range. All other islands associated with Latin American countries were excluded, as they are continental in nature, unlike Guadalupe Island and the Revillagigedo Islands (both situated on the Pacific Plate) and the oceanic islands situated on the Cocos Plate and Nazca Plate. Todd defined the oceanic Bonin Islands as making up a Japanese language segment of Oceania, and excluded the main Japanese archipelago. Todd further included the Aleutian Islands in his definition of Oceania. The island chain borders both the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate, and is geologically a partially submerged volcanic extension of the Aleutian Range on the Alaskan mainland. He did not include the volcanic Kuril Islands and Ryukyu Islands, which similarly border both the Eurasian Plate and the Pacific Plate, nor did he include the neighbouring Kodiak archipelago in the North Pacific Ocean, which is firmly situated on the North American Plate. &quot;The Stockholm Journal of East Asian Studies&quot; stated in 1996 that Oceania was defined as Australia and an ensemble of various Pacific Islands, &quot;particularly those in the central and south Pacific [but] never those in the extreme north, for example the Aleutian chain.&quot; In the &quot;Pacific Ocean Handbook&quot; (1945), author Eliot Grinnell Mears claimed, &quot;it is customary to exclude the Aleutians of the North Pacific, the American coastal islands and the Netherlands East Indies&quot;, and that he included Australia and New Zealand in Oceania for &quot;scientific reasons; Australia&#x27;s fauna is largely continental in character, New Zealand&#x27;s are clearly insular; and neither Commonwealth realm has close ties with Asia.&quot; In his 2002 book &quot;Oceania: An Introduction to the Cultures and Identities of Pacific Islanders&quot;, Andrew Strathern excluded Okinawa and the rest of the Ryukyu Islands from his definition of Oceania, but noted that the islands and their indigenous inhabitants &quot;show many parallels with Pacific island societies.&quot;

In the 2006 book &quot;Extinction and Biogeography of Tropical Pacific Birds&quot;, American paleontologist David Steadman wrote, &quot;no place on earth is as perplexing as the 25,000 islands that make Oceania.&quot; Steadman viewed Oceania as encompassing Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia (including Easter Island and Hawaii). He excluded from his definition the larger islands of New Guinea and New Zealand, and argued that Cocos Island, the Galápagos Islands, the Revillagigedo Islands and other oceanic islands nearing the Americas were not part of Oceania, due to their biogeographical affinities with that area and lack of prehistoric indigenous populations. In his 2018 book &quot;Regionalism in South Pacific&quot;, Chinese author Yu Changsen wrote that some &quot;stress a narrow vision of the Pacific as those Pacific Islands excluding Australia and even sometimes New Zealand&quot;, adding that the term Oceania &quot;promotes a broader concept that has room for Australia and New Zealand.&quot;

American marine geologist Anthony A. P. Koppers wrote in the 2009 book &quot;Encyclopedia of Islands&quot; that, &quot;as a whole, the islands of the Pacific Region are referred to as Oceania, the tenth continent on earth. Inherent to their remoteness and because of the wide variety of island types, the Pacific Islands have developed unique social, biological and geological characteristics.&quot; Koppers considered Oceania to encompass the entire 25,000 islands of the Pacific Ocean. In this book, he included the Aleutian Islands, the Galápagos Islands, the Japanese archipelago, the Kuril Islands and continental islands off the coast of the Americas such as the Channel Islands, the Farallon Islands and Vancouver Island; all of these islands lie in or close to the Pacific Ring of Fire, as is the case with New Guinea and New Zealand, which were also included. In the 2013 book &quot;The Environments of the Poor in Southeast Asia, East Asia and the Pacific&quot;, Paul Bullen critiqued the definition of Oceania in &quot;Encyclopedia of Islands&quot;, and wrote that since Koppers included areas such as Vancouver Island, it is &quot;not clear what the referents of &#x27;Pacific Region&#x27;, &#x27;Oceania&#x27; or &#x27;Pacific Islands&#x27; are.&quot; Bullen added that, &quot;Asia, Europe and the Maritime Continent are not literal geographic continents. The &#x27;Asia–Pacific region&#x27; would comprise two quasi-continents. &#x27;The Pacific&#x27; would not refer to the Pacific Ocean and everything in it e.g., the Philippines.&quot; &quot;The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Place Names&quot; (2017), by John Everett-Heath, states that Oceania is &quot;a collective name for more than 10,000 islands in the Pacific Ocean&quot; and that &quot;it is generally accepted that Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan, and the islands north of Japan (the Kurils and Aleutians) are excluded.&quot; In his 1993 book &quot;A New Oceania: Rediscovering Our Sea of Islands&quot;, New Guinea-born Fijian scholar Epeli Hauʻofa wrote that, &quot;Pacific Ocean islands from Japan, through the Philippines and Indonesia, which are adjacent to the Asian mainland, do not have oceanic cultures, and are therefore not part of Oceania.&quot;

&quot;The Oxford Handbook of Prehistoric Oceania&quot; (2018) defined Oceania as only covering Austronesian-speaking islands in Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia, with this definition including New Guinea and New Zealand. Other Austronesian areas such as Indonesia and the Philippines were not included, due to their closer cultural proximity to mainland Asia. Australia was also not included, as it was settled several thousands of years before the arrival of Austronesian-speaking peoples in Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia. The book stated, &quot;this definition of Oceania might seem too restrictive: Why not include Australia, for example, or even too broad, for what does Highland New Guinea have to do with Hawai&#x27;i?&quot;, further noting that, &quot;a few other islands in the Pacific such as those of Japan or the Channel Islands off the southern California coast are not typically considered Oceania as the indigenous populations of these places do not share a common ancestry with Oceanic groups, except for a time far before humans sailed Pacific waters.&quot; It has been theorized that the indigenous Jōmon people of the Japanese archipelago are related to Austronesians, along with the indigenous inhabitants of the Ryukyu Islands. Some also theorize that Indigenous Australians are related to the Ainu people, who are the original inhabitants of Japan&#x27;s Hokkaido, the Kuril Islands and the southern part of Sakhalin. In their 2019 book &quot;Women and Violence: Global Lives in Focus&quot;, Kathleen Nadeau and Sangita Rayamajhi wrote: the Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei, and most of Indonesia are not usually considered to be part of the region of Oceania as it is understood today. These regions are usually considered to be part of Maritime Southeast Asia. Although these regions, as well as the large East Asian islands of Taiwan, Hainan and the Japanese archipelago, have varying degrees of cultural connections.

In &quot;Reptiles and Amphibians of the Pacific Islands: A Comprehensive Guide&quot; (2013), George R. Zug claimed that &quot;a standard definition of Oceania includes Australia, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, New Caledonia, and New Zealand and the oceanic islands of Polynesia, Micronesia, and Melanesia.&quot; He went on to write that his preferred definition of Oceania emphasizes islands with oceanic geology, stating that oceanic islands are, &quot;islands with no past connections to a continental landmass&quot; and that, &quot;these boundaries encompass the Hawaiian and Bonin Islands in the north and Easter Island in the south, and the Palau Islands in the west to the Galápagos Islands in the east.&quot; Australia, New Guinea, New Zealand and New Caledonia (which is geologically associated with New Zealand) were all excluded, as these areas are descendants of the ancient Pangaea supercontinent, along with landmasses such as the Americas and Afro-Eurasia. Volcanic islands which are geologically associated with continental landmasses, such as the Aleutian Islands, Japan&#x27;s Izu Islands, the Kuril Islands, the Ryukyu Islands and most of the Solomon Islands, were also excluded from his definition. Unlike the United Nations, the World Factbook defines the still-uninhabited Clipperton Island as being a discrete political entity, and they categorize it as part of North America, presumably due to its relative proximity (situated 1,200 kilometres off Mexico on the Pacific Plate). Clipperton is not politically associated with the Americas, as is the case with other oceanic islands nearing the Americas, having had almost no interaction with the continent throughout its history. From the early 20th century to 2007, the island was administratively part of French Polynesia, which itself was known as French Oceania up until 1957. In terms of marine fauna, Clipperton shares similarities with areas of the Pacific which are much farther removed from the Americas. Scottish author Robert Hope Moncrieff considered Clipperton to be the easternmost point of Oceania in 1907, while Ian Todd also included it in his definition of Oceania in &quot;Island Realm: A Pacific Panorama&quot;.

Other uninhabited Pacific Ocean landmasses have been explicitly associated with Oceania, including the highly remote Baker Island and Wake Island (now administered by the U.S. military). This is due to their location in the centre of the Pacific, their biogeography and their oceanic geology. Less isolated oceanic islands that were once uninhabited, such as the Bonin Islands, the Galápagos Islands and the Juan Fernández Islands, have since been sparsely populated by citizens of their political administrators. Archaeological evidence suggests that Micronesians may have lived on the Bonin Islands years ago, but they were uninhabited at the time of European discovery in the 16th century.

====Boundaries between subregions====
Depending on the definition, New Zealand could be part of Polynesia, or part of Australasia with Australia. New Zealand was originally settled by the Polynesian Māori, and has long maintained a political influence over the subregion. Through immigration and high Māori birth rates, New Zealand has attained the largest population of Polynesians in the world, while Australia has the third largest Polynesian population (consisting entirely of immigrants). Modern-day Indigenous Australians are loosely related to Melanesians, and Australia maintains political influence over Melanesia, which is mostly located on the same tectonic plate. Despite this, Australia is rarely seen as a part of the subregion. As with Australia and New Zealand, Melanesia&#x27;s New Caledonia has a significant non-indigenous European population, numbering around 71,000. Conversely, New Caledonia has still had a similar history to the rest of Melanesia, and their French-speaking Europeans make up only 27% of the total population. As such, it is not also culturally considered a part of the predominantly English-speaking Australasia. Some cultural and political definitions of Australasia include most or all of Melanesia, due to its geographical proximity to Australia and New Zealand, but these are rare. Australia, New Zealand and the islands of Melanesia are more commonly grouped together as part of the Australasian biogeographical realm. Papua New Guinea is geographically the closest country to Australia, and is often geologically associated with Australia as it was once physiologically connected. Australia&#x27;s Indian Ocean external territories of Christmas Island and Cocos (Keeling) Islands are situated within the bounds of the Australian Plate and have been geographically associated with Southeast Asia, due to their proximity to western Indonesia. Both were uninhabited when discovered by Europeans during the 17th century. Approximately half of the population on these islands are European Australian mainlanders (with smaller numbers being European New Zealanders), while the other half are immigrants from China or the nearby Malay Archipelago. Australia&#x27;s Indian Ocean external territory Heard Island and McDonald Islands lie on the Antarctic Plate and are also thought of as being in Antarctica or no region at all, due to their extreme geographical isolation. The World Factbook define Heard Island and McDonald Islands as part of Antarctica, while placing Christmas Island and Cocos (Keeling) Islands as the westernmost extent of Oceania.

Norfolk Island, an external territory of Australia, was inhabited in prehistoric times by either Melanesians or Polynesians, and is geographically adjacent to the islands of Melanesia. The current inhabitants are mostly European Australians, and the UN categorize it as being in the Australasia subregion. The 1982 edition of the &quot;South Pacific Handbook&quot;, by David Stanley, groups Australia, New Zealand, Norfolk Island, and Hawaii together under an &quot;Anglonesia&quot; category. This is in spite of the geographical distance separating these areas from Hawaii, which technically lies in the North Pacific. The 1985 edition of the &quot;South Pacific Handbook&quot; also groups the Galápagos Islands as being in Polynesia, while noting that they are not culturally a part of the subregion. The islands are typically grouped with others in the southeastern Pacific that were never inhabited by Polynesians.

The Bonin Islands are in the same biogeographical realm as the geographically adjacent Micronesia, and are often grouped in with the subregion because of this.

==History==
===Colonisation of Oceania===

====Australia====

Indigenous Australians are the original inhabitants of the Australian continent and nearby islands who migrated from Africa to Asia 70,000 years ago and arrived in Australia 50,000 years ago. They are believed to be among the earliest human migrations out of Africa. Although they likely migrated to Australia through Southeast Asia, they are not demonstrably related to any known Asian or Polynesian population. There is evidence of genetic and linguistic interchange between Australians in the far north and the Austronesian peoples of modern-day New Guinea and the islands, but this may be the result of recent trade and intermarriage.

They reached Tasmania 40,000 years ago by migrating across a land bridge from the mainland that existed during the last ice age. It is believed that the first early human migration to Australia was achieved when this landmass formed part of the Sahul continent, connected to the island of New Guinea via a land bridge. The Torres Strait Islanders are indigenous to the Torres Strait Islands, which are at the northernmost tip of Queensland near Papua New Guinea. The earliest definite human remains found in Australia are that of Mungo Man, which have been dated at 40,000 years old.

It is estimated that 4% to 6% of the genome in Melanesians (e.g. Papua New Guinean and Bougainville Islander) derives from the Denisova hominin, an ancient human species discovered in 2010, while no Eurasians or Africans displayed contributions of the Denisovan genes.

====Melanesia====

The original inhabitants of the group of islands now named Melanesia were likely the ancestors of the present-day Papuan-speaking people. Migrating from Southeast Asia, they appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the Solomon Islands archipelago, including Makira and possibly the smaller islands farther to the east.

Particularly along the north coast of New Guinea and in the islands north and east of New Guinea, the Austronesian people, who had migrated into the area somewhat more than 3,000 years ago, came into contact with these pre-existing populations of Papuan-speaking peoples. In the late 20th century, some scholars theorized a long period of interaction, which resulted in many complex changes in genetics, languages, and culture among the peoples.

====Micronesia====

Micronesia began to be settled several millennia ago, although there are competing theories about the origin and arrival of the first settlers. There are numerous difficulties with conducting archaeological excavations in the islands, due to their size, settlement patterns and storm damage. As a result, much evidence is based on linguistic analysis.

The earliest archaeological traces of civilization have been found on the island of Saipan, dated to 1500 BCE or slightly before. The ancestors of the Micronesians settled there over 4,000 years ago. A decentralized chieftain-based system eventually evolved into a more centralized economic and religious culture centred on Yap and Pohnpei. The prehistories of many Micronesian islands such as Yap are not known very well.

The first people of the Northern Mariana Islands navigated to the islands and discovered it at some period between 4000 BCE to 2000 BCE from Southeast Asia. They became known as the Chamorros. Their language was named after them. The ancient Chamorro left a number of megalithic ruins, including Latte stone. The Refaluwasch or Carolinian people came to the Marianas in the 1800s from the Caroline Islands. Micronesian colonists gradually settled the Marshall Islands during the 2nd millennium BCE, with inter-island navigation made possible using traditional stick charts.

====Polynesia====


The Polynesian people are considered to be by linguistic, archaeological and human genetic ancestry a subset of the sea-migrating Austronesian people and tracing Polynesian languages places their prehistoric origins in the Malay Archipelago, and ultimately, in Taiwan. Between 3000 and 1000 BCE, speakers of Austronesian languages began spreading from Taiwan into Island Southeast Asia, as tribes whose natives were thought to have arrived through South China 8,000 years ago to the edges of western Micronesia and on into Melanesia.

In the archaeological record there are well-defined traces of this expansion which allow the path it took to be followed and dated with some certainty. It is thought that by roughly 1400 BCE, &quot;Lapita Peoples&quot;, so-named after their pottery tradition, appeared in the Bismarck Archipelago of north-west Melanesia.

Easter Islanders claimed that a chief Hotu Matuꞌa discovered the island in one or two large canoes with his wife and extended family. They are believed to have been Polynesian. Around 1200, Tahitian explorers discovered and began settling the area. This date range is based on glottochronological calculations and on three radiocarbon dates from charcoal that appears to have been produced during forest clearance activities. Moreover, a recent study which included radiocarbon dates from what is thought to be very early material suggests that the island was discovered and settled as recently as 1200.

===European exploration===

Oceania was first explored by Europeans from the 16th century onwards. Portuguese navigators, between 1512 and 1526, reached the Maluku Islands (by António de Abreu and Francisco Serrão in 1512), Timor, the Aru Islands (Martim A. Melo Coutinho), the Tanimbar Islands, some of the Caroline Islands (by Gomes de Sequeira in 1525), and west Papua New Guinea (by Jorge de Menezes in 1526). In 1519, a Spanish expedition led by Ferdinand Magellan sailed down the east coast of South America, found and sailed through the strait that bears his name and on 28 November 1520 entered the ocean which he named &quot;Pacific&quot;. The three remaining ships, led by Magellan and his captains Duarte Barbosa and João Serrão, then sailed north and caught the trade winds which carried them across the Pacific to the Philippines where Magellan was killed. One surviving ship led by Juan Sebastián Elcano returned west across the Indian Ocean and the other went north in the hope of finding the westerlies and reaching Mexico. Unable to find the right winds, it was forced to return to the East Indies. The Magellan-Elcano expedition achieved the first circumnavigation of the world and reached the Philippines, the Mariana Islands, and other islands of Oceania.

From 1527 to 1595, a number of other large Spanish expeditions crossed the Pacific Ocean, leading to the arrival in Marshall Islands and Palau in the North Pacific, as well as Tuvalu, the Marquesas Islands, the Solomon Islands archipelago, the Cook Islands, and the Admiralty Islands in the South Pacific.

In the quest for Terra Australis, Spanish explorations in the 17th century, such as the expedition led by the Portuguese navigator Pedro Fernandes de Queirós, sailed to Pitcairn and Vanuatu archipelagos, and sailed the Torres Strait between Australia and New Guinea, named after navigator Luís Vaz de Torres. Willem Janszoon, made the first completely documented European landing in Australia (1606), in Cape York Peninsula. Abel Tasman circumnavigated and landed on parts of the Australian continental coast and discovered Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (now Tasmania), New Zealand in 1642, and Fiji. He was the first known European explorer to reach these islands.

On 23 April 1770, British explorer James Cook made his first recorded direct observation of Aboriginal Australians at Brush Island near Bawley Point. On 29 April, Cook and crew made their first landfall on the mainland of the continent at a place now known as the Kurnell Peninsula. It is here that James Cook made first contact with an aboriginal tribe known as the Gweagal. His expedition became the first recorded Europeans to have encountered its eastern coastline of Australia.

====European settlement and colonisation====
In 1789, the mutiny on the Bounty against William Bligh led to several of the mutineers escaping the Royal Navy and settling on Pitcairn Islands, which later became a British colony. Britain also established colonies in Australia in 1788, New Zealand in 1840 and Fiji in 1872, with much of Oceania becoming part of the British Empire. The Gilbert Islands (now known as Kiribati) and the Ellice Islands (now known as Tuvalu) came under Britain&#x27;s sphere of influence in the late 19th century.

French Catholic missionaries arrived on Tahiti in 1834; their expulsion in 1836 caused France to send a gunboat in 1838. In 1842, Tahiti and Tahuata were declared a French protectorate, to allow Catholic missionaries to work undisturbed. On 24 September 1853, under orders from Napoleon III, Admiral Febvrier Despointes took formal possession of New Caledonia.

The Spanish explorer Alonso de Salazar landed in the Marshall Islands in 1529. They were named by Krusenstern, after English explorer John Marshall, who visited them together with Thomas Gilbert in 1788, en route from Botany Bay to Canton (two ships of the First Fleet). In 1905, the British government transferred some administrative responsibility over southeast New Guinea to Australia (which renamed the area &quot;Territory of Papua&quot;); and in 1906, transferred all remaining responsibility to Australia. The Marshall Islands were claimed by Spain in 1874. Germany established colonies in New Guinea in 1884, and Samoa in 1900. The United States also expanded into the Pacific, beginning with Baker Island and Howland Island in 1857, and with Hawaii becoming a US territory in 1898. Disagreements between the US, the UK, and Germany over Samoa led to the Tripartite Convention of 1899.

===Modern history===

One of the first land offensives in Oceania was the Occupation of German Samoa in August 1914 by New Zealand forces. The campaign to take Samoa ended without bloodshed after over 1,000 New Zealanders landed on the German colony. Australian forces attacked German New Guinea in September 1914. A company of Australians and a British warship besieged the Germans and their colonial subjects, ending with a German surrender.

The attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters, was a surprise military strike conducted by the Imperial Japanese Navy against the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on the morning of 7 December 1941. The attack led to the United States&#x27; entry into World War II. The Japanese subsequently invaded New Guinea, Solomon Islands and other Pacific islands. The Japanese were turned back at the Battle of the Coral Sea and the Kokoda Track campaign before they were finally defeated in 1945. Some of the most prominent Oceanic battlegrounds were the Battle of Bita Paka, the Solomon Islands campaign, the Air raids on Darwin, the Kokoda Track, and the Borneo campaign. The United States fought the Battle of Guam from 21 July to 10 August 1944, to recapture the island from Japanese military occupation.

Australia and New Zealand became dominions in the 20th century, adopting the Statute of Westminster Act in 1942 and 1947 respectively. In 1946, Polynesians were granted French citizenship and the islands&#x27; status was changed to an overseas territory; the islands&#x27; name was changed in 1957 to &quot;Polynésie Française&quot; (French Polynesia). Hawaii became a U.S. state in 1959. Fiji and Tonga became independent in 1970. On 1 May 1979, in recognition of the evolving political status of the Marshall Islands, the United States recognised the constitution of the Marshall Islands and the establishment of the government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. The South Pacific Forum was founded in 1971, which became the Pacific Islands Forum in 2000.

==Geography==


Under a four subregion model, the islands of Oceania extend to New Guinea in the west, the Bonin Islands in the northwest, the Hawaiian Islands in the northeast, Easter Island and Sala y Gómez Island in the east, and Macquarie Island in the south. Excluded under most definitions of Oceania are the Pacific landmasses of Taiwan, the Ryukyu Islands, and the Japanese archipelago, which are all on the margins of Asia, as well as the Aleutian Islands and other Alaskan or Canadian islands. In its periphery, Oceania&#x27;s islands would sprawl 28 degrees north to the Bonin Islands in the Northern Hemisphere, and 55 degrees south to Macquarie Island in the Southern Hemisphere.

Oceanian islands are of four basic types: continental islands, high islands, coral reefs and uplifted coral platforms. High islands are of volcanic origin, and many contain active volcanoes. Among these are Bougainville, Hawaii, and Solomon Islands.

Oceania is one of eight terrestrial biogeographic realms, which constitute the major ecological regions of the planet. Related to these concepts are Near Oceania, that part of western Island Melanesia which has been inhabited for tens of millennia, and Remote Oceania which is more recently settled. Although the majority of the Oceanian islands lie in the South Pacific, a few of them are not restricted to the Pacific Ocean – Kangaroo Island and Ashmore and Cartier Islands, for instance, are situated in the Southern Ocean and Indian Ocean, respectively, and Tasmania&#x27;s west coast faces the Southern Ocean.
The coral reefs of the South Pacific are low-lying structures that have built up on basaltic lava flows under the ocean&#x27;s surface. One of the most dramatic is the Great Barrier Reef off northeastern Australia with chains of reef patches. A second island type formed of coral is the uplifted coral platform, which is usually slightly larger than the low coral islands. Examples include Banaba (formerly Ocean Island) and Makatea in the Tuamotu group of French Polynesia.

===Regions===
Micronesia, which lies north of the equator and west of the International Date Line, includes the Mariana Islands in the northwest, the Caroline Islands in the centre, the Marshall Islands to the west and the islands of Kiribati in the southeast.

Melanesia, to the southwest, includes New Guinea, the world&#x27;s second largest island after Greenland and by far the largest of the Pacific islands. The other main Melanesian groups from north to south are the Bismarck Archipelago, the Solomon Islands, the Santa Cruz Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji and New Caledonia.

Polynesia, stretching from Hawaii in the north to New Zealand in the south, also encompasses Tuvalu, Tokelau, Samoa, Tonga, and the Kermadec Islands to the west, the Cook Islands, Society Islands and Austral Islands in the centre, and the Marquesas Islands, the Tuamotus, Mangareva Islands, and Easter Island to the east.

Australasia comprises Australia, New Zealand, and neighbouring islands in the Pacific Ocean. Along with India most of Australasia lies on the Indo-Australian Plate with the latter occupying the Southern area. It is flanked by the Indian Ocean to the west and the Southern Ocean to the south.

===Geology===
The Pacific Plate, which makes up most of Oceania, is an oceanic tectonic plate that lies beneath the Pacific Ocean. At , it is the largest tectonic plate. The plate contains an interior hot spot forming the Hawaiian Islands. It is almost entirely oceanic crust. The oldest member disappearing by way of the plate tectonics cycle is early-Cretaceous (145 to 137 million years ago).

Australia became part of the Indo-Australian Plate 45 to 40 million years ago and this is in the process of separating again with the Australian Plate being relevant to Oceania. It is the lowest, flattest, and oldest landmass on Earth and it has had a relatively stable geological history. Geological forces such as tectonic uplift of mountain ranges or clashes between tectonic plates occurred mainly in Australia&#x27;s early history, when it was still a part of Gondwana. Australia is situated in the middle of the tectonic plate, has occasional middle-sized earthquakes, and currently has no active volcanism (but some volcanoes in southeast Australia erupted within the last 10,000 years).

The geology of New Zealand is noted for its volcanic activity, earthquakes, and geothermal areas because of its position on the boundary of the Australian Plate and Pacific Plates. Much of the basement rock of New Zealand was once part of the super-continent of Gondwana, along with South America, Africa, Madagascar, India, Antarctica and Australia. The rocks that now form the continent of Zealandia were nestled between Eastern Australia and Western Antarctica.

The Australia-New Zealand continental fragment of Gondwana split from the rest of Gondwana in the late Cretaceous time (95–90 Ma). By 75 Ma, Zealandia was essentially separate from Australia and Antarctica, although only shallow seas might have separated Zealandia and Australia in the north. The Tasman Sea, and part of Zealandia then locked together with Australia to form the Australian Plate (40 Ma), and a new plate boundary was created between the Australian Plate and Pacific Plate.

Most islands in the Pacific are high islands (volcanic islands), such as, Easter Island, American Samoa and Fiji, among others, having peaks up to 1300 m rising abruptly from the shore. The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands were formed 7 to 30 million years ago, as shield volcanoes over the same volcanic hotspot that formed the Emperor Seamounts to the north and the Main Hawaiian Islands to the south. Hawaii&#x27;s tallest mountain Mauna Kea is above mean sea level.

===Flora===


The most diverse country of Oceania when it comes to the environment is Australia, with tropical rainforests in the north-east, mountain ranges in the south-east, south-west and east, and dry desert in the centre. Desert or semi-arid land commonly known as the outback makes up by far the largest portion of land. The coastal uplands and a belt of Brigalow grasslands lie between the coast and the mountains, while inland of the dividing range are large areas of grassland. The northernmost point of the east coast is the tropical-rainforested Cape York Peninsula.

Prominent features of the Australian flora are adaptations to aridity and fire which include scleromorphy and serotiny. These adaptations are common in species from the large and well-known families Proteaceae (&quot;Banksia&quot;), Myrtaceae (&quot;Eucalyptus&quot; – gum trees), and Fabaceae (&quot;Acacia&quot; – wattle). The flora of Fiji, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and New Caledonia is tropical dry forest, with tropical vegetation that includes palm trees, &quot;Premna protrusa&quot;, &quot;Psydrax odorata&quot;, &quot;Gyrocarpus americanus&quot;, and &quot;Derris trifoliata&quot;.

New Zealand&#x27;s landscape ranges from the fjord-like sounds of the southwest to the tropical beaches of the far north. South Island is dominated by the Southern Alps. There are 18 peaks of more than 3000 metres (9800 ft) in the South Island. All summits over 2,900 m are within the Southern Alps, a chain that forms the backbone of the South Island; the highest peak of which is Aoraki / Mount Cook, at . Earthquakes are common, though usually not severe, averaging 3,000 per year. There is a wide variety of native trees, adapted to all the various micro-climates in New Zealand.

In Hawaii, one endemic plant, &quot;Brighamia&quot;, now requires hand-pollination because its natural pollinator is presumed to be extinct. The two species of &quot;Brighamia&quot; – &quot;B. rockii&quot; and &quot;B. insignis&quot; – are represented in the wild by around 120 individual plants. To ensure these plants set seed, biologists rappel down cliffs to brush pollen onto their stigmas.

===Fauna===
The aptly named Pacific kingfisher is found in the Pacific Islands, as is the Red-vented bulbul, Polynesian starling, Brown goshawk, Pacific Swallow and the Cardinal myzomela, among others. Birds breeding on Pitcairn include the fairy tern, common noddy, and red-tailed tropicbird. The Pitcairn reed warbler, endemic to Pitcairn Island, was added to the endangered species list in 2008.

Native to Hawaii is the Hawaiian crow, which has been extinct in the wild since 2002. The brown tree snake is native to northern and eastern coasts of Australia, Papua New Guinea, Guam and Solomon Islands. Native to Australia, New Guinea and proximate islands are birds of paradise, honeyeaters, Australasian treecreeper, Australasian robin, kingfishers, butcherbirds, and bowerbirds.

A unique feature of Australia&#x27;s fauna is the relative scarcity of native placental mammals, and dominance of the marsupials – a group of mammals that raise their young in a pouch, including the macropods, possums, and dasyuromorphs. The passerines of Australia, also known as songbirds or perching birds, include wrens, the magpie group, thornbills, corvids, pardalotes, lyrebirds. Predominant bird species in the country include the Australian magpie, Australian raven, the pied currawong, crested pigeons and the laughing kookaburra. The koala, emu, platypus and kangaroo are national animals of Australia, and the Tasmanian devil is also one of the well-known animals in the country. The goanna is a predatory lizard native to the Australian mainland.

The birds of New Zealand evolved into an avifauna that included a large number of endemic species. As an island archipelago New Zealand accumulated bird diversity and when Captain James Cook arrived in the 1770s he noted that the bird song was deafening. The mix includes species with unusual biology such as the kākāpō which is the world&#x27;s only flightless, nocturnal, lek-breeding parrot, but also many species that are similar to neighbouring land areas. Some of the more well known and distinctive bird species in New Zealand are the kiwi, kea, takahē, Kākāpō, mohua, tūī, and the bellbird. The tuatara is a notable reptile endemic to New Zealand.

Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea, Wallacea, and the islands of the Pacific Ocean collectively possess 42% of the world&#x27;s parrot species, including half of all Critically Endangered parrots, many of which are endemic to the region.

===Climate===
The Pacific Islands are ruled by a tropical rainforest and tropical savanna climate. In the tropical and subtropical Pacific, the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) affects weather conditions. In the tropical western Pacific, the monsoon and the related wet season during the summer months contrast with dry winds in the winter which blow over the ocean from the Asian landmass. November is the only month in which all the tropical cyclone basins are active.

To the southwest of the region, in the Australian landmass, the climate is mostly desert or semi-arid, with the southern coastal corners having a temperate climate, such as oceanic and humid subtropical climate in the east coast and Mediterranean climate in the west. The northern parts of the country have a tropical climate. Snow falls frequently on the highlands near the east coast, in the states of Victoria, New South Wales, Tasmania and in the Australian Capital Territory.

Most regions of New Zealand belong to the temperate zone with a maritime climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfb) characterised by four distinct seasons. Conditions vary from extremely wet on the West Coast of the South Island to almost semi-arid in Central Otago and subtropical in Northland. Snow falls in New Zealand&#x27;s South Island and at higher altitudes in the North Island. It is extremely rare at sea level in the North Island.

Hawaii, although being in the tropics, experiences many different climates, depending on latitude and its geography. The island of Hawaii for example hosts 4 (out of 5 in total) climate groups on a surface as small as according to the Köppen climate types: tropical, arid, temperate and polar. The Hawaiian Islands receive most of their precipitation during the winter months (October to April). A few islands in the northwest, such as Guam, are susceptible to typhoons in the wet season.

The highest recorded temperature in Oceania occurred in Oodnadatta, South Australia (2 January 1960), where the temperature reached . The lowest temperature ever recorded in Oceania was , at Ranfurly in Otago in 1903, with a more recent temperature of recorded in 1995 in nearby Ophir. Pohnpei of the Senyavin Islands in Micronesia is the wettest settlement in Oceania, and one of the wettest places on earth, with annual recorded rainfall exceeding each year in certain mountainous locations. The Big Bog on the island of Maui is the wettest place, receiving an average each year.

==Demographics==
The demographic table below shows the subregions and countries of geopolitical Oceania. The countries and territories in this table are categorised according to the scheme for geographic subregions used by the United Nations. The information shown follows sources in cross-referenced articles; where sources differ, provisos have been clearly indicated. These territories and regions are subject to various additional categorisations, depending on the source and purpose of each description.
===Largest city for regions===
* Australasia (metro, urban or proper largest city: Sydney)
* Melanesia (metro, urban or proper largest city: Jayapura)
* Micronesia (metro, urban or proper largest city: Tarawa)
* Polynesia (metro, urban or proper largest city: Honolulu)

===Cities by metropolitan area===
===Religion===


The predominant religion in Oceania is Christianity (73%). A 2011 survey found that 92% in Melanesia, 93% in Micronesia and 96% in Polynesia described themselves as Christians. Traditional religions are often animist, and prevalent among traditional tribes is the belief in spirits (&quot;masalai&quot; in Tok Pisin) representing natural forces. In the 2018 census, 37% of New Zealanders affiliated themselves with Christianity and 48% declared no religion. In the 2016 Census, 52% of the Australian population declared some variety of Christianity and 30% stated &quot;no religion&quot;.

In recent Australian and New Zealand censuses, large proportions of the population say they belong to &quot;no religion&quot; (which includes atheism, agnosticism, deism, and secular humanism). In Tonga, everyday life is heavily influenced by Polynesian traditions and especially by the Christian faith. The Ahmadiyya mosque in Marshall Islands is the only mosque in Micronesia. Another one in Tuvalu belongs to the same sect. The Baháʼí House of Worship in Tiapapata, Samoa, is one of seven designations administered in the Baháʼí Faith.

Hinduism is a minority faith in Oceania. Fiji has the highest percentage of Hindus in Oceania at 29.7% In absolute numbers, Australia has the largest population of Hindus in Oceania constituting 2.7% of the country&#x27;s population. In New Zealand, Hindus form 2.65% of the population of. Samoa also has a significant Hindu population.

Other religions in the region include Islam and Buddhism, which are prominent minority religions in Australia and New Zealand. Judaism, Sikhism and Jainism are also present. Sir Isaac Isaacs was the first Australian-born Governor General of Australia and was the first Jewish vice-regal representative in the British Empire. Prince Philip Movement is followed around Yaohnanen village on the southern island of Tanna in Vanuatu.

===Languages===

Native languages of Oceania fall into three major geographic groups:
* The large Austronesian language family, with such languages as Malay (Indonesian), and Oceanic languages such as Gilbertese, Fijian, Māori, and Hawaiian
* The Aboriginal Australian languages, including the large Pama–Nyungan family
* The Papuan languages of New Guinea and neighbouring islands, including the large Trans–New Guinea family

Immigrants brought their own languages to the region. Common non-indigenous languages include English in Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and many other territories; French in New Caledonia, French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna; Japanese in the Bonin Islands; and Spanish on Easter Island and the Galápagos Islands. There are also Creoles formed from the interaction of Malay or the colonial languages with indigenous languages, such as Tok Pisin, Bislama, Chavacano, various Malay trade and creole languages, Hawaiian Pidgin, Norfuk, and Pitkern. Contact between Austronesian and Papuan resulted in several instances in mixed languages such as Maisin.

===Immigration===
The most multicultural areas in Oceania, which have a high degree of immigration, are Australia, New Zealand, and Hawaii. Since 1945, more than 7 million people have settled in Australia. From the late 1970s, there was a significant increase in immigration from Asian and other non-European countries, making Australia a multicultural country.

Sydney is the most multicultural city in Oceania, having more than 250 different languages spoken with about 40% of residents speaking a language other than English at home. Furthermore, 36 percent of the population reported having been born overseas, with top countries being Italy, Lebanon, Vietnam and Iraq, among others. Melbourne is also fairly multicultural, having the largest Greek-speaking population outside of Europe, and the second largest Asian population in Australia after Sydney.

European migration to New Zealand provided a major influx following the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840. Subsequent immigration has been chiefly from the British Isles, but also from continental Europe, the Pacific, The Americas and Asia. Auckland is home to over half (51.6 percent) of New Zealand&#x27;s overseas born population, including 72 percent of the country&#x27;s Pacific Island-born population, 64 percent of its Asian-born population, and 56 percent of its Middle Eastern and African born population.

Hawaii is a majority-minority state. Chinese workers on Western trading ships settled in Hawaii starting in 1789. In 1820, the first American missionaries arrived to preach Christianity and teach the Hawaiians Western ways. , a large proportion of Hawaii&#x27;s population have Asian ancestry – especially Filipino, Japanese, Korean and Chinese. Many are descendants of immigrants brought to work on the sugarcane plantations in the mid-to-late 19th century. Almost 13,000 Portuguese immigrants had arrived by 1899; they also worked on the sugarcane plantations. Puerto Rican immigration to Hawaii began in 1899 when Puerto Rico&#x27;s sugar industry was devastated by two hurricanes, causing a worldwide shortage of sugar and a huge demand for sugar from Hawaii.

Between 2001 and 2007 Australia&#x27;s Pacific Solution policy transferred asylum seekers to several Pacific nations, including the Nauru detention centre. Australia, New Zealand, and other nations took part in the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands between 2003 and 2017 after a request for aid.

===Archaeogenetics===

Archaeology, linguistics, and existing genetic studies indicate that Oceania was settled by two major waves of migration. The first migration of Australo-Melanesians took place 40 to 80 thousand years ago, and these migrants, Papuans, colonised much of Near Oceania. Approximately 3.5 thousand years ago, a second expansion of Austronesian speakers arrived in Near Oceania, and the descendants of these people spread to the far corners of the Pacific, colonising Remote Oceania.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) studies quantify the magnitude of the Austronesian expansion and demonstrate the homogenising effect of this expansion. With regards to Papuan influence, autochthonous haplogroups support the hypothesis of a long history in Near Oceania, with some lineages suggesting a time depth of 60 thousand years. Santa Cruz, a population located in Remote Oceania, is an anomaly with extreme frequencies of autochthonous haplogroups of Near Oceanian origin.

Large areas of New Guinea are unexplored by scientists and anthropologists due to extensive forestation and mountainous terrain. Known indigenous tribes in Papua New Guinea have very little contact with local authorities aside from the authorities knowing who they are. Many remain preliterate and, at the national or international level, the names of tribes and information about them is extremely hard to obtain. The Indonesian provinces of Papua and West Papua on the island of New Guinea are home to an estimated 44 uncontacted tribal groups.

==Economy==
The linked map below shows the exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of the islands of Oceania and neighbouring areas, as a guide to the following table (there are few land boundaries that can be drawn on a map of the Pacific at this scale).
===Australia===
Australia and New Zealand are the only highly developed independent nations in the region, although the economy of Australia is by far the largest and most dominant economy in the region and one of the largest in the world. New Caledonia, Hawaii, and French Polynesia are highly developed too but are not sovereign states. Australia&#x27;s per-capita GDP is higher than that of the UK, Canada, Germany, and France in terms of purchasing power parity. New Zealand is also one of the most globalised economies and depends greatly on international trade.

The Australian Securities Exchange in Sydney is the largest stock exchange in Australia and in the South Pacific. In 2012, Australia was the 12th largest national economy by nominal GDP and the 19th-largest measured by PPP-adjusted GDP.

Mercer Quality of Living Survey ranks Sydney tenth in the world in terms of quality of living, making it one of the most livable cities. It is classified as an Alpha World City by GaWC. Melbourne also ranked highly in the world&#x27;s most liveable city list, and is a leading financial centre in the Asia–acific region.

The majority of people living in Australia work in health care, retail and education sectors. Australia boasts the largest amount of manufacturing in the region, producing cars, electrical equipment, machinery and clothes.

===New Zealand===

New Zealand&#x27;s economy is the 53rd-largest in the world measured by nominal gross domestic product (GDP) and 68th-largest in the world measured by purchasing power parity (PPP). A major economic and cultural powerhouse of the Southern Hemisphere, Auckland is ranked as a Beta+ world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Auckland and Wellington are frequently ranked among the world&#x27;s most liveable cities, with Auckland being ranked first in the world according to the Global Liveability Ranking.

New Zealand has a large GDP for its population of 5.2 million, and sources of revenue are spread throughout the large island nation. The country has one of the most globalised economies and depends greatly on international trade – mainly with Australia, Canada, China, the European Union, Japan, Singapore, South Korea and the United States. New Zealand&#x27;s 1983 Closer Economic Relations agreement with Australia means that the economy aligns closely with that of Australia. In 2005, the World Bank praised New Zealand as the most business-friendly country in the world. The economy diversified and by 2008, tourism had become the single biggest generator of foreign exchange. The New Zealand dollar is the 10th-most traded currency in the world.

===Pacific Islands===
The overwhelming majority of people living in the Pacific islands work in the service industry which includes tourism, education and financial services. Oceania&#x27;s largest export markets include Japan, China, the United States and South Korea. The smallest Pacific nations rely on trade with Australia, New Zealand and the United States for exporting goods and for accessing other products. Australia and New Zealand&#x27;s trading arrangements are known as Closer Economic Relations. Australia and New Zealand, along with other countries, are members of Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the East Asia Summit (EAS), which may become trade blocs in the future particularly EAS.

The main produce from the Pacific is copra or coconut, but timber, beef, palm oil, cocoa, sugar, and ginger are also commonly grown across the tropics of the Pacific. Fishing provides a major industry for many of the smaller nations in the Pacific, although many fishing areas are exploited by other larger countries, namely Japan. Natural Resources, such as lead, zinc, nickel, and gold, are mined in Australia and Solomon Islands. Oceania&#x27;s largest export markets include Japan, China, the United States, India, South Korea and the European Union.
Endowed with forest, mineral, and fish resources, Fiji is one of the most developed of the Pacific island economies, though it remains a developing country with a large subsistence agriculture sector. Agriculture accounts for 18% of gross domestic product, although it employed some 70% of the workforce as of 2001. Sugar exports and the growing tourist industry are the major sources of foreign exchange. Sugar cane processing makes up one-third of industrial activity. Coconuts, ginger, and copra are also significant.

The history of Hawaii&#x27;s economy can be traced through a succession of dominant industries; sandalwood, whaling, sugarcane, pineapple, the military, tourism and education. Hawaiian exports include food and clothing. These industries play a small role in the Hawaiian economy, due to the shipping distance to viable markets, such as the West Coast of the contiguous U.S. The state&#x27;s food exports include coffee, macadamia nuts, pineapple, livestock, sugarcane and honey. , Honolulu was ranked high on world livability rankings, and was also ranked as the 2nd safest city in the U.S.

===Tourism===
Tourists mostly come from Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States. Fiji currently attracts almost half a million tourists each year, more than a quarter of whom come from Australia. This has contributed $1 billion or more to Fiji&#x27;s economy since 1995, but the Government of Fiji likely underestimates these figures due to the invisible economy inside the tourism industry.

Vanuatu is widely recognised as one of the premier vacation destinations for scuba divers wishing to explore coral reefs of the South Pacific region. Tourism has been promoted, in part, by Vanuatu being the site of several reality-TV shows. The ninth season of the reality TV series &quot;Survivor&quot; was filmed on Vanuatu, entitled &quot; – Islands of Fire&quot;. Two years later, Australia&#x27;s &quot;Celebrity Survivor&quot; was filmed at the same location used by the U.S. version.
Tourism in Australia is an important component of the Australian economy. In the financial year 2014/15, tourism represented 3% of Australia&#x27;s GDP contributing A$47.5 billion to the national economy. In 2015, there were 7.4 million visitor arrivals. Popular Australian destinations include the Sydney Harbour (Sydney Opera House, Sydney Harbour Bridge, Royal Botanic Garden, etc.), Gold Coast (theme parks such as Warner Bros. Movie World, Dreamworld and Sea World), Walls of Jerusalem National Park and Mount Field National Park in Tasmania, Royal Exhibition Building in Melbourne, the Great Barrier Reef in Queensland, The Twelve Apostles in Victoria, Uluru (Ayers Rock) and the Australian outback.

Tourism in New Zealand contributes NZ$7.3 billion (or 4%) of the country&#x27;s GDP in 2013, as well as directly supporting 110,800 full-time equivalent jobs (nearly 6% of New Zealand&#x27;s workforce). International tourist spending accounted for 16% of New Zealand&#x27;s export earnings (nearly NZ$10 billion). International and domestic tourism contributes, in total, NZ$24 billion to New Zealand&#x27;s economy every year. Tourism New Zealand, the country&#x27;s official tourism agency, is actively promoting the country as a destination worldwide. Milford Sound in South Island is acclaimed as New Zealand&#x27;s most famous tourist destination.

In 2003 alone, according to state government data, there were over 6.4 million visitors to the Hawaiian Islands with expenditures of over $10.6 billion. Due to the mild year-round weather, tourist travel is popular throughout the year. In 2011, Hawaii saw increasing arrivals and share of foreign tourists from Canada, Australia, and China increasing 13%, 24% and 21% respectively from 2010.

==Politics==
===Australia===
Australia is a federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy with Charles III at its apex as the King of Australia, a role that is distinct from his position as monarch of the other Commonwealth realms. The King is represented in Australia by the Governor-General at the federal level and by the Governors at the state level, who by convention act on the advice of his ministers. There are two major political groups that usually form government, federally and in the states: the Australian Labor Party and the Coalition which is a formal grouping of the Liberal Party and its minor partner, the National Party. Within Australian political culture, the Coalition is considered centre-right and the Labor Party is considered centre-left. The Australian Defence Force is by far the largest military force in Oceania.

===New Zealand===

New Zealand is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary democracy, although its constitution is not codified. Charles III is the King of New Zealand and the head of state. The King is represented by the Governor-General, whom he appoints on the advice of the Prime Minister. The New Zealand Parliament holds legislative power and consists of the King and the House of Representatives. A parliamentary general election must be called no later than three years after the previous election. New Zealand is identified as one of the world&#x27;s most stable and well-governed states, with high government transparency and among the lowest perceived levels of corruption.

===Pacific Islands===

In Samoan politics, the Prime Minister of Samoa is the head of government. The 1960 constitution, which formally came into force with independence from New Zealand in 1962, builds on the British pattern of parliamentary democracy, modified to take account of Samoan customs. The national government (&quot;malo&quot;) generally controls the legislative assembly. Politics of Tonga takes place in a framework of a constitutional monarchy, whereby the King of Tonga is the Head of State.

Fiji has a multiparty system with the Prime Minister of Fiji as head of government. The executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Parliament of Fiji. Fiji&#x27;s Head of State is the President.

In the politics of Papua New Guinea the Prime Minister is the head of government, and the head of state is the monarch of the United Kingdom, represented by a Governor-General. In Kiribati, a Parliamentary regime, the President of Kiribati is the head of state and government, and of a multi-party system.

New Caledonia remains an integral part of the French Republic. Inhabitants of New Caledonia are French citizens. New Caledonia sends two representatives to the French National Assembly and two senators to the French Senate.

Hawaii is dominated by the Democratic Party. As codified in the Hawaiian Constitution, there are three branches of government: executive, legislative and judicial. The governor is elected statewide.

==Culture==
===Australia===
Since 1788, the primary influence behind Australian culture has been Anglo-Celtic Western culture, with some Indigenous influences. The divergence and evolution that has occurred in the ensuing centuries has resulted in a distinctive Australian culture. Since the mid-20th century, American popular culture has strongly influenced Australia, particularly through television and cinema. Other cultural influences come from neighbouring Asian countries, and through large-scale immigration from non-English-speaking nations. &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; (1906), the world&#x27;s first feature length film, spurred a boom in Australian cinema during the silent film era. The Australian Museum in Sydney and the National Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne are the oldest and largest museums in Oceania. The city&#x27;s New Year&#x27;s Eve celebrations are the largest in Oceania.

Australia is also known for its cafe and coffee culture in urban centres. Australia and New Zealand were responsible for the flat white coffee. Most Indigenous Australian tribal groups subsisted on a simple hunter-gatherer diet of native fauna and flora, otherwise called bush tucker. The first settlers introduced British food to the continent, much of which is now considered typical Australian food, such as the Sunday roast. Multicultural immigration transformed Australian cuisine; post-World War II European migrants, particularly from the Mediterranean, helped to build a thriving Australian coffee culture, and the influence of Asian cultures has led to Australian variants of their staple foods, such as the Chinese-inspired dim sim and Chiko Roll.
===Hawaii===

The music of Hawaii includes traditional and popular styles, ranging from native Hawaiian folk music to modern rock and hip hop. Hawaii&#x27;s musical contributions to the music of the United States are out of proportion to the state&#x27;s small size. Styles such as slack-key guitar are well known worldwide, while Hawaiian-tinged music is a frequent part of Hollywood soundtracks. Hawaii also made a major contribution to country music with the introduction of the steel guitar. The Hawaiian religion is polytheistic and animistic, with a belief in many deities and spirits, including the belief that spirits are found in non-human beings and objects such as animals, the waves, and the sky.

The cuisine of Hawaii is a fusion of many foods brought by immigrants to the Hawaiian Islands, including the earliest Polynesians and native Hawaiians, and American, Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Korean, Polynesian, and Portuguese origins. Native Hawaiian musician and Hawaiian sovereignty activist Israel Kamakawiwoʻole, famous for his medley of &quot;Somewhere Over the Rainbow/What a Wonderful World&quot;, was named &quot;The Voice of Hawaii&quot; by NPR in 2010 in its 50 great voices series.

===New Zealand===
New Zealand as a culture is a Western culture, which is influenced by the cultural input of the indigenous Māori and the various waves of multi-ethnic migration which followed the British colonisation of New Zealand. The Māori people constitute one of the major cultures of Polynesia. The country has been broadened by globalisation and immigration specifically from Oceania, Europe, and Asia. New Zealand marks two national days of remembrance, Waitangi Day and ANZAC Day, and also celebrates many holidays such as the King&#x27;s Birthday, Labour Day, and Christmas Day, as well as public anniversaries of the founding dates of most regions. The New Zealand recording industry began to develop from 1940 onwards and many New Zealand musicians have obtained success in Britain and the United States. Some artists release Māori language songs and the Māori tradition-based art of &quot;kapa haka&quot; (song and dance) has made a resurgence. The country&#x27;s diverse scenery and compact size, plus government incentives, have encouraged some producers to film big budget movies in New Zealand, including &quot;Avatar&quot;, &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, &quot;The Hobbit&quot;, &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot;, &quot;King Kong&quot; and &quot;The Last Samurai&quot;.

The national cuisine has been described as Pacific Rim, incorporating the native Māori cuisine and diverse culinary traditions introduced by settlers and immigrants from Europe, Polynesia and Asia. New Zealand yields produce from land and sea – most crops and livestock, such as maize, potatoes and pigs, were gradually introduced by the early European settlers. Distinctive ingredients or dishes include lamb; salmon; koura (crayfish); whitebait; shellfish including dredge oysters, pāua, mussels, scallops, pipi and tuatua; kumara (sweet potato); kiwifruit; tamarillo; and pavlova (considered a national dish).

===Samoa===
The fa&#x27;a Samoa, or traditional Samoan way, remains a strong force in Samoan life and politics. Despite centuries of European influence, Samoa maintains its historical customs, social and political systems, and language. Cultural customs such as the Samoa &#x27;ava ceremony are significant and solemn rituals at important occasions including the bestowal of &quot;matai&quot; chiefly titles. Items of great cultural value include the finely woven &quot;&#x27;ie toga&quot;.

The Samoan word for dance is &quot;siva&quot;, which consists of unique gentle movements of the body in time to music and which tell a story. Samoan male dances can be more snappy. The &quot;sasa&quot; is also a traditional dance where rows of dancers perform rapid synchronised movements in time to the rhythm of wooden drums &quot;(pate)&quot; or rolled mats. Another dance performed by males is called the &quot;fa&#x27;ataupati&quot; or the slap dance, creating rhythmic sounds by slapping different parts of the body. As with other Polynesian cultures (Hawaiian, Tahitian and Māori) with significant and unique tattoos, Samoans have two gender specific and culturally significant tattoos.

===Arts===
The artistic creations of native Oceanians varies greatly throughout the cultures and regions. The subject matter typically carries themes of fertility or the supernatural. Petroglyphs, tattooing, painting, wood carving, stone carving, and textile work are other common art forms. Art of Oceania properly encompasses the artistic traditions of the people indigenous to Australia and the Pacific Islands. These early peoples lacked a writing system, and made works on perishable materials, so few records of them exist from this time.

Indigenous Australian rock art is the oldest and richest unbroken tradition of art in the world, dating as far back as 60,000 years and spread across hundreds of thousands of sites. These rock paintings served several functions. Some were used in magic, others to increase animal populations for hunting, while some were simply for amusement. Sculpture in Oceania first appears on New Guinea as a series of stone figures found throughout the island, but mostly in mountainous highlands. Establishing a chronological timeframe for these pieces in most cases is difficult, but one has been dated to 1500 BCE.

By 1500 BCE the Lapita culture, descendants of the second wave, would begin to expand and spread into the more remote islands. At around the same time, art began to appear in New Guinea, including the earliest examples of sculpture in Oceania. Beginning 1100 CE, the people of Easter Island would begin construction of nearly 900 moai (large stone statues). At 1200 CE, the people of Pohnpei, a Micronesian island, would embark on another megalithic construction, building Nan Madol, a city of artificial islands and a system of canals. Hawaiian art includes wood carvings, feather work, petroglyphs, bark cloth (called kapa in Hawaiian and tapa elsewhere in the Pacific), and tattoos. Native Hawaiians had neither metal nor woven cloth.

===Sport===
Rugby union is one of the region&#x27;s most prominent sports, and is the national sport of New Zealand, Samoa, Fiji and Tonga. The most popular overall sport in Australia is cricket, with their national team having won the Cricket World Cup a record five times. The most popular sport among Australian women is netball, while Australian rules football garners the highest spectatorship numbers and television ratings. Rugby union is the most popular sport among New Zealanders, and they are tied with South Africa for the most Rugby World Cup titles, having won the tournament three times. Australia&#x27;s team the Wallabies have won the World Cup twice, despite Rugby union being less popular among Australians. In Papua New Guinea, the most popular sport is Rugby league. Fiji&#x27;s sevens team is one of the most successful in the world, as is New Zealand&#x27;s.

Australian rules football is the national sport in Nauru. It has a large following in Papua New Guinea, where it is the second most popular sport after Rugby League. Additionally, it attracts significant attention across New Zealand and the Pacific Islands. The highest level of the sport is the Australian Football League (AFL), which was the fourth best attended sporting league in the world during the 2010s.

Vanuatu is the only country in Oceania to call association football its national sport. However, it is also the most popular sport in Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu, and has a significant (and growing) popularity in Australia. In 2006 Australia left the Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) for the Asian Football Confederation (AFC), and their men&#x27;s team the Socceroos have qualified for every subsequent FIFA World Cup as an Asian entrant. The sole Micronesian country with membership in the OFC is Kiribati, although they are not recognised by FIFA like the other OFC members. Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Nauru and Palau all have no presence, primarily due to lack of infrastructure and logistical difficulties related to Micronesia&#x27;s remoteness. Like Australia, the Micronesian dependent territories of Guam and Northern Mariana Islands currently compete in the AFC instead of the OFC. The OFC was dominated by Australia for many years, and became known for one-sided results.

Australians view sport as an important part of their cultural identity, and the country performs well on the international stage, despite having a relatively small population. They have hosted two Summer Olympics: Melbourne 1956 and Sydney 2000, and the city of Brisbane is also set to host the 2032 edition. Australia has hosted five editions of the Commonwealth Games and New Zealand three times. The Pacific Games (formerly known as the South Pacific Games) is a multi-sport event, much like the Olympics on a much smaller scale, with participation exclusively from countries around the Pacific; Australia and New Zealand competed in the games for the first time in 2015.

Melbourne hosts the Australian Open every year, considered one of the four Grand Slam tournaments in tennis.

==See also==
* Australasia
* Europeans in Oceania
* Festival of Pacific Arts
* Flags of Oceania
* Global Southeast
* Insular Chile
* List of cities in Oceania
* Oceania (journal)
* Oceanic cuisine
* Indigenous peoples of Oceania
* Pacific Islander
* Pacific Union
* Pacific Community
* United Nations geoscheme for Oceania
==References==

===Sources===
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Lawson, Stephanie. &quot;Regional Politics in Oceania: From Colonialism and Cold War to the Pacific Century&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2024), encyclopedic coverage; online review of this book

==External links==

* &quot;Australia and Oceania&quot; from National Geographic
* Oceania photographs, recordings, and digital objects drawn primarily from the Tuzin Archive for Melanesian Anthropology at the UC San Diego Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="0" end="7" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="19" end="38" title="region" label="geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="49" end="60" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="62" end="71" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="73" end="83" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="89" end="98" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186198" start="113" end="120" title="Eastern Hemisphere" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="125" end="132" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q17651246" start="167" end="183" title="land and water hemispheres" label="water hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872579" start="342" end="364" title="list of continents and continental subregions by population" label="second-least populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="371" end="381" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="432" end="448" title="developed country" label="highly developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="474" end="491" title="market economy" label="financial markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="495" end="504" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="506" end="522" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="524" end="530" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="532" end="545" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="551" end="562" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="583" end="598" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="603" end="626" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q752401" start="640" end="664" title="least developed countries" label="less developed economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="668" end="676" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="678" end="694" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="696" end="702" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="704" end="711" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="717" end="735" title="Western New Guinea" label="Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q782287" start="767" end="785" title="list of sovereign states and dependent territories in Oceania" label="country in Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="824" end="830" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045888" start="832" end="843" title="Puncak Jaya" label="Puncak Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="847" end="856" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421337" start="1026" end="1053" title="Exploration of the Pacific" label="first explored by Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q913624" start="1141" end="1157" title="Tanimbar Islands" label="Tanimbar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="1171" end="1187" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="1197" end="1207" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1313" end="1323" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="1367" end="1383" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42000" start="1393" end="1399" title="Tahiti" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330629" start="1417" end="1440" title="eastern states of Australia" label="east coast of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413717" start="1465" end="1493" title="Europeans in Oceania" label="arrival of European settlers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1609" end="1624" title="Military history of Oceania#World War II" label="Pacific theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1653" end="1658" title="World War I" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1663" end="1679" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1687" end="1695" title="Indigenous_Australian_art#Stone_art" label="rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="1699" end="1721" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="1821" end="1846" title="Parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1853" end="1860" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="1905" end="1927" title="list of islands in the Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific island nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="2078" end="2082" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="2091" end="2099" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2122" end="2131" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="2326" end="2339" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="2356" end="2365" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="2563" end="2580" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="2620" end="2637" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q980235" start="2767" end="2784" title="Conrad Malte-Brun" label="Conrad Malte-Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2796" end="2802" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3007" end="3012" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3038" end="3043" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3343" end="3350" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="3433" end="3440" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469840" start="3580" end="3587" title="Malesia" label="Malesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="3612" end="3629" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="3854" end="3866" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220924" start="3959" end="3975" title="John Bartholomew" label="John Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="4006" end="4015" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="4028" end="4041" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="4064" end="4077" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4356" end="4362" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4370" end="4376" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q719978" start="4442" end="4466" title="Samuel Griswold Goodrich" label="Samuel Griswold Goodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="4765" end="4774" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q27527" start="4776" end="4788" title="Afro-Eurasia" label="Afro-Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="4852" end="4873" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5525" end="5532" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="5755" end="5762" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5908" end="5915" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="6052" end="6067" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="6069" end="6079" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="6096" end="6105" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006512" start="6345" end="6368" title="C. Hartley Grattan" label="Clinton Hartley Grattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="6439" end="6450" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="6563" end="6584" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="6686" end="6711" title="Australian Plate" label="Australian tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="6777" end="6796" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301187" start="7275" end="7288" title="Pacific Rim" label="Pacific Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="7403" end="7414" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="7416" end="7425" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="7427" end="7437" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="7443" end="7452" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="7517" end="7538" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="7548" end="7561" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q538867" start="7600" end="7611" title="Nazca Plate" label="Nazca Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q339748" start="7620" end="7640" title="Philippine Sea Plate" label="Philippine Sea Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="7683" end="7687" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="7689" end="7702" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="7704" end="7720" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="7722" end="7729" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148966" start="7786" end="7801" title="Solomon Islands (archipelago)" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q119490" start="8019" end="8039" title="South American Plate" label="South American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052653" start="8158" end="8170" title="Near Oceania" label="Near Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052998" start="8175" end="8189" title="Remote Oceania" label="Remote Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358050" start="8231" end="8242" title="Roger Curtis Green" label="Roger Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846702" start="8247" end="8260" title="Andrew Pawley" label="Andrew Pawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q148839" start="8396" end="8414" title="Santa Cruz Islands" label="Santa Cruz Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="8471" end="8480" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="8482" end="8492" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="8498" end="8507" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="8783" end="8796" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="8836" end="8842" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8859" end="8872" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q161258" start="8874" end="8891" title="Clipperton Island" label="Clipperton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="8909" end="8915" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q156325" start="8921" end="8943" title="Juan Fernández Islands" label="Juan Fernández Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46650" start="8969" end="8985" title="Macquarie Island" label="Macquarie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9056" end="9070" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="9530" end="9561" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="9779" end="9793" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="9815" end="9835" title="States and territories of Australia" label="external territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="9841" end="9853" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="9855" end="9885" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="9887" end="9903" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="9911" end="9915" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="9917" end="9925" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q697" start="9949" end="9954" title="Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q34020" start="9984" end="9988" title="Niue" label="Niue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="9994" end="10018" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="10020" end="10025" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="10045" end="10061" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="10063" end="10068" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="10091" end="10098" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="10100" end="10105" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="10107" end="10113" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="10115" end="10122" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="10124" end="10141" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645" start="10151" end="10187" title="United States Minor Outlying Islands" label="United States Minor Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46879" start="10189" end="10201" title="Baker Island" label="Baker Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131305" start="10203" end="10217" title="Howland Island" label="Howland Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q62218" start="10219" end="10232" title="Jarvis Island" label="Jarvis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="10234" end="10246" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q123076" start="10248" end="10261" title="Palmyra Atoll" label="Palmyra Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="10267" end="10278" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="10417" end="10425" title="Colony" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="10608" end="10617" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="10755" end="10764" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="10769" end="10777" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="10869" end="10875" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="10877" end="10887" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="10892" end="10932" title="Western New Guinea" label="Indonesian New Guinea/Western New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="10934" end="10956" title="The World Factbook" label="The CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121359" start="11491" end="11514" title="Gustave d&amp;#x27;Eichthal" label="Gustave d&amp;#x27;Eichthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q980235" start="11624" end="11641" title="Conrad Malte-Brun" label="Conrad Malte-Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="11809" end="11822" title="Lexicography" label="lexicographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282899" start="11823" end="11847" title="Joseph Emerson Worcester" label="Joseph Emerson Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417172" start="12206" end="12256" title="Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719712" start="12348" end="12364" title="Alexander Murdoch Mackay" label="Alexander Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="12380" end="12393" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46650" start="12425" end="12441" title="Macquarie Island" label="Macquarie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="12564" end="12572" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="12683" end="12704" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="12751" end="12767" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="12871" end="12877" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="12901" end="12912" title="Aleut" label="inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="12934" end="12953" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="13034" end="13041" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13141" end="13147" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469840" start="13464" end="13471" title="Malesia" label="Malesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="13570" end="13578" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="13791" end="13795" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="13800" end="13807" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q118920" start="13875" end="13890" title="Society Islands" label="Society Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186717" start="13934" end="13945" title="Jesse Olney" label="Jesse Olney"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="14705" end="14714" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20951" start="14749" end="14762" title="Élisée Reclus" label="Élisée Reclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586156" start="15121" end="15147" title="Rand McNally" label="Rand McNally &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216807" start="15435" end="15454" title="Robert Needham Cust" label="Robert Needham Cust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296202" start="15943" end="15983" title="Journal of the Royal Statistical Society" label="Journal of the Royal Statistical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469840" start="17029" end="17036" title="Malesia" label="Malesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226854" start="17241" end="17262" title="James Cowles Prichard" label="James Cowles Prichard"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="17313" end="17326" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="18173" end="18187" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="18257" end="18265" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="18311" end="18331" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18380" end="18392" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="18464" end="18479" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="19880" end="19890" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="19898" end="19913" title="Channel Islands (California)" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396187" start="19918" end="19934" title="Farallon Islands" label="Farallon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="19936" end="19942" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="19950" end="19966" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q210907" start="19971" end="19994" title="Haida Gwaii" label="Queen Charlotte Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q504449" start="20036" end="20049" title="Chiloé Island" label="Chiloé Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q853909" start="20099" end="20115" title="Guadalupe Island" label="Guadalupe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q849318" start="20117" end="20138" title="Revillagigedo Islands" label="Revillagigedo Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142925" start="20140" end="20158" title="Islas San Benito" label="San Benito Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q643715" start="20163" end="20182" title="Islas Marías" label="Tres Marías Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073664" start="20200" end="20215" title="Chincha Islands" label="Chincha Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="20312" end="20328" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="20346" end="20352" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070767" start="20386" end="20403" title="Anson Archipelago" label="Anson Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q129264" start="20594" end="20608" title="phantom island" label="phantom island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960300" start="20618" end="20631" title="Ganges Island" label="Ganges Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956409" start="20636" end="20648" title="Los Jardines" label="Los Jardines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192677" start="20783" end="20792" title="leviathan" label="leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810881" start="21598" end="21613" title="John Merry Ross" label="John Merry Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941504" start="22213" end="22236" title="Music Educators Journal" label="Music Educators Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928358" start="22912" end="22945" title="United States Government Publishing Office" label="U.S. Government Publishing Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537766" start="24010" end="24028" title="Kodiak Archipelago" label="Kodiak archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="24156" end="24175" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q503712" start="24865" end="24882" title="Antipodes Islands" label="Antipodes Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q326951" start="24884" end="24900" title="Auckland Islands" label="Auckland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41451" start="24902" end="24916" title="Bounty Islands" label="Bounty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33654" start="24918" end="24934" title="Campbell Islands" label="Campbell Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427436" start="24936" end="24950" title="Chatham Island" label="Chatham Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="24955" end="24971" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadec Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="25052" end="25068" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="25229" end="25236" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="26072" end="26087" title="Oceanic islands" label="oceanic geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="26163" end="26180" title="Physical geography" label="physiographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="26519" end="26533" title="East Asia" label="Far East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269338" start="27047" end="27059" title="Robert Brown (botanist, born 1842)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="27230" end="27253" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="27341" end="27346" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="27373" end="27387" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210907" start="28443" end="28465" title="Queen Charlotte Islands" label="Queen Charlotte&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396187" start="28492" end="28502" title="Farallon Islands" label="Farallones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073664" start="28527" end="28535" title="Chincha Islands" label="Chinchas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160526" start="28739" end="28760" title="Desventuradas Islands" label="Desventuradas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q564954" start="29049" end="29057" title="PLOS One" label="PLOS One"/>
<link wikidata="Q143888" start="29069" end="29085" title="Humboldt Current" label="Humboldt Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053376" start="29434" end="29447" title="Insular Chile" label="Insular Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151199" start="29766" end="29783" title="Kate Darian-Smith" label="Kate Darian-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="29964" end="30010" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="30447" end="30457" title="Irian Jaya" label="Irian Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="30613" end="30629" title="Sexually transmitted infection" label="venereal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="30991" end="31015" title="Pacific Community" label="South Pacific Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q941881" start="31574" end="31590" title="Dutch New Guinea" label="Dutch New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391949" start="31828" end="31840" title="Ron Crocombe" label="Ron Crocombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143720" start="32346" end="32359" title="Thomas Sebeok" label="Thomas Sebeok"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="32497" end="32507" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q215081" start="32515" end="32527" title="Cocos Island" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="32532" end="32540" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750683" start="32548" end="32562" title="Malpelo Island" label="Malpelo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="32592" end="32608" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q386615" start="32700" end="32711" title="Cocos Plate" label="Cocos Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="33177" end="33188" title="Austronesians" label="Austronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180344" start="33962" end="33992" title="Oceania Football Confederation" label="Oceania Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83276" start="34037" end="34065" title="Asian Football Confederation" label="Asian Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="34859" end="34876" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="35070" end="35090" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q678687" start="35160" end="35174" title="Aleutian Range" label="Aleutian Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="35955" end="35978" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="36186" end="36204" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q600614" start="36370" end="36377" title="Okinawa Island" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208167" start="36482" end="36504" title="Ryukyuan people" label="indigenous inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q968902" start="36677" end="36691" title="David Steadman" label="David Steadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="38362" end="38374" title="Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="38960" end="38972" title="Asia–Pacific" label="Asia–Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q794439" start="39591" end="39597" title="Fijians" label="Fijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326832" start="39606" end="39619" title="Epeli Hauʻofa" label="Epeli Hauʻofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961771" start="40513" end="40532" title="New Guinea Highlands" label="Highland New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11608110" start="40954" end="40966" title="Jōmon people" label="Jōmon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="41110" end="41131" title="Indigenous Australian" label="Indigenous Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101828" start="41152" end="41163" title="Ainu people" label="Ainu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="41214" end="41222" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q20850511" start="41871" end="41884" title="George Robert Zug" label="George R. Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="42432" end="42437" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="42672" end="42679" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27527" start="42743" end="42755" title="Afro-Eurasia" label="Afro-Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864302" start="42880" end="42891" title="Izu Islands" label="Izu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42870109" start="43787" end="43808" title="Robert Hope Moncrieff" label="Robert Hope Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="44161" end="44174" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="44542" end="44554" title="Micronesians" label="Micronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="44883" end="44888" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="45666" end="45672" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077944" start="46113" end="46147" title="Australasian realm" label="Australasian biogeographical realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q31063" start="46366" end="46382" title="Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="46387" end="46410" title="Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="Cocos (Keeling) Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580316" start="46706" end="46725" title="European Australians" label="European Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015349" start="46766" end="46789" title="European New Zealanders" label="European New Zealanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q501705" start="46966" end="46981" title="Antarctic Plate" label="Antarctic Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="47276" end="47290" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="48419" end="48441" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="48536" end="48542" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="48546" end="48550" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="48645" end="48684" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="earliest human migrations out of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="48968" end="48978" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="49043" end="49056" title="Interracial marriage" label="intermarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="49072" end="49080" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="49120" end="49131" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="49179" end="49186" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q858288" start="49218" end="49239" title="early human migration" label="early human migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276943" start="49304" end="49319" title="Sahul continent" label="Sahul continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q379636" start="49382" end="49405" title="Torres Strait Islanders" label="Torres Strait Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="49428" end="49441" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="49488" end="49498" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="49504" end="49520" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952802" start="49589" end="49598" title="Mungo Man" label="Mungo Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="49691" end="49702" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="49771" end="49787" title="Denisovan" label="Denisova hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q236425" start="50047" end="50053" title="Papuan languages" label="Papuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148966" start="50184" end="50211" title="Solomon Islands (archipelago)" label="Solomon Islands archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q714573" start="50223" end="50229" title="Makira" label="Makira"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="50387" end="50406" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="51189" end="51195" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="51256" end="51268" title="Micronesians" label="Micronesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q209638" start="51429" end="51432" title="Yap" label="Yap"/>
<link wikidata="Q319836" start="51437" end="51444" title="Pohnpei" label="Pohnpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="51670" end="51684" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="51711" end="51720" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorros"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="51728" end="51736" title="Chamorro language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211672" start="51825" end="51836" title="Latte stone" label="Latte stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282773" start="51857" end="51874" title="Carolinian people" label="Carolinian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="51918" end="51934" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="52008" end="52025" title="2nd millennium BC" label="2nd millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325507" start="52077" end="52101" title="Marshall Islands stick chart" label="traditional stick charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="52254" end="52273" title="Austronesian people" label="Austronesian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="52286" end="52306" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="52320" end="52331" title="Prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="52347" end="52364" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q22528" start="52385" end="52391" title="Geography of Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="52432" end="52454" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="52488" end="52509" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="52527" end="52534" title="Taiwanese aborigines" label="natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="52857" end="52863" title="Lapita culture" label="Lapita"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="52935" end="52955" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269364" start="53020" end="53031" title="Hotu Matuꞌa" label="Hotu Matuꞌa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="53147" end="53157" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="53172" end="53180" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q942552" start="53259" end="53278" title="Glottochronology" label="glottochronological"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="53305" end="53322" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="53744" end="53758" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q611584" start="53763" end="53779" title="António de Abreu" label="António de Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q554452" start="53784" end="53800" title="Francisco Serrão" label="Francisco Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q83067" start="53811" end="53816" title="Timor" label="Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16561" start="53822" end="53833" title="Aru Islands Regency" label="Aru Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q913624" start="53865" end="53881" title="Tanimbar Islands" label="Tanimbar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="53895" end="53911" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286636" start="53916" end="53933" title="Gomes de Sequeira" label="Gomes de Sequeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="53953" end="53969" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029176" start="53974" end="53990" title="Jorge de Menezes" label="Jorge de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="54012" end="54019" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="54038" end="54056" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="54131" end="54157" title="Strait of Magellan" label="strait that bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150753" start="54296" end="54310" title="Duarte Barbosa" label="Duarte Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356297" start="54315" end="54326" title="João Serrão" label="João Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="54361" end="54372" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q201510" start="54483" end="54504" title="Juan Sebastián Elcano" label="Juan Sebastián Elcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453459" start="54547" end="54556" title="Trinidad (ship)" label="the other"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="54595" end="54605" title="westerlies" label="westerlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60524519" start="54707" end="54722" title="Timeline of Magellan&amp;#x27;s circumnavigation" label="Magellan-Elcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="54753" end="54769" title="circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="54799" end="54810" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="54816" end="54831" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="54980" end="54996" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="55001" end="55006" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="55040" end="55046" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q172697" start="55052" end="55069" title="Marquesas Islands" label="Marquesas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q148966" start="55075" end="55102" title="Solomon Islands (archipelago)" label="Solomon Islands archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="55108" end="55120" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q119230" start="55130" end="55147" title="Admiralty Islands" label="Admiralty Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q323750" start="55188" end="55203" title="Terra Australis" label="Terra Australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313633" start="55302" end="55328" title="Pedro Fernandes de Queirós" label="Pedro Fernandes de Queirós"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="55340" end="55348" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="55353" end="55360" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="55390" end="55403" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q356808" start="55460" end="55478" title="Luís Vaz de Torres" label="Luís Vaz de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q174085" start="55480" end="55495" title="Willem Janszoon" label="Willem Janszoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233770" start="55575" end="55594" title="Cape York Peninsula" label="Cape York Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42188" start="55596" end="55607" title="Abel Tasman" label="Abel Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="55695" end="55717" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="55723" end="55731" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="55759" end="55763" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="55866" end="55876" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="55923" end="55945" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979683" start="55949" end="55961" title="Brush Island" label="Brush Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873791" start="55967" end="55979" title="Bawley Point, New South Wales" label="Bawley Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637676" start="56095" end="56112" title="Kurnell, New South Wales" label="Kurnell Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623385" start="56198" end="56205" title="Gweagal" label="Gweagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="56373" end="56393" title="mutiny on the Bounty" label="mutiny on the Bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q294147" start="56402" end="56415" title="William Bligh" label="William Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="56461" end="56471" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="56488" end="56504" title="Pitcairn Islands" label="Pitcairn Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148320" start="56623" end="56627" title="Colonial Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="56679" end="56693" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q271876" start="56699" end="56714" title="Gilbert Islands" label="Gilbert Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="56729" end="56737" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="56776" end="56782" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q572723" start="56998" end="57005" title="Tahuata" label="Tahuata"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="57022" end="57041" title="Protectorate" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="57135" end="57147" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871189" start="57157" end="57176" title="Auguste Febvrier Despointes" label="Febvrier Despointes"/>
<link wikidata="Q545300" start="57240" end="57257" title="Alonso de Salazar" label="Alonso de Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160888" start="57317" end="57328" title="Adam Johann von Krusenstern" label="Krusenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q639410" start="57353" end="57366" title="John Marshall (British captain)" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474478" start="57399" end="57413" title="Thomas Gilbert (captain)" label="Thomas Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="57437" end="57447" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="57451" end="57457" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="57476" end="57487" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q530560" start="57638" end="57656" title="Territory of Papua" label="Territory of Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q701025" start="57841" end="57846" title="German Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46879" start="57921" end="57933" title="Baker Island" label="Baker Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131305" start="57938" end="57952" title="Howland Island" label="Howland Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="57989" end="58001" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="US territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q553024" start="58083" end="58112" title="Tripartite Convention (1899)" label="Tripartite Convention of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081983" start="58189" end="58215" title="Occupation of German Samoa" label="Occupation of German Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051650" start="58234" end="58252" title="New Zealand Defence Force" label="New Zealand forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q165008" start="58393" end="58410" title="German New Guinea" label="German New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="58564" end="58586" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q702397" start="58603" end="58632" title="Imperial General Headquarters" label="Imperial General Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857862" start="58649" end="58664" title="military strike" label="military strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="58682" end="58704" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324633" start="58731" end="58741" title="naval base" label="naval base"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="58745" end="58757" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370388" start="58824" end="58867" title="Military history of the United States during World War II" label="United States&amp;#x27; entry into World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="58995" end="59018" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299343" start="59027" end="59048" title="Kokoda Track campaign" label="Kokoda Track campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741179" start="59150" end="59169" title="Battle of Bita Paka" label="Battle of Bita Paka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759161" start="59175" end="59199" title="Solomon Islands campaign" label="Solomon Islands campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q696557" start="59205" end="59224" title="Bombing of Darwin" label="Air raids on Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299343" start="59230" end="59242" title="Kokoda Track campaign" label="Kokoda Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156895" start="59252" end="59267" title="Borneo campaign" label="Borneo campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q696900" start="59298" end="59312" title="Battle of Guam (1944)" label="Battle of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="59374" end="59391" title="Japanese military" label="Japanese military"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="59438" end="59447" title="British Dominions" label="dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="59482" end="59508" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="59640" end="59658" title="overseas administrative territorial entity" label="overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="59739" end="59755" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="59774" end="59784" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="59794" end="59798" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="59803" end="59808" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="59907" end="59923" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="60042" end="60074" title="Republic of the Marshall Islands" label="Republic of the Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q757276" start="60138" end="60159" title="Pacific Islands Forum" label="Pacific Islands Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="60277" end="60290" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="60313" end="60329" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="60348" end="60361" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q118821" start="60366" end="60385" title="Isla Salas y Gómez" label="Sala y Gómez Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q46650" start="60403" end="60419" title="Macquarie Island" label="Macquarie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="60507" end="60513" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="60519" end="60533" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="60543" end="60563" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="60618" end="60634" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255036" start="60728" end="60744" title="28th parallel north" label="28 degrees north"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="60773" end="60792" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390853" start="60798" end="60814" title="55th parallel south" label="55 degrees south"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="60842" end="60861" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="60927" end="60938" title="high island" label="high island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="60941" end="60951" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324426" start="60966" end="60981" title="coral island" label="coral platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="61071" end="61083" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q944816" start="61151" end="61170" title="biogeographic realm" label="biogeographic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052653" start="61264" end="61276" title="Near Oceania" label="Near Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083292" start="61299" end="61315" title="Island Melanesia" label="Island Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052998" start="61368" end="61382" title="Remote Oceania" label="Remote Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q210371" start="61543" end="61558" title="Kangaroo Island" label="Kangaroo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q133888" start="61563" end="61590" title="Ashmore and Cartier Islands" label="Ashmore and Cartier Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="61626" end="61640" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="61645" end="61657" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984754" start="61677" end="61703" title="West Coast, Tasmania" label="Tasmania&amp;#x27;s west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="61898" end="61916" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q271901" start="62120" end="62126" title="Banaba Island" label="Banaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904" start="62155" end="62162" title="Makatea" label="Makatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="62187" end="62203" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="62220" end="62230" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="62280" end="62303" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="62318" end="62333" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="62356" end="62372" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="62392" end="62408" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q710" start="62440" end="62448" title="Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="62468" end="62477" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="62506" end="62516" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="62563" end="62572" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="62681" end="62701" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="62707" end="62722" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q148839" start="62728" end="62746" title="Santa Cruz Islands" label="Santa Cruz Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="62748" end="62755" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="62757" end="62761" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="62766" end="62779" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="62782" end="62791" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="62875" end="62881" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36823" start="62883" end="62890" title="Tokelau" label="Tokelau"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="62892" end="62897" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="62899" end="62904" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q114935" start="62914" end="62930" title="Kermadec Islands" label="Kermadec Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="62948" end="62960" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118920" start="62962" end="62977" title="Society Islands" label="Society Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q930426" start="62982" end="62997" title="Austral Islands" label="Austral Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q172697" start="63021" end="63038" title="Marquesas Islands" label="Marquesas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183963" start="63044" end="63052" title="Tuamotus" label="Tuamotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504043" start="63054" end="63071" title="Mangareva Islands" label="Mangareva Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="63077" end="63090" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="63105" end="63116" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="63247" end="63268" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="63368" end="63382" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="63416" end="63429" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="63477" end="63491" title="Plate tectonics" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="63599" end="63607" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hot spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="63620" end="63636" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="63660" end="63673" title="oceanic crust" label="oceanic crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="63720" end="63735" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="63751" end="63761" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="63824" end="63845" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="63929" end="63945" title="Australian Plate" label="Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="64111" end="64126" title="tectonic uplift" label="tectonic uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="64260" end="64268" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="64495" end="64502" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="64535" end="64543" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="64554" end="64564" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q117266912" start="64571" end="64581" title="Geothermal activity" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548579" start="64582" end="64587" title="Geothermal areas in New Zealand" label="areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="64635" end="64651" title="Australian Plate" label="Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="64797" end="64807" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150408" start="64883" end="64892" title="Zealandia (continent)" label="Zealandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q530917" start="64936" end="64954" title="Western Antarctica" label="Western Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="65055" end="65070" title="late Cretaceous" label="late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="65254" end="65264" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q783056" start="65336" end="65352" title="Australian Plate" label="Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="65480" end="65492" title="high islands" label="high islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="65494" end="65502" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="65522" end="65535" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="65537" end="65551" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="65556" end="65560" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q183110" start="65638" end="65667" title="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands" label="Northwestern Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q212057" start="65710" end="65724" title="shield volcano" label="shield volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="65750" end="65757" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q632794" start="65774" end="65791" title="Emperor Seamounts" label="Emperor Seamounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131230" start="65880" end="65889" title="Mauna Kea" label="Mauna Kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="66027" end="66037" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q783129" start="66144" end="66150" title="Deserts of Australia" label="Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="66191" end="66198" title="outback" label="outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329999" start="66248" end="66263" title="Eastern Australian temperate forests" label="coastal uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935354" start="66270" end="66297" title="Brigalow Belt" label="belt of Brigalow grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q233770" start="66474" end="66493" title="Cape York Peninsula" label="Cape York Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="66558" end="66565" title="aridity" label="aridity"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="66589" end="66601" title="sclerophyll" label="scleromorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511362" start="66606" end="66614" title="serotiny" label="serotiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q157228" start="66695" end="66705" title="Proteaceae" label="Proteaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131258" start="66713" end="66720" title="Banksia" label="Banksia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156563" start="66729" end="66738" title="Myrtaceae" label="Myrtaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="66746" end="66756" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44448" start="66781" end="66789" title="Fabaceae" label="Fabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="66797" end="66803" title="Acacia" label="Acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="66840" end="66855" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="66857" end="66864" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="66870" end="66883" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511668" start="66887" end="66906" title="tropical dry forest" label="tropical dry forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846186" start="66913" end="66932" title="tropical vegetation" label="tropical vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="66947" end="66957" title="palm trees" label="palm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915110" start="66965" end="66980" title="Premna protrusa" label="Premna protrusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256554" start="66994" end="67009" title="Psydrax odorata" label="Psydrax odorata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625456" start="67023" end="67044" title="Gyrocarpus americanus" label="Gyrocarpus americanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918856" start="67062" end="67079" title="Derris trifoliata" label="Derris trifoliata"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="67133" end="67138" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="67243" end="67256" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059" start="67470" end="67489" title="Aoraki / Mount Cook" label="Aoraki / Mount Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091732" start="67709" end="67718" title="Brighamia" label="Brighamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22285209" start="68098" end="68116" title="Pacific kingfisher" label="Pacific kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q509455" start="68160" end="68177" title="Red-vented bulbul" label="Red-vented bulbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483492" start="68179" end="68198" title="Polynesian starling" label="Polynesian starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q114715" start="68200" end="68213" title="Brown goshawk" label="Brown goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q767050" start="68215" end="68230" title="Pacific Swallow" label="Pacific Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313726" start="68239" end="68256" title="Cardinal myzomela" label="Cardinal myzomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q35672" start="68290" end="68298" title="Pitcairn" label="Pitcairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q76328" start="68311" end="68321" title="fairy tern" label="fairy tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q525717" start="68323" end="68335" title="common noddy" label="common noddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756640" start="68341" end="68362" title="red-tailed tropicbird" label="red-tailed tropicbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q781976" start="68368" end="68389" title="Pitcairn reed warbler" label="Pitcairn reed warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="68436" end="68454" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q247472" start="68494" end="68507" title="Hawaiian crow" label="Hawaiian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q239509" start="68524" end="68543" title="extinct in the wild" label="extinct in the wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q900781" start="68560" end="68576" title="brown tree snake" label="brown tree snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179333" start="68734" end="68751" title="birds of paradise" label="birds of paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q211670" start="68753" end="68763" title="honeyeater" label="honeyeater"/>
<link wikidata="Q614518" start="68766" end="68790" title="Australasian treecreeper" label="Australasian treecreeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q829925" start="68792" end="68810" title="Australasian robin" label="Australasian robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8154335" start="68812" end="68822" title="kingfisher" label="kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q60520032" start="68825" end="68836" title="butcherbird" label="butcherbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q215603" start="68843" end="68852" title="bowerbird" label="bowerbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="68934" end="68943" title="placentalia" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="68974" end="68983" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q949930" start="69034" end="69039" title="pouch (marsupial)" label="pouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23193" start="69055" end="69064" title="Macropodidae" label="macropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q279198" start="69066" end="69073" title="Phalangeriformes" label="possums"/>
<link wikidata="Q213333" start="69079" end="69092" title="dasyuromorphia" label="dasyuromorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="69098" end="69107" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208304" start="69174" end="69178" title="wren" label="wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q842378" start="69185" end="69197" title="Artamidae" label="magpie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q481671" start="69199" end="69209" title="Acanthiza" label="thornbills"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="69211" end="69217" title="corvid" label="corvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q840522" start="69220" end="69229" title="pardalote" label="pardalote"/>
<link wikidata="Q214096" start="69232" end="69240" title="lyrebird" label="lyrebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="69295" end="69312" title="Australian magpie" label="Australian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584072" start="69314" end="69330" title="Australian raven" label="Australian raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q966961" start="69336" end="69350" title="pied currawong" label="pied currawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q167857" start="69352" end="69366" title="crested pigeon" label="crested pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q824974" start="69376" end="69395" title="laughing kookaburra" label="laughing kookaburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q36101" start="69401" end="69406" title="koala" label="koala"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="69408" end="69411" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15343" start="69413" end="69421" title="platypus" label="platypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="69426" end="69434" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="69439" end="69455" title="national animals" label="national animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q134964" start="69478" end="69493" title="Tasmanian devil" label="Tasmanian devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351221" start="69552" end="69558" title="goanna" label="goanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="69564" end="69573" title="predatory" label="predatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872203" start="69595" end="69614" title="Australian mainland" label="Australian mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="69699" end="69706" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126556" start="69847" end="69856" title="bird vocalization" label="bird song"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="69930" end="69936" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816486" start="69991" end="70003" title="Lek mating" label="lek-breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q43642" start="70159" end="70163" title="Kiwi (bird)" label="kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193337" start="70165" end="70168" title="kea" label="kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q212302" start="70170" end="70176" title="takahē" label="takahē"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066503" start="70186" end="70191" title="Yellowhead (bird)" label="mohua"/>
<link wikidata="Q125142" start="70193" end="70196" title="tūī" label="tūī"/>
<link wikidata="Q394708" start="70206" end="70214" title="New Zealand bellbird" label="bellbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q163283" start="70220" end="70227" title="tuatara" label="tuatara"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="70241" end="70248" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q31431" start="70402" end="70408" title="parrot" label="parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="70440" end="70461" title="Critically Endangered" label="Critically Endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="70489" end="70496" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="70562" end="70581" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="70586" end="70610" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="70657" end="70685" title="El Niño Southern Oscillation" label="El Niño Southern Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="70758" end="70765" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="70782" end="70792" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q198782" start="70951" end="70974" title="tropical cyclone basins" label="tropical cyclone basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="71080" end="71089" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="71134" end="71143" title="Temperateness" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="71161" end="71168" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="71173" end="71190" title="humid subtropical" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="71221" end="71242" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="71297" end="71313" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="71392" end="71400" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="71402" end="71417" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="71419" end="71427" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="71439" end="71467" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="71534" end="71550" title="maritime climate" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="71552" end="71581" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="71670" end="71680" title="West Coast, New Zealand" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="71688" end="71700" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="71711" end="71720" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12711322" start="71724" end="71737" title="Central Otago" label="Central Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="71742" end="71753" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474429" start="71757" end="71766" title="North Auckland Peninsula" label="Northland"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="71801" end="71813" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="71845" end="71857" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="71945" end="71951" title="tropic" label="tropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="72036" end="72052" title="Hawaii (island)" label="island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="72351" end="72355" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="72376" end="72383" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193414" start="72461" end="72471" title="Oodnadatta" label="Oodnadatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684725" start="72596" end="72604" title="Ranfurly, New Zealand" label="Ranfurly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007003" start="72684" end="72689" title="Ophir, New Zealand" label="Ophir"/>
<link wikidata="Q319836" start="72691" end="72698" title="Pohnpei" label="Pohnpei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115640" start="72706" end="72722" title="Senyavin Islands" label="Senyavin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="72726" end="72736" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741620" start="72899" end="72910" title="Big Bog, Maui" label="The Big Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="73530" end="73541" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="73580" end="73586" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="73590" end="73599" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27860" start="73638" end="73646" title="Jayapura" label="Jayapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="73650" end="73660" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486" start="73699" end="73705" title="Tarawa" label="Tarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="73709" end="73718" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="73757" end="73765" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="73858" end="73870" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="73910" end="73919" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="73928" end="73938" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="73950" end="73959" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="73984" end="73994" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="74028" end="74035" title="Animism" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="74125" end="74134" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="74517" end="74528" title="Irreligion" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="74551" end="74558" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="74560" end="74571" title="agnosticism" label="agnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="74573" end="74578" title="deism" label="deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q312226" start="74584" end="74600" title="secular humanism" label="secular humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q678" start="74606" end="74611" title="Tonga" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226618" start="74652" end="74662" title="Polynesian culture" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="74717" end="74726" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q672" start="74803" end="74809" title="Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568313" start="74840" end="74863" title="Baháʼí House of Worship" label="Baháʼí House of Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="74878" end="74883" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="74934" end="74946" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="74949" end="74957" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766584" start="74990" end="74994" title="Hinduism in Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766536" start="75073" end="75082" title="Hinduism in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="75186" end="75197" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896086" start="75239" end="75244" title="Hinduism in Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="75325" end="75330" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="75335" end="75343" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302161" start="75365" end="75382" title="minority religion" label="minority religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="75414" end="75421" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="75423" end="75430" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="75435" end="75442" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673410" start="75465" end="75477" title="Isaac Isaacs" label="Isaac Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="75508" end="75537" title="Governor General of Australia" label="Governor General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="75596" end="75610" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527425" start="75612" end="75634" title="Prince Philip Movement" label="Prince Philip Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049062" start="75654" end="75663" title="Yaohnanen" label="Yaohnanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q378281" start="75698" end="75703" title="Tanna (island)" label="Tanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q686" start="75707" end="75714" title="Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="75815" end="75827" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="75828" end="75843" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="75868" end="75873" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q324457" start="75892" end="75909" title="Oceanic languages" label="Oceanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898" start="75918" end="75928" title="Gilbertese language" label="Gilbertese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33295" start="75930" end="75936" title="Fijian language" label="Fijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="75938" end="75943" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="75949" end="75957" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="75964" end="75995" title="Aboriginal Australian languages" label="Aboriginal Australian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33942" start="76017" end="76029" title="Pama–Nyungan" label="Pama–Nyungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q236425" start="76043" end="76059" title="Papuan languages" label="Papuan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="76063" end="76073" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34018" start="76120" end="76136" title="Trans–New Guinea" label="Trans–New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="76239" end="76246" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="76310" end="76316" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="76320" end="76333" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="76335" end="76351" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35555" start="76353" end="76370" title="Wallis and Futuna" label="Wallis and Futuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q243634" start="76388" end="76401" title="Bonin Islands" label="Bonin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="76407" end="76414" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14452" start="76418" end="76431" title="Easter Island" label="Easter Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="76440" end="76457" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galápagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="76474" end="76481" title="Creole language" label="Creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34159" start="76580" end="76589" title="Tok Pisin" label="Tok Pisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35452" start="76591" end="76598" title="Bislama" label="Bislama"/>
<link wikidata="Q33281" start="76600" end="76609" title="Chavacano" label="Chavacano"/>
<link wikidata="Q653415" start="76619" end="76651" title="Malay trade and creole languages" label="Malay trade and creole languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35602" start="76653" end="76668" title="Hawaiian Pidgin" label="Hawaiian Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33797" start="76670" end="76676" title="Norfuk" label="Norfuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36554" start="76682" end="76689" title="Pitkern" label="Pitkern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448149" start="76788" end="76794" title="Maisin language" label="Maisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717478" start="76869" end="76880" title="List of sovereign states and dependent territories by immigrant population" label="high degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="76884" end="76895" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934638" start="77136" end="77157" title="Multiculturalism in Australia" label="multicultural country"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="77179" end="77192" title="Multiculturalism" label="multicultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251156" start="77297" end="77324" title="Languages Other Than English" label="language other than English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468367" start="77397" end="77410" title="foreign born" label="born overseas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="77485" end="77494" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089934" start="77544" end="77558" title="Greek community of Melbourne" label="Greek-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806588" start="77612" end="77617" title="Asian Australians" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="77744" end="77762" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="77906" end="77914" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="78092" end="78097" title="Asian people" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366180" start="78137" end="78151" title="Middle Eastern people" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102828" start="78194" end="78217" title="majority-minority state" label="majority-minority state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="78219" end="78226" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="78488" end="78496" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431993" start="78508" end="78514" title="Korean immigration to Hawaii" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="78655" end="78665" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="78722" end="78731" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258644" start="78745" end="78779" title="Puerto Rican immigration to Hawaii" label="Puerto Rican immigration to Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416504" start="78986" end="79002" title="Pacific Solution" label="Pacific Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q564811" start="79022" end="79036" title="asylum seekers" label="asylum seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550420" start="79079" end="79101" title="Nauru detention centre" label="Nauru detention centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800679" start="79162" end="79208" title="Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands" label="Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="79280" end="79291" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="79293" end="79304" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="79319" end="79334" title="genetics" label="genetic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q854556" start="79425" end="79445" title="Australo-Melanesians" label="Australo-Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q424129" start="79506" end="79513" title="Papuan people" label="Papuans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052653" start="79533" end="79545" title="Near Oceania" label="Near Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="79607" end="79619" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052998" start="79743" end="79757" title="Remote Oceania" label="Remote Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="79760" end="79777" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="Mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="79824" end="79846" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80686" start="79954" end="79964" title="haplogroup" label="haplogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q148839" start="80089" end="80099" title="Santa Cruz Islands" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="80250" end="80260" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="80294" end="80308" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q372561" start="80327" end="80338" title="forestation" label="forestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="80391" end="80407" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="80517" end="80528" title="preliterate" label="preliterate"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="80654" end="80663" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="80678" end="80683" title="Papua (province)" label="Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096" start="80688" end="80698" title="West Papua (province)" label="West Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q672979" start="80755" end="80780" title="uncontacted peoples" label="uncontacted tribal groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="80826" end="80849" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="81093" end="81102" title="Developed country" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154521" start="81151" end="81171" title="economy of Australia" label="economy of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="81352" end="81361" title="sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="81405" end="81411" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="higher"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="81473" end="81496" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q732670" start="81604" end="81634" title="Australian Securities Exchange" label="Australian Securities Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="81638" end="81644" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829699" start="81660" end="81712" title="List of stock exchanges in Oceania" label="stock exchange in Australia and in the South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="81819" end="81831" title="Purchasing power parity" label="PPP-adjusted"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="81914" end="81931" title="quality of living" label="quality of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199177" start="81954" end="81973" title="world&amp;#x27;s most livable cities" label="most livable cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="82004" end="82014" title="World City" label="World City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="82018" end="82022" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="GaWC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="82024" end="82033" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199177" start="82060" end="82091" title="World&amp;#x27;s Most Livable Cities" label="world&amp;#x27;s most liveable city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="82115" end="82131" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82139" end="82150" title="Asia–acific" label="Asia–acific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056339" start="82322" end="82336" title="Automotive industry in Australia" label="producing cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11828862" start="82374" end="82381" title="clothing industry" label="clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q956630" start="82422" end="82429" title="Economy of New Zealand" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="82437" end="82441" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="53rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="82475" end="82505" title="nominal gross domestic product" label="nominal gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="82516" end="82520" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="68th"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="82554" end="82577" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="82633" end="82652" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="82702" end="82749" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="82764" end="82774" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199177" start="82807" end="82840" title="world&amp;#x27;s most liveable cities" label="world&amp;#x27;s most liveable cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101909" start="82869" end="82887" title="Global Liveability Ranking" label="first in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q22101909" start="82905" end="82931" title="Global Liveability Ranking" label="Global Liveability Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="82934" end="82945" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="83099" end="83109" title="globalised" label="globalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="83177" end="83186" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="83188" end="83194" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="83196" end="83201" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="83207" end="83221" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="83223" end="83228" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="83230" end="83239" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="83241" end="83252" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="83261" end="83274" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102487" start="83300" end="83325" title="Closer Economic Relations" label="Closer Economic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154521" start="83394" end="83411" title="Economy of Australia" label="that of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="83426" end="83436" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102487" start="84170" end="84195" title="Closer Economic Relations" label="Closer Economic Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="84267" end="84300" title="Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation" label="Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q542549" start="84316" end="84332" title="East Asia Summit" label="East Asia Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="84439" end="84444" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="84448" end="84455" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="84461" end="84467" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="84469" end="84473" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="84475" end="84483" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="84485" end="84490" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="84492" end="84497" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="84503" end="84509" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="84545" end="84552" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="84569" end="84576" title="Fishing" label="Fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="84594" end="84602" title="Industry (economics)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="84665" end="84672" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980594" start="84734" end="84751" title="Natural Resources" label="Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="84761" end="84765" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="84767" end="84771" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="84773" end="84779" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="84785" end="84789" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="84818" end="84833" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="84941" end="84955" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="85007" end="85011" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="85063" end="85072" title="economics" label="economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="85094" end="85112" title="developing nation" label="developing country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="85126" end="85149" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="85190" end="85212" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="85273" end="85278" title="Sugar" label="Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="85428" end="85435" title="Coconut" label="Coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="85438" end="85444" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="85450" end="85455" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="85575" end="85585" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="85587" end="85594" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="85607" end="85616" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86160" end="86164" title="Economy of Fiji#Tourism" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="86549" end="86560" title="scuba diver" label="scuba diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="86581" end="86591" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856068" start="86761" end="86769" title="Survivor (US TV series)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241096" start="86880" end="86898" title="Celebrity Survivor" label="Celebrity Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q782217" start="86963" end="86983" title="Tourism in Australia" label="Tourism in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="87068" end="87075" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="87094" end="87103" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="87111" end="87114" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="87262" end="87276" title="Sydney Harbour" label="Sydney Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q45178" start="87278" end="87296" title="Sydney Opera House" label="Sydney Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q54495" start="87298" end="87319" title="Sydney Harbour Bridge" label="Sydney Harbour Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54489" start="87321" end="87341" title="Royal Botanic Garden, Sydney" label="Royal Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="87350" end="87360" title="Gold Coast, Queensland" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="87362" end="87373" title="theme parks" label="theme parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417567" start="87382" end="87406" title="Warner Bros. Movie World" label="Warner Bros. Movie World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256280" start="87408" end="87418" title="Dreamworld (Australian theme park)" label="Dreamworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q505518" start="87423" end="87432" title="Sea World (Australia)" label="Sea World"/>
<link wikidata="Q385655" start="87435" end="87467" title="Walls of Jerusalem National Park" label="Walls of Jerusalem National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905973" start="87472" end="87497" title="Mount Field National Park" label="Mount Field National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="87501" end="87509" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q695935" start="87511" end="87536" title="Royal Exhibition Building" label="Royal Exhibition Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="87540" end="87549" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="87555" end="87573" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="87577" end="87587" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q475623" start="87589" end="87608" title="The Twelve Apostles (Victoria)" label="The Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="87612" end="87620" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33910" start="87622" end="87627" title="Uluru" label="Uluru"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="87649" end="87667" title="Australian outback" label="Australian outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q383373" start="87670" end="87692" title="Tourism in New Zealand" label="Tourism in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472704" start="87705" end="87708" title="New Zealand dollar" label="NZ$"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="87750" end="87753" title="gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829095" start="88098" end="88117" title="Tourism New Zealand" label="Tourism New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q187197" start="88225" end="88238" title="Milford Sound" label="Milford Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829152" start="88403" end="88435" title="Tourism in Hawaii" label="visitors to the Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="88761" end="88768" title="federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="88769" end="88782" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="88783" end="88806" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="88812" end="88823" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="88843" end="88860" title="Monarchy of Australia" label="King of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="88928" end="88946" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="88993" end="89009" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589802" start="89042" end="89051" title="Governors of the Australian states" label="Governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="89226" end="89248" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="89257" end="89266" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="89301" end="89314" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="89342" end="89356" title="National Party of Australia" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="89423" end="89435" title="centre-right" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="89470" end="89481" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="89487" end="89511" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="89598" end="89621" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="89629" end="89652" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995141" start="89663" end="89679" title="Constitution of New Zealand" label="its constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="89683" end="89695" title="Uncodified constitution" label="not codified"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="89697" end="89708" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296" start="89716" end="89735" title="Monarchy of New Zealand" label="King of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="89744" end="89757" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="89790" end="89806" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="89832" end="89838" title="Advice (constitutional)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="89846" end="89860" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="89866" end="89888" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="89895" end="89912" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034424" start="89946" end="89970" title="New Zealand House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354778" start="89974" end="90004" title="Elections in New Zealand" label="parliamentary general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153917" start="90280" end="90295" title="Politics of Samoa" label="Samoan politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277355" start="90301" end="90324" title="Prime Minister of Samoa" label="Prime Minister of Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="90332" end="90350" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164230" start="90356" end="90373" title="Constitution of Samoa" label="1960 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="90483" end="90506" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269555" start="90618" end="90638" title="Legislative Assembly of Samoa" label="legislative assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154675" start="90640" end="90657" title="Politics of Tonga" label="Politics of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="90690" end="90713" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q836240" start="90727" end="90740" title="King of Tonga" label="King of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="90748" end="90761" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154000" start="90764" end="90768" title="Politics of Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469153" start="90802" end="90824" title="Prime Minister of Fiji" label="Prime Minister of Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="90852" end="90867" title="Executive (government)" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="90900" end="90917" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345425" start="90959" end="90977" title="Parliament of Fiji" label="Parliament of Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="90979" end="90983" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q48894" start="90991" end="91004" title="Head of State of Fiji" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q76292543" start="91012" end="91021" title="President of Fiji" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155720" start="91031" end="91059" title="politics of Papua New Guinea" label="politics of Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074656" start="91064" end="91078" title="List of Prime Ministers of the Papua New Guinea" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="91131" end="91164" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="the monarch of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073440" start="91183" end="91199" title="Governor-General of Papua New Guinea" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153951" start="91204" end="91212" title="Politics of Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="91216" end="91236" title="Parliamentary system" label="Parliamentary regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q878250" start="91242" end="91263" title="President of Kiribati" label="President of Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394908" start="91331" end="91344" title="Politics of New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="91377" end="91392" title="French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164879" start="91427" end="91441" title="French citizen" label="French citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="91491" end="91515" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q215987" start="91540" end="91553" title="French Senate" label="French Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225255" start="91556" end="91562" title="Politics of Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="91583" end="91599" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164196" start="91620" end="91641" title="Constitution of Hawaii" label="Hawaiian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="91659" end="91681" title="branches of government" label="branches of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763604" start="91853" end="91865" title="Anglo-Celtic" label="Anglo-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="91866" end="91881" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="91893" end="91903" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="92066" end="92090" title="Culture of the United States" label="American popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212945" start="92313" end="92340" title="The Story of the Kelly Gang" label="The Story of the Kelly Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="92378" end="92392" title="feature length" label="feature length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973146" start="92417" end="92434" title="cinema of Australia" label="Australian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="92446" end="92457" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q769416" start="92467" end="92484" title="Australian Museum" label="Australian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464509" start="92503" end="92531" title="National Gallery of Victoria" label="National Gallery of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036694" start="92564" end="92571" title="List of largest art museums" label="largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="92572" end="92578" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660053" start="92608" end="92627" title="Sydney New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="92702" end="92706" title="Coffeehouse" label="cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117362" start="92711" end="92725" title="coffee culture" label="coffee culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="92729" end="92742" title="Urban area" label="urban centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="92758" end="92769" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q62449" start="92795" end="92805" title="flat white" label="flat white"/>
<link wikidata="Q533945" start="92877" end="92897" title="hunter-gatherer diet" label="hunter-gatherer diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017481" start="92942" end="92953" title="bush tucker" label="bush tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="92985" end="92997" title="British cuisine" label="British food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850311" start="93085" end="93097" title="Sunday roast" label="Sunday roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117362" start="93269" end="93283" title="coffee culture" label="coffee culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q149806" start="93306" end="93320" title="Culture of Asia" label="Asian cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="93387" end="93394" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277124" start="93404" end="93411" title="dim sim" label="dim sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097475" start="93416" end="93426" title="Chiko Roll" label="Chiko Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="93553" end="93557" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="93562" end="93569" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="93614" end="93640" title="music of the United States" label="music of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507082" start="93710" end="93726" title="slack-key guitar" label="slack-key guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="93803" end="93812" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="93867" end="93880" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="93910" end="93922" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="93949" end="93961" title="Polytheism" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="93966" end="93975" title="Animism" label="animistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295586" start="94142" end="94159" title="cuisine of Hawaii" label="cuisine of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107563" start="94272" end="94288" title="Native Hawaiian cuisine" label="native Hawaiians"/>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="94294" end="94302" title="Cuisine of the United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="94304" end="94311" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520796" start="94313" end="94321" title="Filipino cuisine" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="94323" end="94331" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="94333" end="94339" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068130" start="94341" end="94351" title="Polynesian cuisine" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180817" start="94357" end="94367" title="Portuguese cuisine" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42180" start="94436" end="94457" title="Israel Kamakawiwoʻole" label="Israel Kamakawiwoʻole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560404" start="94490" end="94539" title="Somewhere Over the Rainbow/What a Wonderful World" label="Somewhere Over the Rainbow/What a Wonderful World"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="94592" end="94595" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="94761" end="94766" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q672551" start="94834" end="94869" title="History of New Zealand" label="British colonisation of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851080" start="95100" end="95112" title="Waitangi Day" label="Waitangi Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q295859" start="95117" end="95126" title="ANZAC Day" label="ANZAC Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192842" start="95540" end="95549" title="kapa haka" label="kapa haka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282637" start="95698" end="95707" title="Film producer" label="producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="95766" end="95772" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="95786" end="95807" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q74331" start="95821" end="95831" title="The Hobbit (film series)" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211909" start="95845" end="95869" title="The Chronicles of Narnia (film series)" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160215" start="95883" end="95892" title="King Kong (2005 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q207130" start="95909" end="95925" title="The Last Samurai" label="The Last Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301187" start="95977" end="95988" title="Pacific Rim" label="Pacific Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115061" start="96015" end="96028" title="Māori cuisine" label="Māori cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="96339" end="96343" title="Lamb and mutton" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4473734" start="96353" end="96358" title="Paranephrops" label="koura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995732" start="96371" end="96380" title="whitebait" label="whitebait"/>
<link wikidata="Q14651290" start="96402" end="96415" title="dredge oyster" label="dredge oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658241" start="96418" end="96422" title="pāua" label="pāua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013103" start="96443" end="96447" title="Paphies australis" label="pipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017042" start="96452" end="96458" title="tuatua" label="tuatua"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="96460" end="96466" title="Sweet potato" label="kumara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194" start="96483" end="96492" title="kiwifruit" label="kiwifruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q379747" start="96494" end="96503" title="tamarillo" label="tamarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419824" start="96509" end="96516" title="Pavlova (food)" label="pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427520" start="96564" end="96579" title="fa&amp;#x27;a Samoa" label="fa&amp;#x27;a Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="96775" end="96783" title="Samoan language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409895" start="96814" end="96838" title="Samoa &amp;#x27;ava ceremony" label="Samoa &amp;#x27;ava ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247662" start="96929" end="96934" title="fa&amp;#x27;amatai" label="matai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084052" start="97018" end="97031" title="&amp;#x27;ie toga" label="&amp;#x27;ie toga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532284" start="97075" end="97079" title="siva Samoa" label="siva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424953" start="97231" end="97235" title="sasa (dance)" label="sasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058791" start="97306" end="97318" title="synchronization" label="synchronised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081927" start="97374" end="97378" title="pate (musical instrument)" label="pate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427523" start="97455" end="97471" title="fa&amp;#x27;ataupati" label="fa&amp;#x27;ataupati"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945322" start="97598" end="97606" title="Hawaiian culture" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282763" start="97608" end="97616" title="Tahitians" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647357" start="97621" end="97626" title="Māori culture" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="97919" end="97930" title="Petroglyphs" label="Petroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="97932" end="97941" title="tattooing" label="tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="98179" end="98193" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="98303" end="98311" title="rock art" label="rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021436" start="98905" end="98919" title="Lapita culture" label="Lapita culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q20350" start="99219" end="99223" title="moai" label="moai"/>
<link wikidata="Q846967" start="99362" end="99371" title="Nan Madol" label="Nan Madol"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="99448" end="99460" title="wood carving" label="wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212817" start="99509" end="99513" title="kapa" label="kapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q972724" start="99530" end="99534" title="Tapa cloth" label="tapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="99640" end="99651" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="99815" end="99822" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q142555" start="99835" end="99848" title="Australia national cricket team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="99864" end="99881" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q231200" start="99952" end="99959" title="netball" label="netball"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="99967" end="99992" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="100142" end="100154" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="100168" end="100183" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="100253" end="100266" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="the Wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="100402" end="100414" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590524" start="100416" end="100439" title="Fiji national rugby sevens team" label="Fiji&amp;#x27;s sevens team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590302" start="100490" end="100508" title="New Zealand national rugby sevens team" label="New Zealand&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q781430" start="100562" end="100567" title="Australian rules football in Nauru" label="Nauru"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="100752" end="100767" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="100807" end="100833" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466364" start="100924" end="100931" title="Football in Vanuatu" label="Vanuatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="100971" end="100991" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466269" start="101058" end="101066" title="Football in Kiribati" label="Kiribati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466393" start="101068" end="101083" title="Football in Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352875" start="101088" end="101094" title="Football in Tuvalu" label="Tuvalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478113" start="101146" end="101155" title="Soccer in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180344" start="101184" end="101214" title="Oceania Football Confederation" label="Oceania Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83276" start="101229" end="101257" title="Asian Football Confederation" label="Asian Football Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q268208" start="101291" end="101304" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="the Socceroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="101341" end="101355" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="101482" end="101486" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q218167" start="101515" end="101545" title="Federated States of Micronesia national football team" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863561" start="101575" end="101580" title="Palau national football team" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q270203" start="101769" end="101773" title="Guam national football team" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q754199" start="101778" end="101802" title="Northern Mariana Islands national football team" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="102158" end="102172" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="Melbourne 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="102177" end="102188" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="Sydney 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q31039462" start="102239" end="102251" title="2032 Summer Olympics" label="2032 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="102295" end="102313" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="102347" end="102360" title="Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="102640" end="102655" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="102695" end="102705" title="Grand Slam (tennis)" label="Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="102721" end="102727" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="102745" end="102756" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413717" start="102759" end="102779" title="Europeans in Oceania" label="Europeans in Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445802" start="102782" end="102806" title="Festival of Pacific Arts" label="Festival of Pacific Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841875" start="102809" end="102825" title="Flags of Oceania" label="Flags of Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q124328544" start="102828" end="102844" title="Global Southeast" label="Global Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053376" start="102847" end="102860" title="Insular Chile" label="Insular Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609766" start="102863" end="102888" title="List of cities in Oceania" label="List of cities in Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773021" start="102891" end="102908" title="Oceania (journal)" label="Oceania (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068130" start="102911" end="102926" title="Oceanic cuisine" label="Oceanic cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142425" start="102929" end="102958" title="Indigenous peoples of Oceania" label="Indigenous peoples of Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="102961" end="102977" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005578" start="102980" end="102993" title="Pacific Union" label="Pacific Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="102996" end="103013" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261705" start="103016" end="103052" title="United Nations geoscheme for Oceania" label="United Nations geoscheme for Oceania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22622" wikidata="Q1226236" url="?curid=22622" title="Orthodox">
<text>Orthodox, Orthodoxy, or Orthodoxism may refer to:
==Religion==
* Orthodoxy, adherence to accepted norms, more specifically adherence to creeds, especially within Christianity and Judaism, but also less commonly in non-Abrahamic religions like Neo-paganism or Hinduism

===Christian===
==== Traditional Christian denominations ====
* Eastern Orthodoxy, the world&#x27;s second largest Christian denomination
* Oriental Orthodoxy, which does not accept the theological resolutions of the Council of Chalcedon

==== Modern denominations ====
* Lutheran orthodoxy, an era in the history of Lutheranism which began in 1580 from the writing of the &quot;Book of Concord&quot;
* Neo-orthodoxy, a theological position also known as &quot;dialectical theology&quot;
* Orthodox Presbyterian Church, a confessional Presbyterian denomination located primarily in the northern United States
* Paleo-orthodoxy, (20th–21st century), a movement in the United States focusing on the consensus among the ecumenical councils and church fathers
* Reformed Orthodoxy (16th–18th century), a systematized, institutionalized and codified Reformed theology
* True Orthodox church, also called Old Calendarists, a movement that separated from the mainstream Eastern Orthodox Church in the 1920s over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform

==== Academic term ====
* Proto-orthodox Christianity, a term coined by New Testament scholar Bart D. Ehrman to describe the Early Christian movement which was the precursor of Christian orthodoxy

===Non-Christian===
* Orthodox Judaism, a branch of Judaism
**Haredi Judaism, groups within Orthodox Judaism that reject modern secular culture
***Hasidic Judaism, a sub-group within Haredi Judaism noted for its religious conservatism and, typically, social seclusion
**Modern Orthodox Judaism, is a movement within Orthodox Judaism
* Kemetic Orthodoxy, an Egyptian neo-pagan religion that intends to reform and restore ancient Egyptian religion
* Orthodox Bahá&#x27;í Faith, a small Baha&#x27;i denomination
* Orthodox Hinduism, a term for Sanātanī
* Orthodox Islam, generally refers to Sunni Islam
* Slavic Native Faith or Orthodoxy, a term used by Neo-Slavic pagan religious organizations

==Other uses==
* Left-arm orthodox spin, a bowling technique in cricket
* &quot;Orthodox&quot; (album), a 2013 album by American rock band Beware of Darkness
* Orthodox (band), an American metalcore band from Tennessee.
* Orthodox File Managers, a user interface to work with file systems
* Orthodox (Jordan), a Jordanian basketball club
* Orthodox Marxism, the dominant form of Marxist philosophy between the death of Karl Marx and the beginning of World War I
* Orthodox seed, a seed which may be preserved via drying or freezing
* Orthodox stance, a way of positioning the feet and hands in combat sports

==See also==
* Anti-Orthodox (disambiguation)
* Heterodoxy
* Orthodox calendar (disambiguation)
* Orthodox Church (disambiguation)
* Orthodox Communion (disambiguation)
* Orthodoxy by country (disambiguation)
* Unorthodox (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1226236" start="0" end="8" title="Orthodox" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226236" start="10" end="19" title="Orthodox" label="Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226236" start="24" end="35" title="Orthodox" label="Orthodoxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="65" end="74" title="Orthodoxy" label="Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="333" end="350" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="409" end="427" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877946" start="541" end="559" title="Lutheran orthodoxy" label="Lutheran orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q875241" start="672" end="685" title="Neo-orthodoxy" label="Neo-orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q782613" start="759" end="787" title="Orthodox Presbyterian Church" label="Orthodox Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976213" start="880" end="895" title="Paleo-orthodoxy" label="Paleo-orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210815" start="1027" end="1045" title="Reformed Orthodoxy" label="Reformed Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036536" start="1134" end="1154" title="True Orthodox church" label="True Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q358010" start="1168" end="1184" title="Old Calendarists" label="Old Calendarists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="1341" end="1368" title="Proto-orthodox Christianity" label="Proto-orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="1535" end="1551" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="1575" end="1589" title="Haredi Judaism" label="Haredi Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="1660" end="1675" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771622" start="1783" end="1806" title="Modern Orthodox Judaism" label="Modern Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528388" start="1848" end="1865" title="Kemetic Orthodoxy" label="Kemetic Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850093" start="1961" end="1987" title="Orthodox Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith" label="Orthodox Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415529" start="2024" end="2041" title="Orthodox Hinduism" label="Orthodox Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="2065" end="2079" title="Orthodox Islam" label="Orthodox Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="2115" end="2134" title="Slavic Native Faith" label="Slavic Native Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520158" start="2223" end="2245" title="Left-arm orthodox spin" label="Left-arm orthodox spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143059" start="2280" end="2308" title="Orthodox (album)" label="&amp;quot;Orthodox&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124655299" start="2366" end="2381" title="Orthodox (band)" label="Orthodox (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q732970" start="2428" end="2450" title="Orthodox File Managers" label="Orthodox File Managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104445" start="2497" end="2514" title="Orthodox (Jordan)" label="Orthodox (Jordan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q937465" start="2546" end="2562" title="Orthodox Marxism" label="Orthodox Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104514" start="2670" end="2683" title="Orthodox seed" label="Orthodox seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260471" start="2740" end="2755" title="Orthodox stance" label="Orthodox stance"/>
<link wikidata="Q50326967" start="2830" end="2860" title="Anti-Orthodox (disambiguation)" label="Anti-Orthodox (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="2863" end="2873" title="Heterodoxy" label="Heterodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104503" start="2876" end="2910" title="Orthodox calendar (disambiguation)" label="Orthodox calendar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22134292" start="2913" end="2945" title="Orthodox Church (disambiguation)" label="Orthodox Church (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29588788" start="2948" end="2983" title="Orthodox Communion (disambiguation)" label="Orthodox Communion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719655" start="2986" end="3023" title="Orthodoxy by country (disambiguation)" label="Orthodoxy by country (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897261" start="3026" end="3053" title="Unorthodox (disambiguation)" label="Unorthodox (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22623" wikidata="Q817281" url="?curid=22623" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill">
<text>The combined oral contraceptive pill (COCP), often referred to as the birth control pill or colloquially as &quot;the pill&quot;, is a type of birth control that is designed to be taken orally by women. It is the oral form of combined hormonal contraception. The pill contains two important hormones: a progestin (a synthetic form of the hormone progestogen / progesterone) and estrogen (usually ethinylestradiol or 17β estradiol). When taken correctly, it alters the menstrual cycle to eliminate ovulation and prevent pregnancy.

Combined oral contraceptive pills were first approved for contraceptive use in the United States in 1960, and remain a very popular form of birth control. They are used by more than 100 million women worldwide including about 9 million women in the United States. From 2015 to 2017, 12.6% of women aged 15–49 in the US reported using combined oral contraceptive pills, making it the second most common method of contraception in this age range (female sterilization is the most common method). Use of combined oral contraceptive pills, however, varies widely by country, age, education, and marital status. For example, one third of women aged 16–49 in the United Kingdom use either the combined pill or progestogen-only pill (POP), compared with less than 3% of women in Japan (as of 1950–2014).

Combined oral contraceptives are on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines. The pill was a catalyst for the sexual revolution.
==Background==
===Oral contraceptives===

Hormonal oral contraceptives are preventive medications taken orally by females to avoid pregnancy by manipulating their sex hormones. The first oral contraceptive was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and sold to the market in 1960. There are two types of hormonal oral contraceptives, namely Combined Oral Contraceptives and Progesterone Only Pills. Oral contraceptives, be it combined or progesterone-only, can effectively prevent pregnancy by regulating hormonal changes in the menstrual cycle, inhibiting ovulation, and altering cervical mucus to impede sperm mobility; combined pills have extra effects in menstrual cycle regulation and menstrual pain relief. Common off-label uses include menstrual suppression and acne relief, with Combined Oral Contraceptives having additional benefits in relieving menstrual migraine.

=== Variants ===
Progesterone-only pills (POPs) utilise progestin, the synthetic form of progesterone, as the only active pharmaceutical ingredient in the formulation. In the US, drospirenone and norethindrone are the most commonly used compounds in formulations.

Combined oral contraceptives (COCs) are commonly classified into generations, referring to their order of development in history. This discussion may also help identify some key features in a variety of products. According to EMA, the first generation of combined oral contraceptives, which made use of a high concentration of oestrogen only, were those invented in the 1960s. In the second generation of products, progestogens were introduced into the formulation while the concentration of oestrogen was reduced. Starting from the 1990s, the progression in the development of combined oral contraceptives has been directed towards varying the type of progestogen incorporated. These products are referred as the third and fourth generation.

Oestrogen ingredients: estradiol, ethinylestradiol, estetrol.

1st generation progestin: norethindrone acetate, ethynodiol diacetate, lynestrenol, norethynodrel.

2nd generation progestin: levonorgestrel, dl-norgestrel.

3rd generation progestin: norgestimate, gestodene, desogestrel.

=== The menstrual cycle ===

Hormonal oral contraceptives (HOCs) interact with hormonal changes in the menstrual cycle in females to prevent ovulation, and hence achieve contraception. In a 28-day menstrual cycle, there are the proliferative phase, ovulation, and then the secretory phase.

Menstruation marks the beginning of proliferative phase in day 1-14. In this period, the pituitary gland located near the brain secretes follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) into the bloodstream to signal the development of follicle in ovary in the female reproductive system. While follicle serves as the chamber of ovum development, it secretes Oestrogen, a hormone that not only triggers the thickening of uterine lining in preparation for implantation, but also inhibits the secretion of FSH in pituitary via a negative feedback mechanism.

Specifically in ovulation, transient positive feedback by Oestrogen on FSH and Luteinising Hormone (LH) secretion from pituitary is permitted so that the release of mature ovum from follicle is triggered.

In secretory phase on day 14-28, this follicle then transforms into corpus luteum and continues releasing Oestrogen with Progesterone into bloodstream. While Oestrogen and Progesterone primarily aid the maintenance of thickness in uterine lining, the negative feedback in pituitary allows them to inhibit FSH and LH secretion. In the absence of LH, corpus luteum degenerates and ultimately causes blood Oestrogen and Progesterone levels to decline. Without these thickness maintaining agents, uterine lining breaks down and hence the presentation of menstruation.

==Mechanism of action==
Progesterone and Oestrogen, either in combination or with Progesterone-only, are the active pharmaceutical ingredients found in a hormonal oral contraceptive formulation. These medications are orally administered for systemic absorption to exert their effects. An artificially enhanced level of Progesterone throughout the menstrual cycle inhibits the pituitary secretion of FSH and LH such that their actions in stimulating follicular development and ovulation are prevented. Similarly, a boosted Oestrogen level activates the negative feedback mechanism in reducing FSH secretion from pituitary and therefore prevents follicular development. In the absence of a developed follicle, ovulation cannot occur so that fertilisation is made impossible and contraception is achieved. In comparison, Progesterone is more efficacious than Oestrogen not only because of its additional action in impeding LH, but also its ability to modulate the cervical mucus into sperm-repellent.

Combined oral contraceptive pills were developed to prevent ovulation by suppressing the release of gonadotropins. Combined hormonal contraceptives, including combined oral contraceptive pills, inhibit follicular development and prevent ovulation as a primary mechanism of action.

Under normal circumstances, luteinizing hormone (LH) stimulates the theca cells of the ovarian follicle to produce androstenedione. The granulosa cells of the ovarian follicle then convert this androstenedione to estradiol. This conversion process is catalyzed by aromatase, an enzyme produced as a result of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulation. In individuals using oral contraceptives, progestogen negative feedback decreases the pulse frequency of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release by the hypothalamus, which decreases the secretion of FSH and greatly decreases the secretion of LH by the anterior pituitary. Decreased levels of FSH inhibit follicular development, preventing an increase in estradiol levels. Progestogen negative feedback and the lack of estrogen positive feedback on LH secretion prevent a mid-cycle LH surge. Inhibition of follicular development and the absence of an LH surge prevent ovulation.

Estrogen was originally included in oral contraceptives for better cycle control (to stabilize the endometrium and thereby reduce the incidence of breakthrough bleeding), but was also found to inhibit follicular development and help prevent ovulation. Estrogen negative feedback on the anterior pituitary greatly decreases the secretion of FSH, which inhibits follicular development and helps prevent ovulation.

Another primary mechanism of action of all progestogen-containing contraceptives is inhibition of sperm penetration through the cervix into the upper genital tract (uterus and fallopian tubes) by decreasing the water content and increasing the viscosity of the cervical mucus.

The estrogen and progestogen in combined oral contraceptive pills have other effects on the reproductive system, but these have not been shown to contribute to their contraceptive efficacy:
* Slowing tubal motility and ova transport, which may interfere with fertilization.
* Endometrial atrophy and alteration of metalloproteinase content, which may impede sperm motility and viability, or theoretically inhibit implantation.
* Endometrial edema, which may affect implantation.

Insufficient evidence exists on whether changes in the endometrium could actually prevent implantation. The primary mechanisms of action are so effective that the possibility of fertilization during combined oral contraceptive pill use is very small. Since pregnancy occurs despite endometrial changes when the primary mechanisms of action fail, endometrial changes are unlikely to play a significant role, if any, in the observed effectiveness of combined oral contraceptive pills.

==Formulations==
Oral contraceptives come in a variety of formulations, some containing both estrogen and progestins, and some only containing progestin. Doses of component hormones also vary among products, and some pills are monophasic (delivering the same dose of hormones each day) while others are multiphasic (doses vary each day). combined oral contraceptive pills can also be divided into two groups, those with progestins that possess androgen activity (norethisterone acetate, etynodiol diacetate, levonorgestrel, norgestrel, norgestimate, desogestrel, gestodene) or antiandrogen activity (cyproterone acetate, chlormadinone acetate, drospirenone, dienogest, nomegestrol acetate).

Combined oral contraceptive pills have been somewhat inconsistently grouped into &quot;generations&quot; in the medical literature based on when they were introduced.
* First generation combined oral contraceptive pills are sometimes defined as those containing the progestins noretynodrel, norethisterone, norethisterone acetate, or etynodiol acetate; and sometimes defined as all combined oral contraceptive pills containing ≥ 50 μg ethinylestradiol.
* Second generation combined oral contraceptive pills are sometimes defined as those containing the progestins norgestrel or levonorgestrel; and sometimes defined as those containing the progestins norethisterone, norethisterone acetate, etynodiol acetate, norgestrel, levonorgestrel, or norgestimate and &lt; 50 μg ethinylestradiol.
* Third generation combined oral contraceptive pills are sometimes defined as those containing the progestins desogestrel or gestodene; and sometimes defined as those containing desogestrel, gestodene, or norgestimate.
* Fourth generation combined oral contraceptive pills are sometimes defined as those containing the progestin drospirenone; and sometimes defined as those containing drospirenone, dienogest, or nomegestrol acetate.

==Medical use==
=== Contraceptive use ===
Combined oral contraceptive pills are a type of oral medication that were originally designed to be taken every day at the same time of day in order to prevent pregnancy. There are many different formulations or brands, but the average pack is designed to be taken over a 28-day period (also known as a cycle). For the first 21 days of the cycle, users take a daily pill that contains two hormones, estrogen and progestogen. During the last 7 days of the cycle, users take daily placebo (biologically inactive) pills and these days are considered hormone-free days. Although these are hormone-free days, users are still protected from pregnancy during this time.

Some combined oral contraceptive pill packs only contain 21 pills and users are advised to take no pills for the last 7 days of the cycle. Other combined oral contraceptive pill formulations contain 91 pills, consisting of 84 days of active hormones followed by 7 days of placebo (Seasonale). Combined oral contraceptive pill formulations can contain 24 days of active hormone pills followed by 4 days of placebo pills (e.g. Yaz 28 and Loestrin 24 Fe) as a means to decrease the severity of placebo effects. These combined oral contraceptive pills containing active hormones and a placebo/hormone-free period are called cyclic combined oral contraceptive pills. Once a pack of cyclical combined oral contraceptive pill treatment is completed, users start a new pack and new cycle.

Most monophasic combined oral contraceptive pills can be used continuously such that patients can skip placebo days and continuously take hormone active pills from a combined oral contraceptive pill pack. One of the most common reasons users do this is to avoid or diminish withdrawal bleeding. The majority of women on cyclic combined oral contraceptive pills have regularly scheduled withdrawal bleeding, which is vaginal bleeding mimicking users&#x27; menstrual cycles with the exception of lighter menstrual bleeding compared to bleeding patterns prior to combined oral contraceptive pill commencement. As such, a study reported that out of 1003 women taking combined oral contraceptive pills approximately 90% reported regularly scheduled withdrawal bleeds over a 90-day standard reference period. Withdrawal bleeding usually occurs during the placebo, hormone-free days. Therefore, avoiding placebo days can diminish withdrawal bleeding among other placebo effects.

=== Regimen ===
This section demonstrates the overall rationalisation of dosing route and intervals of hormonal oral contraceptives, please seek advice and follow instructions from healthcare professionals in administering specific hormonal oral contraceptives. Considering the menstrual cycle as a 28-day cycle, hormonal oral contraceptives are available in packages of 21, 28, or 91 tablets.  These pills have typically undergone unit dose optimisation so that they follow the administration pattern of once daily, every day or almost every day on a regular basis. Since they are formulated into daily doses, it is recommended that the medication should be taken at the same time every day to maximise efficacy.

For 21-tablet packs, the general instruction is to take one tablet daily for 21 days, followed by a 7-day blank interval without taking hormonal oral contraceptives before initiating another 21-tablet pack. For 28-tablet packs, the 1st tablet from a new pack should be taken on the next day when the 28th tablet from an old pack was finished. While the 7-day blank period does not apply to 28-tablet packs, they will likely include tablets in distinctive colours indicating that they have an alternate amount of active ingredients, otherwise inactive ingredient or folate supplement only. The instruction for 91-tablet pack follows that of 28-tablet packs with some colour-distinguishable tablets which contain different amounts of medicine or supplement.

To acquire immediate contraceptive effects, the initiation of hormonal oral contraceptive dosing is recommended within the 1st-5th day from menstruation in order to discard other means of contraception. Specific to Progesterone only pills, even if dosing is initiated within five days, backup contraception is suggested in the first 48 hours since the first pill. In the case of dosing initiated after the 5th day from menstruation, effects usually take place after seven days and other contraceptive methods should remain in place until then.

==== Effectiveness ====
If used exactly as instructed, the estimated risk of getting pregnant is 0.3% which means that about 3 in 1000 women on combined oral contraceptive pills will become pregnant within one year. However, typical use of combined oral contraceptive pills by users often consists of timing errors, forgotten pills, or unwanted side effects. With typical use, the estimated risk of getting pregnant is about 9% which means that about 9 in 100 women on combined oral contraceptive pills will become pregnant in one year. The perfect use failure rate is based on a review of pregnancy rates in clinical trials, and the typical use failure rate is based on a weighted average of estimates from the 1995 and 2002 US National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG), corrected for underreporting of abortions.

Several factors account for typical use effectiveness being lower than perfect use effectiveness:

# Mistakes on part of those providing instructions on how to use the method
# Mistakes on part of the user
# Conscious user non-compliance with instructions

For instance, someone using combined oral contraceptive pills might have received incorrect information by a health care provider about medication frequency, forgotten to take the pill one day or not gone to the pharmacy in time to renew a combined oral contraceptive pill prescription.

Combined oral contraceptive pills provide effective contraception from the very first pill if started within five days of the beginning of the menstrual cycle (within five days of the first day of menstruation). If started at any other time in the menstrual cycle, combined oral contraceptive pills provide effective contraception only after 7 consecutive days of use of active pills, so a backup method of contraception (e.g. condoms) must be used in the interim.

The effectiveness of combined oral contraceptive pills appears to be similar whether the active pills are taken continuously or if they are taken cyclically. Contraceptive efficacy, however, could be impaired by numerous means. Factors that may contribute to a decrease in effectiveness:

# Missing more than one active pill in a packet,
# Delay in starting the next packet of active pills (i.e., extending the pill-free, inactive pill or placebo pill period beyond 7 days),
# Intestinal malabsorption of active pills due to vomiting or diarrhea,
# Drug-drug interactions among combined oral contraceptive pills and other medications of the user that decrease contraceptive estrogen and/or progestogen levels.

In any of these instances, a backup contraceptive method should be used until hormone active pills have been consistently taken for 7 consecutive days or drug-drug interactions or underlying illnesses have been discontinued or resolved. According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines, a pill is considered &quot;late&quot; if a user takes the pill after the user&#x27;s normal medication time, but no longer than 24 hours after this normal time. If 24 hours or more have passed since the time the user was supposed to take the pill, then the pill is considered &quot;missed&quot;. CDC guidelines discuss potential next steps for users who missed their pill or took it late.

===Role of placebo pills===
The role of the placebo pills is two-fold: to allow the user to continue the routine of taking a pill every day and to simulate the average menstrual cycle. By continuing to take a pill every day, users remain in the daily habit even during the week without hormones. Failure to take pills during the placebo week does not impact the effectiveness of the pill, provided that daily ingestion of active pills is resumed at the end of the week.

The placebo, or hormone-free, week in the 28-day pill package simulates an average menstrual cycle, though the hormonal events during a pill cycle are significantly different from those of a normal ovulatory menstrual cycle. Because the pill suppresses ovulation (to be discussed more in the Mechanism of action section), birth control users do not have true menstrual periods. Instead, it is the lack of hormones for a week that causes a withdrawal bleed. The withdrawal bleeding that occurs during the break from active pills has been thought to be reassuring, a physical confirmation of not being pregnant. The withdrawal bleeding is also predictable. Unexpected breakthrough bleeding can be a possible side effect of longer term active regimens.

Since it is not uncommon for menstruating women to become anemic, some placebo pills may contain an iron supplement. This replenishes iron stores that may become depleted during menstruation. As well, birth control pills, such as combined oral contraceptive pills, are sometimes fortified with folic acid as it is recommended to take folic acid supplementation in the months prior to pregnancy to decrease the likelihood of neural tube defect in infants.

===No or less frequent placebos===

If the pill formulation is monophasic, meaning each hormonal pill contains a fixed dose of hormones, it is possible to skip withdrawal bleeding and still remain protected against conception by skipping the placebo pills altogether and starting directly with the next packet. Attempting this with bi- or tri-phasic pill formulations carries an increased risk of breakthrough bleeding and may be undesirable. It will not, however, increase the risk of getting pregnant.

Starting in 2003, women have also been able to use a three-month version of the pill. Similar to the effect of using a constant-dosage formulation and skipping the placebo weeks for three months, Seasonale gives the benefit of less frequent periods, at the potential drawback of breakthrough bleeding. Seasonique is another version in which the placebo week every three months is replaced with a week of low-dose estrogen.

A version of the combined pill has also been packaged to eliminate placebo pills and withdrawal bleeds. Marketed as Anya or Lybrel, studies have shown that after seven months, 71% of users no longer had any breakthrough bleeding, the most common side effect of going longer periods of time without breaks from active pills.

While more research needs to be done to assess the long term safety of using combined oral contraceptive pills continuously, studies have shown there may be no difference in short term adverse effects when comparing continuous use versus cyclic use of birth control pills.

===Non-contraceptive use===
The hormones in the pill have also been used to treat other medical conditions, such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), endometriosis, adenomyosis, acne, hirsutism, amenorrhea, menstrual cramps, menstrual migraines, menorrhagia (excessive menstrual bleeding), menstruation-related or fibroid-related anemia and dysmenorrhea (painful menstruation). Besides acne, no oral contraceptives have been approved by the US FDA for the previously mentioned uses despite extensive use for these conditions.

==== PCOS ====
The cause of PCOS, or polycystic ovary syndrome, is multifactorial and not well-understood. Women with PCOS often have higher than normal levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and androgens that impact the normal function of the ovaries. While multiple small follicles develop in the ovary, none are able to grow in size enough to become the dominant follicle and trigger ovulation. This leads to an imbalance of LH, follicle stimulating hormone, estrogen, and progesterone. Without ovulation, unopposed estrogen can lead to endometrial hyperplasia, or overgrowth of tissue in the uterus. This endometrial overgrowth is more likely to become cancerous than normal endometrial tissue. Thus, although the data varies, it is generally agreed upon by most gynecological societies that due to the unopposed estrogen, women with PCOS are at higher risk for endometrial cancer.

To reduce the risk of endometrial cancer, it is often recommended that women with PCOS who do not desire pregnancy take hormonal contraceptives to prevent the effects of unopposed estrogen. Both combined oral contraceptive pills and progestin-only methods are recommended. It is the progestin component of combined oral contraceptive pills that protects the endometrium from hyperplasia, and thus reduces a woman with PCOS&#x27;s endometrial cancer risk. Combined oral contraceptive pills are preferred to progestin-only methods in women who also have uncontrolled acne, symptoms of hirsutism, and androgenic alopecia, because combined oral contraceptive pills can help treat these symptoms.

==== Acne and hirsutism ====
Combined oral contraceptive pills are sometimes prescribed to treat symptoms of androgenization, including acne and hirsutism. The estrogen component of combined oral contraceptive pills appears to suppress androgen production in the ovaries. Estrogen also leads to increased synthesis of sex hormone binding globulin, which causes a decrease in the levels of free testosterone.

Ultimately, the drop in the level of free androgens leads to a decrease in the production of sebum, which is a major contributor to development of acne. Four different oral contraceptives have been approved by the US FDA to treat moderate acne if the patient is at least 14 or 15 years old, has already begun menstruating, and needs contraception. These include Ortho Tri-Cyclen, Estrostep, Beyaz, and YAZ.

Hirsutism is the growth of coarse, dark hair where women typically grow only fine hair or no hair at all. This hair growth on the face, chest, and abdomen is also mediated by higher levels or action of androgens. Therefore, combined oral contraceptive pills also work to treat these symptoms by lowering the levels of free circulating androgens.

Studies have shown that combined oral contraceptives are effective in reducing both inflammatory and non-inflammatory facial acne lesions. However, comparisons between different combined oral contraceptives have not been studied to understand if any brand is superior than the others. Oestrogen decreases sebum production by shrinking the sebaceous gland, increasing Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) production to reduce unbound testosterone, and regulating LH and FSH levels. Studies have not shown that POPs are effective against acne lesions.

==== Endometriosis ====
For pelvic pain associated with endometriosis, combined oral contraceptive pills are considered a first-line medical treatment, along with NSAIDs, GnRH agonists, and aromatase inhibitors. Combined oral contraceptive pills work to suppress the growth of the extra-uterine endometrial tissue. This works to lessen its inflammatory effects. Combined oral contraceptive pills, along with the other medical treatments listed above, do not eliminate the extra-uterine tissue growth, they just reduce the symptoms. Surgery is the only definitive treatment. Studies looking at rates of pelvic pain recurrence after surgery have shown that continuous use of combined oral contraceptive pills is more effective at reducing the recurrence of pain than cyclic use.

==== Adenomyosis ====
Similar to endometriosis, adenomyosis is often treated with combined oral contraceptive pills to suppress the growth the endometrial tissue that has grown into the myometrium. Unlike endometriosis however, levonorgestrel containing IUDs are more effective at reducing pelvic pain in adenomyosis than combined oral contraceptive pills.

====Menorrhagia====

In the average menstrual cycle, a woman typically loses 35 to 40 milliliters of blood. However, up to 20% of women experience much heavier bleeding, or menorrhagia. This excess blood loss can lead to anemia, with symptoms of fatigue and weakness, as well as disruption in their normal life activities. Combined oral contraceptive pills contain progestin, which causes the lining of the uterus to be thinner, resulting in lighter bleeding episodes for those with heavy menstrual bleeding.

==== Amenorrhea ====
Although the pill is sometimes prescribed to induce menstruation on a regular schedule for women bothered by irregular menstrual cycles, it actually suppresses the normal menstrual cycle and then mimics a regular 28-day monthly cycle.

Women who are experiencing menstrual dysfunction due to female athlete triad are sometimes prescribed oral contraceptives as pills that can create menstrual bleeding cycles. However, the condition&#x27;s underlying cause is energy deficiency and should be treated by correcting the imbalance between calories eaten and calories burned by exercise. Oral contraceptives should not be used as an initial treatment for female athlete triad.

=== Menstrual suppression ===
Menstrual bleeding is not necessary in women who do not wish to conceive, therefore menstrual suppression may be implemented in women who do not want to have menstrual bleeding for convenience, gynecologic disorders, bleeding disorders or other medical conditions.

In the two types of hormonal oral contraceptives, only combined oral contraceptives can achieve amenorrhea, while POPs can only reduce the amount of blood. The method of using combined oral contraceptives for menstrual suppression is to skip the 7 placebo pills and continue taking active pills after the 21 active pills. This can be used in extended method or continuous method. For extended method, patients who take active pills for 3, 4, or 6 months and then take placebo pills for a period of time will more likely experience withdrawal bleeding. The interval can be decided by the patients according to their own preferences. For continuous method, people can take combined oral contraceptives for a year continuously without any placebo pills. In the first few months of extended or continuous use of combined oral contraceptives, unscheduled bleeding or spotting may occur. However, the bleeding or spotting is expected to resolve after a few months of use.

Menstrual suppression is commonly used for convenience especially when women go on vacation. It is also used for gynecologic disorders such as dysmenorrhea (commonly known as menstrual pain), symptoms related to premenstrual hormone change and excessive bleeding related to uterine fibroids. Patients can also benefit from menstrual suppression for bleeding disorders or chronic anemia.

=== Menstrual migraine ===
Patients with menstrual Oestrogen-related migraine, but without aura and additional risk factors to stroke, can be benefited from combined oral contraceptives. However, older women and those with a strong family history of problematic headaches may find that using hormonal oral contraceptives worsens their headache.

== Benefits ==
The distinctive feature of hormonal oral contraceptives when compared to other contraceptive methods is that they are less invasive and do not interfere with sex. Conclusive data suggest that the failure rate of contraception in using hormonal oral contraceptives for the first year is 9% in typical use which allows missed doses, and &lt;1% in perfect use. The efficacy of hormonal oral contraceptives in preventing pregnancy is high overall. Furthermore, the regular use of hormonal oral contraceptive tends to not only ease premenstrual syndrome, but also allow lighter and less painful menstruation. In addition, the association between a suppressed risk of developing ovarian cancer and hormonal oral contraceptive use is proven.

==Contraindications==
While combined oral contraceptives are generally considered to be a relatively safe medication, they are contraindicated for those with certain medical conditions. The World Health Organization and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention publish guidance, called medical eligibility criteria, on the safety of birth control in the context of medical conditions.

In terms of protection in sexual intercourse, a sole reliance on hormonal oral contraceptives does not defend one from sexually transmitted infections such as HPV. Additionally, breakthrough bleeding and spotting are exceptionally prevalent in the early stage of using hormonal oral contraceptives. Although most reported side effects including nausea, headache, or mood swings will disappear as the therapy progresses or upon switching formulation, elevated blood pressure or blood clots in patients with cardiovascular conditions are documented side effects that requires medical attention if not termination of hormonal oral contraceptives. It is because combined oral contraceptives uses have been found to be related to an increased risk of ischemic stroke or myocardial infarction, especially in combined oral contraceptives with &gt;50 μg Oestrogen.
Besides, some ongoing studies giving evidence on the association between hormonal oral contraceptive use and escalated breast cancer risks cannot be neglected.

According to WHO Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use 2015, Category 3 implies that the use of such contraception is usually not recommended, unless other more appropriate methods are neither available nor acceptable and with good resources of clinical judgment; Category 4 implies that the contraceptive method should not be used even with good resources of clinical judgment. Both categories suggest that the contraceptive method should not be used with limited resources for clinical judgment. The tables below summarise conditions of category 3 and 4 from World Health Organization Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use 2015.

=== Precautions and contraindications for combined oral contraceptives ===

*The category should be assessed according to the severity of the condition.

===Hypercoagulability===

Estrogen in high doses can increase risk of blood clots. All combined oral contraceptive pill users have a small increase in the risk of venous thromboembolism compared with non-users; this risk is greatest within the first year of combined oral contraceptive pill use. Individuals with any pre-existing medical condition that also increases their risk for blood clots have a more significant increase in risk of thrombotic events with combined oral contraceptive pill use. These conditions include but are not limited to high blood pressure, pre-existing cardiovascular disease (such as valvular heart disease or ischemic heart disease), history of thromboembolism or pulmonary embolism, cerebrovascular accident, and a familial tendency to form blood clots (such as familial factor V Leiden). There are conditions that, when associated with combined oral contraceptive pill use, increase risk of adverse effects other than thrombosis. For example, women with a history of migraine with aura have an increased risk of stroke when using combined oral contraceptive pills, and women who smoke over age 35 and use combined oral contraceptive pills are at higher risk of myocardial infarction.

===Pregnancy and postpartum===

Women who are known to be pregnant should not take combined oral contraceptive pills. Those in the postpartum period who are breastfeeding are also advised not to start combined oral contraceptive pills until 4 weeks after birth due to increased risk of blood clots. While studies have demonstrated conflicting results about the effects of combined oral contraceptive pills on lactation duration and milk volume, there exist concerns about the transient risk of combined oral contraceptive pills on breast milk production when breastfeeding is being established early postpartum. Due to the stated risks and additional concerns on lactation, women who are breastfeeding are not advised to start combined oral contraceptive pills until at least six weeks postpartum, while women who are not breastfeeding and have no other risks factors for blood clots may start combined oral contraceptive pills after 21 days postpartum.

===Breast cancer===

The World Health Organization (WHO) does not recommend the use of combined oral contraceptive pills in women with breast cancer. Since combined oral contraceptive pills contain both estrogen and progestin, they are not recommended to be used in those with hormonally-sensitive cancers, including some types of breast cancer. Non-hormonal contraceptive methods, such as the Copper IUD or condoms, should be the first-line contraceptive choice for these patients instead of combined oral contraceptive pills.

===Other===

Women with known or suspected endometrial cancer or unexplained uterine bleeding should also not take combined oral contraceptive pills to avoid health risks. Combined oral contraceptive pills are also contraindicated for people with advanced diabetes, liver tumors, hepatic adenoma or severe cirrhosis of the liver. Combined oral contraceptive pills are metabolized in the liver and thus liver disease can lead to reduced elimination of the medication. Additionally, severe hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia are also contraindications, but the evidence showing that combined oral contraceptive pills lead to worse outcomes in this population is weak. Obesity is not considered to be a contraindication to taking combined oral contraceptive pills.

==Side effects==
It is generally accepted that the health risks of oral contraceptives are lower than those from pregnancy and birth, and &quot;the health benefits of any method of contraception are far greater than any risks from the method&quot;. Some organizations have argued that comparing a contraceptive method to no method (pregnancy) is not relevant—instead, the comparison of safety should be among available methods of contraception.

===Common===
Different sources note different incidence of side effects. The most common side effect is breakthrough bleeding. Combined oral contraceptive pills can improve conditions such as dysmenorrhea, premenstrual syndrome, and acne, reduce symptoms of endometriosis and polycystic ovary syndrome, and decrease the risk of anemia. Use of oral contraceptives also reduces lifetime risk of ovarian and endometrial cancer.

Nausea, vomiting, headache, bloating, breast tenderness, swelling of the ankles/feet (fluid retention), or weight change may occur. Vaginal bleeding between periods (spotting) or missed/irregular periods may occur, especially during the first few months of use.

===Heart and blood vessels===
Combined oral contraceptives are associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism, including deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE).

While lower doses of estrogen in combined oral contraceptive pills may have a lower risk of stroke and myocardial infarction compared to higher estrogen dose pills (50 μg/day), users of low estrogen dose combined oral contraceptive pills still have an increased risk compared to non-users. These risks are greatest in women with additional risk factors, such as smoking (which increases risk substantially) and long-continued use of the pill, especially in women over 35 years of age.

The overall absolute risk of venous thrombosis per 100,000 woman-years in current use of combined oral contraceptives is approximately 60, compared with 30 in non-users. The risk of thromboembolism varies with different types of birth control pills; compared with combined oral contraceptives containing levonorgestrel (LNG), and with the same dose of estrogen and duration of use, the rate ratio of deep venous thrombosis for combined oral contraceptives with norethisterone is 0.98, with norgestimate 1.19, with desogestrel (DSG) 1.82, with gestodene 1.86, with drospirenone (DRSP) 1.64, and with cyproterone acetate 1.88. In comparison, venous thromboembolism occurs in 100–200 per 100.000 pregnant women every year.

One study showed more than a 600% increased risk of blood clots for women taking combined oral contraceptive pills with drospirenone compared with non-users, compared with 360% higher for women taking birth control pills containing levonorgestrel. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) initiated studies evaluating the health of more than 800,000 women taking combined oral contraceptive pills and found that the risk of VTE was 93% higher for women who had been taking drospirenone combined oral contraceptive pills for 3 months or less and 290% higher for women taking drospirenone combined oral contraceptive pills for 7–12 months, compared with women taking other types of oral contraceptives.

Based on these studies, in 2012, the FDA updated the label for drospirenone combined oral contraceptive pills to include a warning that contraceptives with drospirenone may have a higher risk of dangerous blood clots.

A 2015 systematic review and meta-analysis found that combined birth control pills were associated with 7.6-fold higher risk of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, a rare form of stroke in which blood clotting occurs in the cerebral venous sinuses.

===Cancer===

====Decreased risk of ovarian, endometrial, and colorectal cancers====
Usage of combined oral concetraption decreased the risk of ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer, and colorectal cancer. Two large cohort studies published in 2010 both found a significant reduction in adjusted relative risk of ovarian and endometrial cancer mortality in ever-users of OCs compared with never-users. The use of oral contraceptives (birth control pills) for five years or more decreases the risk of ovarian cancer in later life by 50%. Combined oral contraceptive use reduces the risk of ovarian cancer by 40% and the risk of endometrial cancer by 50% compared with never users. The risk reduction increases with duration of use, with an 80% reduction in risk for both ovarian and endometrial cancer with use for more than 10 years. The risk reduction for both ovarian and endometrial cancer persists for at least 20 years.

====Increased risk of breast, cervical, and liver cancers====
A report by a 2005 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) working group found that combined oral contraceptives increase the risk of cancers of the breast, cervix and liver. A systematic review in 2010 did not support an increased overall cancer risk in users of combined oral contraceptive pills, but did find a slight increase in breast cancer risk among current users, which disappears 5–10 years after use has stopped; the study also found an increased risk of cervical and liver cancers. A 2013 meta-analysis concluded that every use of birth control pills is associated with a modest increase in the risk of breast cancer (relative risk 1.08) and a reduced risk of colorectal cancer (relative risk 0.86) and endometrial cancer (relative risk 0.57). Cervical cancer risk in those infected with HPV is increased. A similar small increase in breast cancer risk was observed in other meta analyses. A study of 1.8 million Danish women of reproductive age followed for 11 years found that the risk of breast cancer was 20% higher among those who currently or recently used hormonal contraceptives than among women who had never used hormonal contraceptives. This risk increased with duration of use, with a 38% increase in risk after more than 10 years of use.

===Weight===
A 2016 systematic review found low quality evidence that studies of combination hormonal contraceptives showed no large difference in weight when compared with placebo or no intervention groups. The evidence was not strong enough to be certain that contraceptive methods do not cause some weight change, but no major effect was found. This review also found &quot;that women did not stop using the pill or patch because of weight change&quot;.

===Sexual function and risk aversion===

====Sexual desire====

Some researchers question a causal link between combined oral contraceptive pill use and decreased libido; a 2007 study of 1700 women found combined oral contraceptive pill users experienced no change in sexual satisfaction. A 2005 laboratory study of genital arousal tested fourteen women before and after they began taking combined oral contraceptive pills. The study found that women experienced a significantly wider range of arousal responses after beginning pill use; decreases and increases in measures of arousal were equally common.

In 2012, &quot;The Journal of Sexual Medicine&quot; published a review of research studying the effects of hormonal contraceptives on female sexual function that concluded that the sexual side effects of hormonal contraceptives are not well-studied and especially in regards to impacts on libido, with research establishing only mixed effects where only small percentages of women report experiencing an increase or decrease and majorities report being unaffected. In 2013, &quot;The European Journal of Contraception &amp; Reproductive Health Care&quot; published a review of 36 studies including 8,422 female subjects in total taking combined oral contraceptive pills that found that 5,358 subjects (or 63.6 percent) reported no change in libido, 1,826 subjects (or 21.7 percent) reported an increase, and 1,238 subjects (or 14.7 percent) reported a decrease. In 2019, &quot;Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews&quot; published a meta-analysis of 22 published and 4 unpublished studies (with 7,529 female subjects in total) that evaluated whether women expose themselves to greater health risks at different points in the menstrual cycle including by sexual activity with partners and found that subjects in the last third of the follicular phase and at ovulation (when levels of endogenous estradiol and luteinizing hormones are heightened) experienced increased sexual activity with partners as compared with the luteal phase and during menstruation.

A 2006 study of 124 premenopausal women measured sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), including before and after discontinuation of the oral contraceptive pill. Women continuing use of oral contraceptives had SHBG levels four times higher than those who never used it, and levels remained elevated even in the group that had discontinued its use. Theoretically, an increase in SHBG may be a physiologic response to increased hormone levels, but may decrease the free levels of other hormones, such as androgens, because of the unspecificity of its sex hormone binding. In 2020, &quot;The Lancet Diabetes &amp; Endocrinology&quot; published a cross-sectional study of 588 premenopausal female subjects aged 18 to 39 years from the Australian states of Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria with regular menstrual cycles whose SHBG levels were measured by immunoassay that found that after controlling for age, body mass index, cycle stage, smoking, parity, partner status, and psychoactive medication, SHBG was inversely correlated with sexual desire.

====Sexual attractiveness and function====
Combined oral contraceptive pills may increase natural vaginal lubrication, while some women experience decreased lubrication.

In 2004, the &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences&quot; published a study where pairs of digital photographs of the faces of 48 women at Newcastle University and Charles University between the ages 19 and 33 who were not taking hormonal contraceptives during the study were photographed in the late follicular and early mid-luteal phases of their menstrual cycles and the photographs were then rated by 261 blinded subjects (130 male and 131 female) at their respective universities who compared the facial attractiveness of each photographed woman in their photograph pairs, and found that the subjects perceived the late follicular phase images of the photographed women as being more attractive than the luteal phase images by more than expected by random chance.

In 2007, &quot;Evolution and Human Behavior&quot; published a study where 18 professional lap dancers recorded their menstrual cycles, work shifts, and tip earnings at gentlemen&#x27;s clubs for 60 days that found by a mixed model analysis of 296 work shifts (or approximately 5,300 lap dances) that the 11 dancers with normal menstrual cycles earned US$335 per 5-hour shift during the late follicular phase and at ovulation, US$260 per shift during the luteal phase, and US$185 per shift during menstruation, while the 7 dancers using hormonal contraceptives showed no earnings peak during the late follicular phase and at ovulation. In 2008, &quot;Evolution and Human Behavior&quot; published a study where the voices of 51 female students at the State University of New York at Albany were recorded with the women counting from 1 to 10 at four different points in their menstrual cycles were rated by blinded subjects who listened to the recordings to be more attractive at the points of the menstrual cycle with higher probabilities of conception, while the ratings of the voices of the women who were taking hormonal contraceptives showed no variation over the menstrual cycle in attractiveness.

====Risk-taking behaviour====
In 1998, &quot;Evolution and Human Behavior&quot; published a study of 300 female undergraduate students at the State University of New York at Albany between the ages of 18 and 54 (with a mean age of 21.9 years) that surveyed the subjects engagement in 18 different behaviors over the 24 hours prior to filling out the study&#x27;s questionnaire that varied in their risk of potential rape or sexual assault and the first day of their last menstruations, and found that subjects at ovulation showed statistically significant decreased engagement in behaviors that risked rape and sexual assault while subjects taking birth control pills showed no variation over their menstrual cycles in the same behaviors (suggesting a psychologically adaptive function of the hormonal fluctuations during the menstrual cycle in causing avoidance of behaviors that risk rape and sexual assault). In 2003, &quot;Evolution and Human Behavior&quot; published a conceptual replication study of the 1998 survey that confirmed its findings.

In 2006, a study presented at the annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society surveyed 176 female undergraduate students at Michigan State University (with a mean age of 19.9 years) in a decision-making experiment where the subjects chose between an option with a guaranteed outcome or an option involving risk and indicated the first day of their last menstruations, and found that the subjects risk aversion preferences varied over the menstrual cycle (with none of the subjects at ovulation preferring the risky option) and only subjects not taking hormonal contraceptives showed the menstrual cycle effect on risk aversion. In the 2019 &quot;Neuroscience &amp; Biobehavioral Reviews&quot; meta-analysis, the research reviewed also evaluated whether the 7,529 female subjects across the 26 studies showed greater risk recognition and avoidance of potentially threatening people and dangerous situations at different phases of the menstrual cycle and found that the subjects displayed better risk accuracy recognition during the late follicular phase and at ovulation as compared to the luteal phase.

===Depression===
Low levels of serotonin, a neurotransmitter in the brain, have been linked to depression. High levels of estrogen, as in first-generation combined oral contraceptive pills, and progestin, as in some progestin-only contraceptives, have been shown to lower the brain serotonin levels by increasing the concentration of a brain enzyme that reduces serotonin.

Current medical reference textbooks on contraception and major organizations such as the American ACOG, the WHO, and the United Kingdom&#x27;s RCOG agree that current evidence indicates low-dose combined oral contraceptives are unlikely to increase the risk of depression, and unlikely to worsen the condition in women that are depressed.

===Hypertension===
Bradykinin lowers blood pressure by causing blood vessel dilation. Certain enzymes are capable of breaking down bradykinin (Angiotensin Converting Enzyme, Aminopeptidase P). Progesterone can increase the levels of Aminopeptidase P (AP-P), thereby increasing the breakdown of bradykinin, which increases the risk of developing hypertension.

=== Thyroid ===
Estrogen in oral contraceptives may increase thyroid binding globulin and decrease free T4. Thus, longer history of oral contraceptives use may be strongly associated with hypothyroidism, especially for more than 10 years. Also, a higher dose of thyroxine may be needed with oral contraceptives.

===Other effects===
Other side effects associated with low-dose combined oral contraceptive pills are leukorrhea (increased vaginal secretions), reductions in menstrual flow, mastalgia (breast tenderness), and decrease in acne. Side effects associated with older high-dose combined oral contraceptive pills include nausea, vomiting, increases in blood pressure, and melasma (facial skin discoloration); these effects are not strongly associated with low-dose formulations.

Excess estrogen, such as from birth control pills, appears to increase cholesterol levels in bile and decrease gallbladder movement, which can lead to gallstones. Progestins found in certain formulations of oral contraceptive pills can limit the effectiveness of weight training to increase muscle mass. This effect is caused by the ability of some progestins to inhibit androgen receptors. One study claims that the pill may affect what male body odors a woman prefers, which may in turn influence her selection of partner. Use of combined oral contraceptives is associated with a reduced risk of endometriosis, giving a relative risk of endometriosis of 0.63 during active use, yet with limited quality of evidence according to a systematic review.

Combined oral contraception decreases total testosterone levels by approximately 0.5 nmol/L, free testosterone by approximately 60%, and increases the amount of sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) by approximately 100 nmol/L. Contraceptives containing second generation progestins and/or estrogen doses of around 20 –25 mg EE were found to have less impact on SHBG concentrations. Combined oral contraception may also reduce bone density.

==Drug interactions==
Some drugs reduce the effect of the pill and can cause breakthrough bleeding, or increased chance of pregnancy. These include drugs such as rifampicin, barbiturates, phenytoin and carbamazepine. In addition cautions are given about broad spectrum antibiotics, such as ampicillin and doxycycline, which may cause problems &quot;by impairing the bacterial flora responsible for recycling ethinylestradiol from the large bowel&quot; (BNF 2003).

The traditional medicinal herb St John&#x27;s Wort has also been implicated due to its upregulation of the P450 system in the liver which could increase the metabolism of ethinyl estradiol and progestin components of some combined oral contraception.

== Accessibility ==
The availability of pharmaceutical products to the public is determined by the local governing body. In the US, the responsible organisation is the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). According to a press announcement in July 2023, a daily hormonal oral contraceptive was first made accessible to the public without a prescription. Although this drug class was approved for prescription use as early as in 1973, it took an additional 50 years to de-escalate its legal status. Such allowance is made plausible thanks to the demonstration of its safe and effective use by the general public, not needing any guidance from healthcare professionals. Ultimately, the governing body should act accordingly to applicants&#x27; evidence and update the local legislation.

==History==

By the 1930s, scientists had isolated and determined the structure of the steroid hormones and found that high doses of androgens, estrogens or progesterone inhibited ovulation,
but obtaining these hormones, which were produced from animal extracts, from European pharmaceutical companies was extraordinarily expensive.

In 1939, Russell Marker, a professor of organic chemistry at Pennsylvania State University, developed a method of synthesizing progesterone from plant steroid sapogenins, initially using sarsapogenin from sarsaparilla, which proved too expensive. After three years of extensive botanical research, he discovered a much better starting material, the saponin from inedible Mexican yams (&quot;Dioscorea mexicana&quot; and &quot;Dioscorea composita&quot;) found in the rain forests of Veracruz near Orizaba. The saponin could be converted in the lab to its aglycone moiety diosgenin. Unable to interest his research sponsor Parke-Davis in the commercial potential of synthesizing progesterone from Mexican yams, Marker left Penn State and in 1944 co-founded Syntex with two partners in Mexico City. When he left Syntex a year later the trade of the barbasco yam had started and the period of the heyday of the Mexican steroid industry had been started. Syntex broke the monopoly of European pharmaceutical companies on steroid hormones, reducing the price of progesterone almost 200-fold over the next eight years.

Midway through the 20th century, the stage was set for the development of a hormonal contraceptive, but pharmaceutical companies, universities and governments showed no interest in pursuing research.

===Progesterone to prevent ovulation===
Progesterone, given by injections, was first shown to inhibit ovulation in animals in 1937 by Makepeace and colleagues.

In 1951, reproductive physiologist Gregory Pincus, a leader in hormone research and co-founder of the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology (WFEB) in Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, first met American birth control movement founder Margaret Sanger at a Manhattan dinner hosted by Abraham Stone, medical director and vice president of Planned Parenthood (PPFA), who helped Pincus obtain a small grant from PPFA to begin hormonal contraceptive research. Research started in April 1951, with reproductive physiologist Min Chueh Chang repeating and extending the 1937 experiments of Makepeace et al. that was published in 1953 and showed that injections of progesterone suppressed ovulation in rabbits. In October 1951, G. D. Searle &amp; Company refused Pincus&#x27; request to fund his hormonal contraceptive research, but retained him as a consultant and continued to provide chemical compounds to evaluate.

In March 1952, Sanger wrote a brief note mentioning Pincus&#x27; research to her longtime friend and supporter, suffragist and philanthropist Katharine Dexter McCormick, who visited the WFEB and its co-founder and old friend Hudson Hoagland in June 1952 to learn about contraceptive research there. Frustrated when research stalled from PPFA&#x27;s lack of interest and meager funding, McCormick arranged a meeting at the WFEB in June 1953, with Sanger and Hoagland, where she first met Pincus who committed to dramatically expand and accelerate research with McCormick providing fifty times PPFA&#x27;s previous funding.

Pincus and McCormick enlisted Harvard clinical professor of gynecology John Rock, chief of gynecology at the Free Hospital for Women and an expert in the treatment of infertility, to lead clinical research with women. At a scientific conference in 1952, Pincus and Rock, who had known each other for many years, discovered they were using similar approaches to achieve opposite goals. In 1952, Rock induced a three-month anovulatory &quot;pseudopregnancy&quot; state in eighty of his infertility patients with continuous gradually increasing oral doses of an estrogen (5 to 30 mg/day diethylstilbestrol) and progesterone (50 to 300 mg/day), and within the following four months 15% of the women became pregnant.

In 1953, at Pincus&#x27; suggestion, Rock induced a three-month anovulatory &quot;pseudopregnancy&quot; state in twenty-seven of his infertility patients with an oral 300 mg/day progesterone-only regimen for 20 days from cycle days 5–24 followed by pill-free days to produce withdrawal bleeding. This produced the same 15% pregnancy rate during the following four months without the amenorrhea of the previous continuous estrogen and progesterone regimen. But 20% of the women experienced breakthrough bleeding and in the first cycle ovulation was suppressed in only 85% of the women, indicating that even higher and more expensive oral doses of progesterone would be needed to initially consistently suppress ovulation. Similarly, Ishikawa and colleagues found that ovulation inhibition occurred in only a &quot;proportion&quot; of cases with 300 mg/day oral progesterone. Despite the incomplete inhibition of ovulation by oral progesterone, no pregnancies occurred in the two studies, although this could have simply been due to chance. However, Ishikawa et al. reported that the cervical mucus in women taking oral progesterone became impenetrable to sperm, and this may have accounted for the absence of pregnancies.

Progesterone was abandoned as an oral ovulation inhibitor following these clinical studies due to the high and expensive doses required, incomplete inhibition of ovulation, and the frequent incidence of breakthrough bleeding. Instead, researchers would turn to much more potent synthetic progestogens for use in oral contraception in the future.

===Progestins to prevent ovulation===
In October 1951, Chemist Luis Miramontes, working under the supervision of Carl Djerassi, and the direction of George Rosenkranz at Syntex in Mexico City, synthesized the first oral contraceptive, which was based on highly active progestin norethisterone. Frank B. Colton at Searle in Skokie, Illinois synthesized the orally highly active progestins noretynodrel (an isomer of norethisterone) in 1952 and norethandrolone in 1953.

Pincus asked his contacts at pharmaceutical companies to send him chemical compounds with progestogenic activity. Chang screened nearly 200 chemical compounds in animals and found the three most promising were Syntex&#x27;s norethisterone and Searle&#x27;s noretynodrel and norethandrolone.

In December 1954, Rock began the first studies of the ovulation-suppressing potential of 5–50 mg doses of the three oral progestins for three months (for 21 days per cycle—days 5–25 followed by pill-free days to produce withdrawal bleeding) in fifty of his patients with infertility in Brookline, Massachusetts. Norethisterone or noretynodrel 5 mg doses and all doses of norethandrolone suppressed ovulation but caused breakthrough bleeding, but 10 mg and higher doses of norethisterone or noretynodrel suppressed ovulation without breakthrough bleeding and led to a 14% pregnancy rate in the following five months. Pincus and Rock selected Searle&#x27;s noretynodrel for the first contraceptive trials in women, citing its total lack of androgenicity versus Syntex&#x27;s norethisterone very slight androgenicity in animal tests.

===Combined oral contraceptive===
Noretynodrel (and norethisterone) were subsequently discovered to be contaminated with a small percentage of the estrogen mestranol (an intermediate in their synthesis), with the noretynodrel in Rock&#x27;s 1954–5 study containing 4–7% mestranol. When further purifying noretynodrel to contain less than 1% mestranol led to breakthrough bleeding, it was decided to intentionally incorporate 2.2% mestranol, a percentage that was not associated with breakthrough bleeding, in the first contraceptive trials in women in 1954. The noretynodrel and mestranol combination was given the proprietary name Enovid.

The first contraceptive trial of Enovid led by Celso-Ramón García and Edris Rice-Wray began in April 1956 in Río Piedras, Puerto Rico. A second contraceptive trial of Enovid (and norethisterone) led by Edward T. Tyler began in June 1956 in Los Angeles. In January 1957, Searle held a symposium reviewing gynecologic and contraceptive research on Enovid through 1956 and concluded Enovid&#x27;s estrogen content could be reduced by 33% to lower the incidence of estrogenic gastrointestinal side effects without significantly increasing the incidence of breakthrough bleeding.

While these large-scale trials contributed to the initial understanding of the pill formulation&#x27;s clinical effects, the ethical implications of the trials generated significant controversy. Of note is the apparent lack of both autonomy and informed consent among participants in the Puerto Rican cohort prior to the trials. Many of these participants hailed from impoverished, working-class backgrounds.

===Public availability===
As of 2013, less than a third of countries worldwide required a prescription for oral contraceptives.

==== United States ====

In June 1957, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Enovid 10 mg (9.85 mg noretynodrel and 150 μg mestranol) for menstrual disorders, based on data from its use by more than 600 women. Numerous additional contraceptive trials showed Enovid at 10, 5, and 2.5 mg doses to be highly effective. In July 1959, Searle filed a supplemental application to add contraception as an approved indication for 10, 5, and 2.5 mg doses of Enovid. The FDA refused to consider the application until Searle agreed to withdraw the lower dosage forms from the application. In May 1960, the FDA announced it would approve Enovid 10 mg for contraceptive use, and did so in June 1960. At that point, Enovid 10 mg had been in general use for three years and, by conservative estimate, at least half a million women had used it.

Although FDA-approved for contraceptive use, Searle never marketed Enovid 10 mg as a contraceptive. Eight months later, in February 1961, the FDA approved Enovid 5 mg for contraceptive use. In July 1961, Searle finally began marketing Enovid 5 mg (5 mg noretynodrel and 75 μg mestranol) to physicians as a contraceptive.

Although the FDA approved the first oral contraceptive in 1960, contraceptives were not available to married women in all states until &quot;Griswold v. Connecticut&quot; in 1965, and were not available to unmarried women in all states until &quot;Eisenstadt v. Baird&quot; in 1972.

The first published case report of a blood clot and pulmonary embolism in a woman using Enavid (Enovid 10 mg in the US) at a dose of 20 mg/day did not appear until November 1961, four years after its approval, by which time it had been used by over one million women. It would take almost a decade of epidemiological studies to conclusively establish an increased risk of venous thrombosis in oral contraceptive users and an increased risk of stroke and myocardial infarction in oral contraceptive users who smoke or have high blood pressure or other cardiovascular or cerebrovascular risk factors. These risks of oral contraceptives were dramatized in the 1969 book &quot;The Doctors&#x27; Case Against the Pill&quot; by feminist journalist Barbara Seaman who helped arrange the 1970 Nelson Pill Hearings called by Senator Gaylord Nelson. The hearings were conducted by senators who were all men and the witnesses in the first round of hearings were all men, leading Alice Wolfson and other feminists to protest the hearings and generate media attention. Their work led to mandating the inclusion of patient package inserts with oral contraceptives to explain their possible side effects and risks to help facilitate informed consent. Today&#x27;s standard dose oral contraceptives contain an estrogen dose that is one third lower than the first marketed oral contraceptive and contain lower doses of different, more potent progestins in a variety of formulations.

Beginning in 2015, certain states passed legislation allowing pharmacists to prescribe oral contraceptives. Such legislation was considered to address physician shortages and decrease barriers to birth control for women. Pharmacists in Oregon, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Maryland, and New Mexico have authority to prescribe birth control after receiving specialized training and certification from their respective state Board of Pharmacy. , pharmacists in 29 states can prescribe oral contraceptives.

A progestin-based birth control pill (Opill) was approved by the FDA in 2023 and is available over the counter. Estrogen-based pills still require prescriptions as of 2024.

====Australia====
The first oral contraceptive introduced outside the United States was Schering&#x27;s Anovlar (norethisterone acetate 4 mg + ethinylestradiol 50 μg) in January 1961, in Australia.

====Germany====
The first oral contraceptive introduced in Europe was Schering&#x27;s Anovlar in June 1961, in West Germany. The lower hormonal dose, still in use, was studied by the Belgian Gynaecologist Ferdinand Peeters.

====United Kingdom====
Before the mid-1960s, the United Kingdom did not require pre-marketing approval of drugs. The British Family Planning Association (FPA) through its clinics was then the primary provider of family planning services in the UK and provided only contraceptives that were on its Approved List of Contraceptives (established in 1934). In 1957, Searle began marketing Enavid (Enovid 10 mg in the US) for menstrual disorders. Also in 1957, the FPA established a Council for the Investigation of Fertility Control (CIFC) to test and monitor oral contraceptives which began animal testing of oral contraceptives and in 1960 and 1961 began three large clinical trials in Birmingham, Slough, and London.

In March 1960, the Birmingham FPA began trials of noretynodrel 2.5 mg + mestranol 50 μg, but a high pregnancy rate initially occurred when the pills accidentally contained only 36 μg of mestranol—the trials were continued with noretynodrel 5 mg + mestranol 75 μg (Conovid in the UK, Enovid 5 mg in the US).
In August 1960, the Slough FPA began trials of noretynodrel 2.5 mg + mestranol 100 μg (Conovid-E in the UK, Enovid-E in the US).
In May 1961, the London FPA began trials of Schering&#x27;s Anovlar.

In October 1961, at the recommendation of the Medical Advisory Council of its CIFC, the FPA added Searle&#x27;s Conovid to its Approved List of Contraceptives.
In December 1961, Enoch Powell, then Minister of Health, announced that the oral contraceptive pill Conovid could be prescribed through the NHS at a subsidized price of 2s per month.
In 1962, Schering&#x27;s Anovlar and Searle&#x27;s Conovid-E were added to the FPA&#x27;s Approved List of Contraceptives.

====France====
In December 1967, the Neuwirth Law legalized contraception in France, including the pill. The pill is the most popular form of contraception in France, especially among young women. It accounts for 60% of the birth control used in France. The abortion rate has remained stable since the introduction of the pill.

====Japan====
In Japan, lobbying from the Japan Medical Association prevented the pill from being approved for general use for nearly 40 years. The higher dose &quot;second generation&quot; pill was approved for use in cases of gynecological problems, but not for birth control. Two main objections raised by the association were safety concerns over long-term use of the pill, and concerns that pill use would lead to decreased use of condoms and thereby potentially increase sexually transmitted infection (STI) rates.

However, when the Ministry of Health and Welfare approved Viagra&#x27;s use in Japan after only six months of the application&#x27;s submission, while still claiming that the pill required more data before approval, women&#x27;s groups cried foul. The pill was subsequently approved for use in June 1999, when Japan became the last UN member country to do so. However, the pill has not become popular in Japan. According to estimates, only 1.3 percent of 28 million Japanese females of childbearing age use the pill, compared with 15.6 percent in the United States. The pill prescription guidelines the government has endorsed require pill users to visit a doctor every three months for pelvic examinations and undergo tests for sexually transmitted diseases and uterine cancer. In the United States and Europe, in contrast, an annual or bi-annual clinic visit is standard for pill users. However, beginning as far back as 2007, many Japanese OBGYNs have required only a yearly visit for pill users, with multiple checks a year recommended only for those who are older or at increased risk of side effects. As of 2004, condoms accounted for 80% of birth control use in Japan, and this may explain Japan&#x27;s comparatively low rates of AIDS.

==Society and culture==
The pill was approved by the US FDA in the early 1960s; its use spread rapidly in the late part of that decade, generating an enormous social impact. &quot;Time&quot; magazine placed the pill on its cover in April 1967. In the first place, it was more effective than most previous reversible methods of birth control, giving women unprecedented control over their fertility. Its use was separate from intercourse, requiring no special preparations at the time of sexual activity that might interfere with spontaneity or sensation, and the choice to take the pill was a private one. This combination of factors served to make the pill immensely popular within a few years of its introduction.

Claudia Goldin, among others, argue that this new contraceptive technology was a key player in forming women&#x27;s modern economic role, in that it prolonged the age at which women first married allowing them to invest in education and other forms of human capital as well as generally become more career-oriented. Soon after the birth control pill was legalized, there was a sharp increase in college attendance and graduation rates for women. From an economic point of view, the birth control pill reduced the cost of staying in school. The ability to control fertility without sacrificing sexual relationships allowed women to make long term educational and career plans.

Because the pill was so effective, and soon so widespread, it also heightened the debate about the moral and health consequences of pre-marital sex and promiscuity. Never before had sexual activity been so divorced from reproduction. For a couple using the pill, intercourse became purely an expression of love, or a means of physical pleasure, or both; but it was no longer a means of reproduction. While this was true of previous contraceptives, their relatively high failure rates and their less widespread use failed to emphasize this distinction as clearly as did the pill. The spread of oral contraceptive use thus led many religious figures and institutions to debate the proper role of sexuality and its relationship to procreation. The Roman Catholic Church in particular, after studying the phenomenon of oral contraceptives, re-emphasized the stated teaching on birth control in the 1968 papal encyclical &quot;Humanae vitae&quot;. The encyclical reiterated the established Catholic teaching that artificial contraception distorts the nature and purpose of sex. On the other side Anglican and other Protestant churches, such as the Protestant Church in Germany (EKD), accepted the combined oral contraceptive pill.

The United States Senate began hearings on the pill in 1970 and where different viewpoints were heard from medical professionals. Dr. Michael Newton, President of the College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists said:
Another physician, Dr. Roy Hertz of the Population Council, said that anyone who takes this should know of &quot;our knowledge and ignorance in these matters&quot; and that all women should be made aware of this so they can decide to take the pill or not.

The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare at the time, Robert Finch, announced the federal government had accepted a compromise warning statement which would accompany all sales of birth control pills.

==Result on popular culture==
The introduction of the birth control pill in 1960 allowed more women to find employment opportunities and further their education. As a result of women getting more jobs and an education, their husbands had to start taking over household tasks like cooking. Wanting to stop the change that was occurring in terms of gender norms in an American household, many films, television shows, and other popular culture items portrayed what an ideal American family should be. Below are listed some examples:

===Poem===
* &quot;The Pill Versus the Springhill Mine Disaster&quot; is the title poem of a 1968 collection by Richard Brautigan.

===Music===
* Singer Loretta Lynn commented on how women no longer had to choose between a relationship and a career in her 1974 album with a song entitled &quot;The Pill&quot;, which told the story of a married woman&#x27;s use of the drug to liberate herself from her traditional role as wife and mother.

==Environmental impact==
A woman using combined oral contraceptive pills excretes in her urine and feces natural estrogens, estrone (E1) and estradiol (E2), and synthetic estrogen ethinylestradiol (EE2).
These hormones can pass through water treatment plants and into rivers. Other forms of contraception, such as the contraceptive patch, use the same synthetic estrogen (EE2) that is found in combined oral contraceptive pills, and can add to the hormonal concentration in the water when flushed down the toilet. This excretion is shown to play a role in causing endocrine disruption, which affects the sexual development and reproduction of wild fish populations in segments of streams contaminated by treated sewage effluents.
A study done in British rivers supported the hypothesis that the incidence and the severity of intersex wild fish populations were significantly correlated with the concentrations of the E1, E2, and EE2 in the rivers.

A review of activated sludge plant performance found estrogen removal rates varied considerably but averaged 78% for estrone, 91% for estradiol, and 76% for ethinylestradiol (estriol effluent concentrations are between those of estrone and estradiol, but estriol is a much less potent endocrine disruptor to fish).

Several studies have suggested that reducing human population growth through increased access to contraception, including birth control pills, can be an effective strategy for climate change mitigation as well as adaptation. According to Thomas Wire, contraception is the &#x27;greenest technology&#x27; because of its cost-effectiveness in combating global warming — each $7 spent on contraceptives would reduce global carbon emissions by 1 tonne over four decades, while achieving the same result with low-carbon technologies would require $32.

== See also ==
* Estradiol-containing oral contraceptive
* Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
* List of estrogens available in the United States
* List of progestogens available in the United States
* Progestogen-only injectable contraceptive

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* The Birth Control Pill—CBC Digital Archives
* The Birth of the Pill—slide show by &quot;Life&quot; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="4" end="36" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="combined oral contraceptive pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="38" end="42" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="COCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="70" end="88" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="birth control pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="114" end="122" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="the pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="143" end="156" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="180" end="192" title="Oral administration" label="taken orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608020" start="226" end="257" title="combined hormonal contraception" label="combined hormonal contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="291" end="298" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383885" start="303" end="312" title="progestin" label="progestin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45071" start="346" end="357" title="progestogen" label="progestogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="360" end="372" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48841284" start="378" end="386" title="Estrogen (medication)" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q415563" start="396" end="412" title="ethinylestradiol" label="ethinylestradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422416" start="416" end="429" title="Estradiol" label="17β estradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="468" end="483" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="497" end="506" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="519" end="528" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764560" start="976" end="996" title="female sterilization" label="female sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1122" end="1129" title="marital" label="marital"/>
<link wikidata="Q977536" start="1235" end="1256" title="progestogen-only pill" label="progestogen-only pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="1369" end="1429" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="1463" end="1480" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="1568" end="1578" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q162025" start="1586" end="1592" title="Orally disintegrating tablet" label="orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="1596" end="1602" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="1613" end="1622" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q422812" start="1645" end="1656" title="sex hormone" label="sex hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="1711" end="1739" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383885" start="1871" end="1883" title="Progestin" label="Progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="2026" end="2041" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="2054" end="2063" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="2078" end="2086" title="Cervix" label="cervical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="2087" end="2092" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="2103" end="2108" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q119697" start="2217" end="2230" title="off-label use" label="off-label use"/>
<link wikidata="Q78152257" start="2240" end="2261" title="menstrual suppression" label="menstrual suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="2266" end="2270" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="2363" end="2371" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383885" start="2430" end="2439" title="Progestogen (medication)" label="progestin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="2463" end="2475" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419646" start="2553" end="2565" title="drospirenone" label="drospirenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q421352" start="2570" end="2583" title="Norethisterone" label="norethindrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="2865" end="2868" title="European Medicines Agency" label="EMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12415847" start="3406" end="3415" title="Estradiol (medication)" label="estradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415563" start="3417" end="3433" title="ethinylestradiol" label="ethinylestradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q105572005" start="3435" end="3443" title="Estetrol (medication)" label="estetrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495694" start="3472" end="3493" title="Norethisterone acetate" label="norethindrone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405160" start="3495" end="3515" title="Etynodiol diacetate" label="ethynodiol diacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071071" start="3517" end="3528" title="lynestrenol" label="lynestrenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659069" start="3530" end="3543" title="Noretynodrel" label="norethynodrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q416950" start="3572" end="3586" title="levonorgestrel" label="levonorgestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051185" start="3588" end="3601" title="Norgestrel" label="dl-norgestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051181" start="3630" end="3642" title="norgestimate" label="norgestimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q408289" start="3644" end="3653" title="gestodene" label="gestodene"/>
<link wikidata="Q415304" start="3655" end="3666" title="desogestrel" label="desogestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="3810" end="3819" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="4049" end="4064" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="4082" end="4087" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="4097" end="4125" title="follicle-stimulating hormone" label="follicle-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="4141" end="4152" title="bloodstream" label="bloodstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q953556" start="4182" end="4190" title="Ovarian follicle" label="follicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="4194" end="4199" title="ovary" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q844342" start="4207" end="4233" title="female reproductive system" label="female reproductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="4305" end="4314" title="Estrogen" label="Oestrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q839508" start="4367" end="4381" title="Endometrium" label="uterine lining"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="4401" end="4413" title="Implantation (embryology)" label="implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="4473" end="4500" title="Negative feedback" label="negative feedback mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="4582" end="4601" title="Luteinizing hormone" label="Luteinising Hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="4675" end="4679" title="Egg cell" label="ovum"/>
<link wikidata="Q749637" start="4777" end="4790" title="corpus luteum" label="corpus luteum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="4830" end="4842" title="Progesterone" label="Progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="5383" end="5416" title="Active ingredient" label="active pharmaceutical ingredients"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="5491" end="5497" title="Orally ingested" label="orally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663812" start="5515" end="5534" title="systemic absorption" label="systemic absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="6013" end="6026" title="fertilisation" label="fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="6050" end="6063" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="6333" end="6342" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q409770" start="6373" end="6385" title="gonadotropin" label="gonadotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464664" start="6475" end="6497" title="follicular phase" label="follicular development"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265477" start="6583" end="6602" title="luteinizing hormone" label="luteinizing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982396" start="6623" end="6634" title="Theca of follicle" label="theca cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q411064" start="6670" end="6685" title="androstenedione" label="androstenedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543282" start="6691" end="6705" title="granulosa cell" label="granulosa cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q200774" start="6864" end="6892" title="follicle-stimulating hormone" label="follicle-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="6966" end="6983" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q318896" start="7017" end="7047" title="gonadotropin-releasing hormone" label="gonadotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="7070" end="7082" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="7170" end="7188" title="anterior pituitary" label="anterior pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q422416" start="7272" end="7281" title="estradiol" label="estradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q918004" start="7345" end="7362" title="positive feedback" label="positive feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="7389" end="7398" title="menstrual cycle" label="mid-cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="8008" end="8013" title="spermatozoon" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="8038" end="8044" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q844342" start="8060" end="8073" title="female reproductive system (human)" label="genital tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="8075" end="8081" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="8086" end="8100" title="fallopian tube" label="fallopian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="8154" end="8163" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="8171" end="8185" title="cervical mucus" label="cervical mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666904" start="8447" end="8460" title="human fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q839508" start="8464" end="8475" title="Endometrium" label="Endometrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q425402" start="8502" end="8519" title="metalloproteinase" label="metalloproteinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="8601" end="8613" title="implantation (human embryo)" label="implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48841284" start="9245" end="9253" title="estrogen (medication)" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50383885" start="9258" end="9267" title="progestin" label="progestin"/>
<link wikidata="Q977536" start="9295" end="9304" title="progestogen only pill" label="progestin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9379" end="9389" title="oral contraceptive formulations#monophasic" label="monophasic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9455" end="9466" title="oral contraceptive formulations#multiphasic" label="multiphasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="9596" end="9604" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495694" start="9615" end="9637" title="norethisterone acetate" label="norethisterone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405160" start="9639" end="9658" title="etynodiol diacetate" label="etynodiol diacetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q416950" start="9660" end="9674" title="levonorgestrel" label="levonorgestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051185" start="9676" end="9686" title="norgestrel" label="norgestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051181" start="9688" end="9700" title="norgestimate" label="norgestimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415304" start="9702" end="9713" title="desogestrel" label="desogestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q408289" start="9715" end="9724" title="gestodene" label="gestodene"/>
<link wikidata="Q574820" start="9729" end="9741" title="antiandrogen" label="antiandrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426185" start="9752" end="9771" title="cyproterone acetate" label="cyproterone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102980" start="9773" end="9794" title="chlormadinone acetate" label="chlormadinone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q419646" start="9796" end="9808" title="drospirenone" label="drospirenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q139160" start="9810" end="9819" title="dienogest" label="dienogest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048519" start="9821" end="9840" title="nomegestrol acetate" label="nomegestrol acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="11587" end="11594" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163574" start="12053" end="12062" title="Seasonale" label="Seasonale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421883" start="12828" end="12847" title="Extended cycle combined hormonal contraceptive" label="withdrawal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q621636" start="13600" end="13612" title="Route of administration" label="dosing route"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974939" start="13708" end="13732" title="Health professional" label="healthcare professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671589" start="14231" end="14239" title="Efficacy (pharmacology)" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="14807" end="14813" title="folate" label="folate"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="15187" end="15200" title="Birth control" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="17047" end="17062" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="17101" end="17113" title="menstruation" label="menstruation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="17331" end="17337" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="17847" end="17857" title="Intestine" label="Intestinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442923" start="17858" end="17871" title="malabsorption" label="malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="17895" end="17903" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="17907" end="17915" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="18338" end="18380" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="18833" end="18840" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="18957" end="18972" title="menstrual cycle" label="menstrual cycle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19552" end="19579" title="#Mechanism of action" label="Mechanism of action section"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="20111" end="20115" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="20305" end="20315" title="Folate" label="folic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q548213" start="20435" end="20453" title="neural tube defect" label="neural tube defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268495" start="20864" end="20885" title="breakthrough bleeding" label="breakthrough bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163574" start="21168" end="21177" title="Seasonale" label="Seasonale"/>
<link wikidata="Q500816" start="22111" end="22136" title="polycystic ovary syndrome" label="polycystic ovary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q205764" start="22145" end="22158" title="endometriosis" label="endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012569" start="22160" end="22171" title="adenomyosis" label="adenomyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334655" start="22190" end="22200" title="amenorrhea" label="amenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859056" start="22220" end="22238" title="menstrual migraine" label="menstrual migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816422" start="22336" end="22348" title="dysmenorrhea" label="dysmenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099384" start="24870" end="24886" title="Ortho Tri-Cyclen" label="Ortho Tri-Cyclen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401863" start="24888" end="24897" title="Estrostep" label="Estrostep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899831" start="24899" end="24904" title="Beyaz (drug)" label="Beyaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q419646" start="24910" end="24913" title="Drospirenone" label="YAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="25347" end="25359" title="Inflammation" label="inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q212328" start="25568" end="25573" title="sebum" label="sebum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212328" start="25602" end="25617" title="sebaceous gland" label="sebaceous gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q419613" start="25630" end="25658" title="Sex hormone-binding globulin" label="Sex hormone-binding globulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="25695" end="25707" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q755630" start="27772" end="27792" title="female athlete triad" label="female athlete triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="28378" end="28399" title="Gynaecology" label="gynecologic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q334655" start="28546" end="28556" title="amenorrhea" label="amenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="28698" end="28705" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q816422" start="29560" end="29572" title="dysmenorrhea" label="dysmenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q556281" start="29691" end="29706" title="uterine fibroid" label="uterine fibroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="29796" end="29802" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="29874" end="29882" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q67004728" start="30483" end="30494" title="missed dose" label="missed dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671589" start="30528" end="30536" title="Efficacy (pharmacology)" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220193" start="30693" end="30714" title="premenstrual syndrome" label="premenstrual syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="30839" end="30853" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="31092" end="31117" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="31129" end="31171" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q75098286" start="31197" end="31225" title="Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use" label="medical eligibility criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="31323" end="31341" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="31416" end="31446" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="31456" end="31459" title="HPV" label="HPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268495" start="31475" end="31496" title="breakthrough bleeding" label="breakthrough bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="31642" end="31648" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="31650" end="31658" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933601" start="31663" end="31673" title="mood swing" label="mood swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="31747" end="31770" title="elevated blood pressure" label="elevated blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="31774" end="31785" title="blood clots" label="blood clots"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="31803" end="31828" title="cardiovascular conditions" label="cardiovascular conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="32043" end="32058" title="Stroke" label="ischemic stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="32062" end="32083" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="32273" end="32286" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="32328" end="32331" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="32889" end="32914" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="33709" end="33731" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130519" start="33741" end="33763" title="valvular heart disease" label="valvular heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="33767" end="33789" title="Coronary artery disease" label="ischemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q185986" start="33930" end="33945" title="factor V Leiden" label="factor V Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="34127" end="34135" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="34172" end="34178" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="34239" end="34244" title="Tobacco smoking" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="34321" end="34342" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="34502" end="34515" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="35325" end="35350" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q944777" start="35872" end="35890" title="endometrial cancer" label="endometrial cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172076" start="36109" end="36124" title="hepatic adenoma" label="hepatic adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="36135" end="36144" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q762713" start="36317" end="36337" title="hypercholesterolemia" label="hypercholesterolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467339" start="36342" end="36362" title="hypertriglyceridemia" label="hypertriglyceridemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="36506" end="36513" title="Obesity" label="Obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268495" start="37153" end="37174" title="breakthrough bleeding" label="breakthrough bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751330" start="37838" end="37860" title="venous thromboembolism" label="venous thromboembolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762339" start="37872" end="37892" title="deep vein thrombosis" label="deep vein thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="37903" end="37921" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="38021" end="38027" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="38032" end="38053" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q421352" start="38876" end="38890" title="norethisterone" label="norethisterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051181" start="38905" end="38917" title="norgestimate" label="norgestimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415304" start="38929" end="38940" title="desogestrel" label="desogestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q408289" start="38958" end="38967" title="gestodene" label="gestodene"/>
<link wikidata="Q419646" start="38979" end="38991" title="drospirenone" label="drospirenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q426185" start="39014" end="39033" title="cyproterone acetate" label="cyproterone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="39391" end="39419" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="40065" end="40082" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="40087" end="40100" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428132" start="40186" end="40218" title="cerebral venous sinus thrombosis" label="cerebral venous sinus thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="40235" end="40241" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="40450" end="40464" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944777" start="40466" end="40484" title="endometrial cancer" label="endometrial cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="40490" end="40507" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="40892" end="40906" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944777" start="40930" end="40948" title="endometrial cancer" label="endometrial cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="41310" end="41353" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="41451" end="41457" title="breast cancer" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="41459" end="41465" title="cervical cancer" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="41470" end="41475" title="liver cancer" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="41479" end="41496" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="41635" end="41648" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="41803" end="41816" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="42102" end="42105" title="HPV" label="HPV"/>
<link wikidata="Q178066" start="43187" end="43193" title="libido" label="libido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743627" start="43646" end="43676" title="The Journal of Sexual Medicine" label="The Journal of Sexual Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732609" start="44111" end="44179" title="The European Journal of Contraception &amp;amp; Reproductive Health Care" label="The European Journal of Contraception &amp;amp; Reproductive Health Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709986" start="44508" end="44548" title="Neuroscience &amp;amp; Biobehavioral Reviews" label="Neuroscience &amp;amp; Biobehavioral Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="44567" end="44580" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="44917" end="44927" title="Endogeny (biology)" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363481" start="45052" end="45064" title="luteal phase" label="luteal phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="45111" end="45124" title="Menopause" label="premenopausal"/>
<link wikidata="Q419613" start="45140" end="45168" title="sex hormone-binding globulin" label="sex hormone-binding globulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="45675" end="45714" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet Diabetes &amp;amp; Endocrinology"/>
<link wikidata="Q954027" start="45733" end="45754" title="cross-sectional study" label="cross-sectional study"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="45821" end="45830" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="45832" end="45838" title="States and territories of Australia" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="45842" end="45852" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="45854" end="45869" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="45875" end="45883" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q759183" start="45949" end="45960" title="immunoassay" label="immunoassay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131191" start="46004" end="46019" title="body mass index" label="body mass index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107654" start="46131" end="46144" title="sexual desire" label="sexual desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q536554" start="46245" end="46264" title="vaginal lubrication" label="vaginal lubrication"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46337" end="46392" title="Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences" label="Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q837164" start="46480" end="46500" title="Newcastle University" label="Newcastle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="46505" end="46523" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="46750" end="46757" title="Blinded experiment" label="blinded"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="47083" end="47091" title="Expected value" label="expected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="47095" end="47108" title="Bernoulli trial" label="random chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418623" start="47126" end="47154" title="Evolution and Human Behavior" label="Evolution and Human Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q59195" start="47201" end="47210" title="lap dance" label="lap dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586445" start="47279" end="47301" title="Strip club" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501135" start="47330" end="47341" title="mixed model" label="mixed model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="47462" end="47465" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780816" start="47860" end="47898" title="University at Albany, SUNY" label="State University of New York at Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="48729" end="48733" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="48737" end="48751" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="48843" end="48868" title="Statistical significance" label="statistically significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256373" start="49065" end="49089" title="Psychological adaptation" label="psychologically adaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425625" start="49298" end="49309" title="Reproducibility" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141179" start="49424" end="49449" title="Cognitive Science Society" label="Cognitive Science Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="49496" end="49521" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="49559" end="49574" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q47627" start="49575" end="49585" title="Experimental economics" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104493" start="49678" end="49682" title="risk" label="risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083550" start="49768" end="49793" title="Risk aversion (psychology)" label="risk aversion preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="50507" end="50516" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="50571" end="50581" title="Clinical depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q463772" start="50948" end="50952" title="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="ACOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="50958" end="50961" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170992" start="50993" end="50997" title="Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists" label="RCOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144334" start="51965" end="51975" title="leukorrhea" label="leukorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12171" start="52022" end="52036" title="menstruation" label="menstrual flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907986" start="52038" end="52047" title="mastalgia" label="mastalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="52085" end="52089" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="52178" end="52184" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="52186" end="52194" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="52209" end="52223" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q305190" start="52229" end="52236" title="melasma" label="melasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="52488" end="52498" title="gallstones" label="gallstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12834857" start="52600" end="52615" title="weight training" label="weight training"/>
<link wikidata="Q416601" start="52708" end="52725" title="androgen receptor" label="androgen receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205764" start="52935" end="52948" title="endometriosis" label="endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="53069" end="53086" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="53133" end="53145" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419613" start="53250" end="53278" title="sex hormone binding globulin" label="sex hormone binding globulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="53556" end="53560" title="Medication" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268495" start="53606" end="53627" title="breakthrough bleeding" label="breakthrough bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q422652" start="53691" end="53701" title="rifampicin" label="rifampicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="53703" end="53714" title="barbiturate" label="barbiturate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="53717" end="53726" title="phenytoin" label="phenytoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410412" start="53731" end="53744" title="carbamazepine" label="carbamazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244150" start="53819" end="53829" title="ampicillin" label="ampicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422442" start="53834" end="53845" title="doxycycline" label="doxycycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500347" start="53895" end="53910" title="Human flora" label="bacterial flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q415563" start="53937" end="53953" title="ethinylestradiol" label="ethinylestradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756347" start="53982" end="53985" title="British National Formulary" label="BNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="54025" end="54044" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Wort" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="54101" end="54105" title="P450" label="P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="54120" end="54125" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="54414" end="54442" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355478" start="54584" end="54596" title="Medical prescription" label="prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="55117" end="55133" title="steroid hormones" label="steroid hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="55163" end="55171" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="55174" end="55183" title="estrogens" label="estrogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="55187" end="55199" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="55210" end="55219" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q507443" start="55307" end="55331" title="pharmaceutical companies" label="pharmaceutical companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381482" start="55373" end="55387" title="Russell Marker" label="Russell Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="55404" end="55421" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="55425" end="55454" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="55491" end="55503" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421001" start="55523" end="55532" title="sapogenin" label="sapogenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117102" start="55569" end="55581" title="Smilax regelii" label="sarsaparilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="55713" end="55720" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279587" start="55755" end="55773" title="Dioscorea mexicana" label="Dioscorea mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279583" start="55790" end="55809" title="Dioscorea composita" label="Dioscorea composita"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="55846" end="55854" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q993904" start="55860" end="55867" title="Orizaba" label="Orizaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107734" start="55934" end="55943" title="diosgenin" label="diosgenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046487" start="55985" end="55996" title="Parke-Davis" label="Parke-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646372" start="56119" end="56125" title="Syntex" label="Syntex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="56147" end="56158" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826007" start="56197" end="56222" title="Mexican barbasco trade" label="trade of the barbasco yam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56271" end="56295" title="Marker degradation#Mexican steroid industry" label="Mexican steroid industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="56553" end="56575" title="hormonal contraceptive" label="hormonal contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="56861" end="56873" title="physiologist" label="physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q334361" start="56874" end="56888" title="Gregory Pincus" label="Gregory Pincus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034183" start="56941" end="56986" title="Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology" label="Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559909" start="56997" end="57022" title="Shrewsbury, Massachusetts" label="Shrewsbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q285514" start="57074" end="57089" title="Margaret Sanger" label="Margaret Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="57095" end="57104" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="57176" end="57194" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q987166" start="57357" end="57372" title="Min Chueh Chang" label="Min Chueh Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q198605" start="57558" end="57584" title="G. D. Searle &amp;amp; Company" label="G. D. Searle &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="57862" end="57872" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="suffragist"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="57877" end="57891" title="philanthropist" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376216" start="57892" end="57918" title="Katharine Dexter McCormick" label="Katharine Dexter McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q53041170" start="57975" end="57990" title="Hudson Hoagland" label="Hudson Hoagland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="58403" end="58410" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q80015" start="58433" end="58443" title="obstetrics and gynaecology" label="gynecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255337" start="58444" end="58453" title="John Rock (American scientist)" label="John Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900977" start="58482" end="58505" title="Free Hospital for Women" label="Free Hospital for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="58540" end="58551" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q25556" start="58794" end="58805" title="anovulatory" label="anovulatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056784" start="58812" end="58827" title="high-dose estrogen" label="pseudopregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q423989" start="58957" end="58975" title="diethylstilbestrol" label="diethylstilbestrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="59307" end="59312" title="menstrual cycle" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83864" start="59361" end="59380" title="menstrual cycle" label="withdrawal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q334655" start="59469" end="59479" title="amenorrhea" label="amenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268495" start="59575" end="59596" title="breakthrough bleeding" label="breakthrough bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="60168" end="60182" title="cervical mucus" label="cervical mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q535388" start="60718" end="60733" title="Luis E. Miramontes" label="Luis Miramontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q78608" start="60768" end="60781" title="Carl Djerassi" label="Carl Djerassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965037" start="60804" end="60821" title="George Rosenkranz" label="George Rosenkranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485107" start="60949" end="60964" title="Frank B. Colton" label="Frank B. Colton"/>
<link wikidata="Q985536" start="60978" end="60994" title="Skokie, Illinois" label="Skokie, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q421352" start="61348" end="61362" title="norethisterone" label="norethisterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659069" start="61381" end="61393" title="noretynodrel" label="noretynodrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050955" start="61398" end="61413" title="norethandrolone" label="norethandrolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="61702" end="61726" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q904308" start="62404" end="62413" title="mestranol" label="mestranol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822155" start="62880" end="62886" title="Enovid" label="Enovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962867" start="62899" end="62928" title="Contraceptive trials in Puerto Rico" label="contraceptive trial of Enovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000057" start="62936" end="62954" title="Celso-Ramón García" label="Celso-Ramón García"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340257" start="62959" end="62974" title="Edris Rice-Wray" label="Edris Rice-Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q683206" start="62998" end="63022" title="Río Piedras, Puerto Rico" label="Río Piedras, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="63129" end="63140" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="64047" end="64075" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q198605" start="64344" end="64350" title="G.D. Searle &amp;amp; Company" label="Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053373" start="65306" end="65329" title="Griswold v. Connecticut" label="Griswold v. Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058832" start="65413" end="65432" title="Eisenstadt v. Baird" label="Eisenstadt v. Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="65486" end="65496" title="blood clot" label="blood clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="65501" end="65519" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="65750" end="65765" title="epidemiological" label="epidemiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751330" start="65821" end="65838" title="venous thrombosis" label="venous thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="65892" end="65898" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="65903" end="65924" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="65957" end="65962" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="65971" end="65990" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q807635" start="66191" end="66205" title="Barbara Seaman" label="Barbara Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990689" start="66234" end="66254" title="Nelson Pill Hearings" label="Nelson Pill Hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q886966" start="66273" end="66287" title="Gaylord Nelson" label="Gaylord Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726155" start="66417" end="66430" title="Alice Wolfson" label="Alice Wolfson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045717" start="66550" end="66572" title="patient package insert" label="patient package insert"/>
<link wikidata="Q764527" start="66667" end="66683" title="informed consent" label="informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970614" start="67340" end="67357" title="Board of Pharmacy" label="Board of Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130902074" start="67460" end="67465" title="Opill" label="Opill"/>
<link wikidata="Q563556" start="67684" end="67692" title="Schering AG" label="Schering"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495694" start="67709" end="67731" title="norethisterone acetate" label="norethisterone acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415563" start="67739" end="67755" title="ethinylestradiol" label="ethinylestradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401863" start="67881" end="67888" title="Anovlar" label="Anovlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="67906" end="67918" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12929" start="68000" end="68017" title="Ferdinand Peeters" label="Ferdinand Peeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433208" start="68145" end="68172" title="Family Planning Association" label="Family Planning Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="68703" end="68713" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q211907" start="68715" end="68721" title="Slough" label="Slough"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="68727" end="68733" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q333028" start="69420" end="69432" title="Enoch Powell" label="Enoch Powell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69439" end="69457" title="Secretary of State for Health#Minister of Health" label="Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="69542" end="69545" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="69572" end="69573" title="Shilling" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258213" start="69746" end="69758" title="Neuwirth Law" label="Neuwirth Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11507440" start="70080" end="70105" title="Japan Medical Association" label="Japan Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="70515" end="70545" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q191521" start="70618" end="70624" title="Viagra" label="Viagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80015" start="71503" end="71508" title="OBGYN" label="OBGYN"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="71984" end="71988" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097475" start="72521" end="72535" title="Claudia Goldin" label="Claudia Goldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q477172" start="73330" end="73345" title="pre-marital sex" label="pre-marital sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="73943" end="73964" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q683261" start="74120" end="74133" title="Humanae vitae" label="Humanae vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="74341" end="74369" title="Protestant Church in Germany" label="Protestant Church in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="74429" end="74449" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229776" start="74681" end="74699" title="Population Council" label="Population Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305968" start="74902" end="74945" title="Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare" label="Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313779" start="74959" end="74971" title="Robert Finch (American politician)" label="Robert Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757122" start="75658" end="75702" title="The Pill Versus the Springhill Mine Disaster" label="The Pill Versus the Springhill Mine Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q357114" start="75751" end="75768" title="Richard Brautigan" label="Richard Brautigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272931" start="75792" end="75804" title="Loretta Lynn" label="Loretta Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757121" start="75933" end="75941" title="The Pill (song)" label="The Pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="76168" end="76173" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="76178" end="76183" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="76192" end="76200" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q414986" start="76203" end="76210" title="estrone" label="estrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422416" start="76220" end="76229" title="estradiol" label="estradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415563" start="76259" end="76275" title="ethinylestradiol" label="ethinylestradiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="76315" end="76330" title="water treatment" label="water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295013" start="76397" end="76416" title="contraceptive patch" label="contraceptive patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185557" start="76598" end="76607" title="excretion" label="excretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138899" start="76643" end="76663" title="endocrine disruption" label="endocrine disruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="76727" end="76731" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36333" start="77040" end="77062" title="activated sludge" label="activated sludge plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q409721" start="77203" end="77210" title="estriol" label="estriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138899" start="77313" end="77332" title="endocrine disruptor" label="endocrine disruptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="77441" end="77454" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77520" end="77545" title="climate change mitigation#population" label="climate change mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="77557" end="77567" title="climate change adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="77695" end="77709" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209217" start="77909" end="77948" title="Estradiol-containing oral contraceptive" label="Estradiol-containing oral contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354346" start="77951" end="77978" title="Hormone replacement therapy" label="Hormone replacement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27657914" start="77987" end="78035" title="List of estrogens available in the United States" label="List of estrogens available in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q27657939" start="78038" end="78089" title="List of progestogens available in the United States" label="List of progestogens available in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209219" start="78092" end="78133" title="Progestogen-only injectable contraceptive" label="Progestogen-only injectable contraceptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="78286" end="78290" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22625" wikidata="Q46952" url="?curid=22625" title="Organized crime">
<text>Organized crime is a category of transnational, national, or local group of centralized enterprises run to engage in illegal activity, most commonly for profit. While organized crime is generally thought of as a form of illegal business, some criminal organizations, such as terrorist groups, rebel forces, and separatists, are politically motivated. Many criminal organizations rely on fear or terror to achieve their goals or aims as well as to maintain control within the organization and may adopt tactics commonly used by authoritarian regimes to maintain power. Some forms of organized crime simply exist to cater towards demand of illegal goods in a state or to facilitate trade of goods and services that may have been banned by a state (such as illegal drugs or firearms). Sometimes, criminal organizations force people to do business with them, such as when a gang extorts protection money from shopkeepers. Street gangs may often be deemed organized crime groups or, under stricter definitions of organized crime, may become disciplined enough to be considered &quot;organized&quot;. A criminal organization can also be referred to as an outfit, a gang, crime family, mafia, mob, (crime) ring, or syndicate; the network, subculture, and community of criminals involved in organized crime may be referred to as the underworld or gangland. Sociologists sometimes specifically distinguish a &quot;mafia&quot; as a type of organized crime group that specializes in the supply of extra-legal protection and quasi-law enforcement. Academic studies of the original &quot;Mafia&quot;, the Italian Mafia, as well as its American counterpart, generated an economic study of organized crime groups and exerted great influence on studies of the Russian mafia, the Chinese triads, the Hong Kong triads, and the Japanese yakuza.

Other organizations—including states, churches, militaries, police forces, and corporations—may sometimes use organized-crime methods to conduct their activities, but their powers derive from their status as formal social institutions. There is a tendency to distinguish &quot;traditional&quot; organized crime such as gambling, loan sharking, drug-trafficking, prostitution, and fraud from certain other forms of crime that also usually involve organized or group criminal acts, such as white-collar crime, financial crimes, political crimes, war crimes, state crimes, and treason. This distinction is not always apparent and academics continue to debate the matter. For example, in failed states that can no longer perform basic functions such as education, security, or governance (usually due to fractious violence or to extreme poverty), organized crime, governance, and war sometimes complement each other. The term &quot;oligarchy&quot; has been used to describe democratic countries whose political, social, and economic institutions come under the control of a few families and business oligarchs that may be deemed or may devolve into organized crime groups in practice. By their very nature, kleptocracies, mafia states, narco-states or narcokleptocracies, and states with high levels of clientelism and political corruption are either heavily involved with organized crime or tend to foster organized crime within their own governments.

In the United States, the Organized Crime Control Act (1970) defines organized crime as &quot;[t]he unlawful activities of [...] a highly organized, disciplined association [...]&quot;. Criminal activity as a structured process is referred to as racketeering. In the UK, police estimate that organized crime involves up to 38,000 people operating in 6,000 various groups. Historically, the largest organized crime force in the United States has been Cosa Nostra (Italian-American Mafia), but other transnational criminal organizations have also risen in prominence in recent decades. A 2012 article in a U.S. Department of Justice journal stated that: &quot;Since the end of the Cold War, organized crime groups from Russia, China, Italy, Nigeria, and Japan have increased their international presence and worldwide networks or have become involved in more transnational criminal activities. Most of the world&#x27;s major international organized crime groups are present in the United States.&quot; The US Drug Enforcement Administration&#x27;s 2017 &quot;National Drug Threat Assessment&quot; classified Mexican transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) as the &quot;greatest criminal drug threat to the United States,&quot; citing their dominance &quot;over large regions in Mexico used for the cultivation, production, importation, and transportation of illicit drugs&quot; and identifying the Sinaloa, Jalisco New Generation, Juárez, Gulf, Los Zetas, and Beltrán-Leyva cartels as the six Mexican TCO with the greatest influence in drug trafficking to the United States. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 16 has a target to combat all forms of organized crime as part of the 2030 Agenda.

In some countries, football hooliganism has been linked to organized crime.

==Models of organized crime==
Various models have been proposed to describe the structure of criminal organizations.

===Organizational===
====Patron–client networks====
Patron–client networks are defined by fluid interactions. They produce crime groups that operate as smaller units within the overall network, and as such tend towards valuing significant others, familiarity of social and economic environments, or tradition. These networks are usually composed of:

* Hierarchies based on &#x27;naturally&#x27; forming family, social and cultural traditions;
* &#x27;Tight-knit&#x27; focus of activity/labor;
* Fraternal or nepotistic value systems;
* Personalized activity; including family rivalries, territorial disputes, recruitment and training of family members, etc.;
* Entrenched belief systems, reliance of tradition (including religion, family values, cultural expectations, class politics, gender roles, etc.); and,
* Communication and rule enforcement mechanisms dependent on organizational structure, social etiquette, history of criminal involvement, and collective decision-making.

====Bureaucratic/corporate operations====
Bureaucratic/corporate organized crime groups are defined by the general rigidity of their internal structures. They focus more on how the operations works, succeeds, sustains itself or avoids retribution, they are generally typified by:

* A complex authority structure;
* An extensive division of labor between classes within the organization;
* Meritocratic (as opposed to cultural or social attributes);
* Responsibilities carried out in an impersonal manner;
* Extensive written rules/regulations (as opposed to cultural praxis dictating action); and,
* &#x27;Top-down&#x27; communication and rule enforcement mechanisms.

However, this model of operation has some flaws:

* The &#x27;top-down&#x27; communication strategy is susceptible to interception, more so further down the hierarchy being communicated to;
* Maintaining written records jeopardizes the security of the organization and relies on increased security measures;
* Infiltration at lower levels in the hierarchy can jeopardize the entire organization (a &#x27;house of cards&#x27; effect); and,
* Death, injury, incarceration or internal power struggles dramatically heighten the insecurity of operations.

While bureaucratic operations emphasize business processes and strongly authoritarian hierarchies, these are based on enforcing power relationships rather than an overlying aim of protectionism, sustainability or growth.

====Youth and street gangs====

An estimate on youth street gangs in the United States provided by Hannigan, et al., marked an increase of 35% between 2002 and 2010. A distinctive gang culture underpins many, but not all, organized groups; this may develop through recruiting strategies, social learning processes in the corrective system experienced by youth, family or peer involvement in crime, and the coercive actions of criminal authority figures. The term &quot;street gang&quot; is commonly used interchangeably with &quot;youth gang,&quot; referring to neighborhood or street-based youth groups that meet &quot;gang&quot; criteria. Miller (1992) defines a street gang as &quot;a self-formed association of peers, united by mutual interests, with identifiable leadership and internal organization, who act collectively or as individuals to achieve specific purposes, including the conduct of illegal activity and control of a particular territory, facility, or enterprise.&quot; Some reasons youth join gangs include to feel accepted, attain status, and increase their self-esteem. A sense of unity brings together many of the youth gangs that lack the family aspect at home.

&quot;Zones of transition&quot; are deteriorating neighborhoods with shifting populations. In such areas, conflict between groups, fighting, &quot;turf wars&quot;, and theft promote solidarity and cohesion. Cohen (1955): working class teenagers joined gangs due to frustration of inability to achieve status and goals of the middle class; Cloward and Ohlin (1960): blocked opportunity, but unequal distribution of opportunities lead to creating different types of gangs (that is, some focused on robbery and property theft, some on fighting and conflict and some were retreatists focusing on drug taking); Spergel (1966) was one of the first criminologists to focus on &quot;evidence-based practice&quot; rather than intuition into gang life and culture. Participation in gang-related events during adolescence perpetuate a pattern of maltreatment on their own children years later. Klein (1971) like Spergel studied the effects on members of social workers&#x27; interventions. More interventions actually lead to greater gang participation and solidarity and bonds between members. Downes and Rock (1988) on Parker&#x27;s analysis: strain theory applies, labeling theory (from experience with police and courts), control theory (involvement in trouble from early childhood and the eventual decision that the costs outweigh the benefits) and conflict theories. No ethnic group is more disposed to gang involvement than another, rather it is the status of being marginalized, alienated or rejected that makes some groups more vulnerable to gang formation, and this would also be accounted for in the effect of social exclusion, especially in terms of recruitment and retention. These may also be defined by age (typically youth) or peer group influences, and the permanence or consistency of their criminal activity. These groups also form their own symbolic identity or public representation which are recognizable by the community at large (include colors, symbols, patches, flags and tattoos).

Research has focused on whether the gangs have formal structures, clear hierarchies and leadership in comparison with adult groups, and whether they are rational in pursuit of their goals, though positions on structures, hierarchies and defined roles are conflicting. Some studied street gangs involved in drug dealing - finding that their structure and behavior had a degree of organizational rationality. Members saw themselves as organized criminals; gangs were formal-rational organizations, Strong organizational structures, well defined roles and rules that guided members&#x27; behavior. Also a specified and regular means of income (i.e., drugs). Padilla (1992) agreed with the two above. However some have found these to be loose rather than well-defined and lacking persistent focus, there was relatively low cohesion, few shared goals and little organizational structure. Shared norms, value and loyalties were low, structures &quot;chaotic&quot;, little role differentiation or clear distribution of labor. Similarly, the use of violence does not conform to the principles behind protection rackets, political intimidation and drug trafficking activities employed by those adult groups. In many cases gang members graduate from youth gangs to highly developed OC groups, with some already in contact with such syndicates and through this we see a greater propensity for imitation. Gangs and traditional criminal organizations cannot be universally linked (Decker, 1998), however there are clear benefits to both the adult and youth organization through their association. In terms of structure, no single crime group is archetypal, though in most cases there are well-defined patterns of vertical integration (attempting to control all or part of the supply chain), as is the case in arms, sex and drug trafficking.

===Individual difference===

====Entrepreneurial====
The entrepreneurial model looks at either the individual criminal or a smaller group of organized criminals, that capitalize off the more fluid &#x27;group-association&#x27; of contemporary organized crime. This model conforms to social learning theory or differential association in that there are clear associations and interaction between criminals where knowledge may be shared, or values enforced, however, it is argued that rational choice is not represented in this. The choice to commit a certain act, or associate with other organized crime groups, may be seen as much more of an entrepreneurial decision - contributing to the continuation of a criminal enterprise, by maximizing those aspects that protect or support their own individual gain. In this context, the role of risk is also easily understandable, however it is debatable whether the underlying motivation should be seen as true entrepreneurship, or entrepreneurship as a product of some social disadvantage.

The criminal organization, much in the same way as one would assess pleasure and pain, weighs such factors as legal, social and economic risk to determine potential profit and loss from certain criminal activities. This decision-making process rises from the entrepreneurial efforts of the group&#x27;s members, their motivations and the environments in which they work. Opportunism is also a key factor – the organized criminal or criminal group is likely to frequently reorder the criminal associations they maintain, the types of crimes they perpetrate, and how they function in the public arena (recruitment, reputation, etc.) in order to ensure efficiency, capitalization and protection of their interests.

===Multi-model approach===
Culture and ethnicity provide an environment where trust and communication between criminals can be efficient and secure. This may ultimately lead to a competitive advantage for some groups; however, it is inaccurate to adopt this as the only determinant of classification in organized crime. This categorization includes the Sicilian Mafia, &#x27;Ndrangheta, ethnic Chinese criminal groups, Japanese yakuza (or Boryokudan), Colombian drug trafficking groups, Nigerian organized crime groups, Corsican mafia, Korean criminal groups and Jamaican posses. From this perspective, organized crime is not a modern phenomenon - the construction of 17th and 18th century crime gangs fulfill all the present day criteria of criminal organizations (in opposition to the Alien Conspiracy Theory). These roamed the rural borderlands of central Europe embarking on many of the same illegal activities associated with today&#x27;s crime organizations, with the exception of money laundering.
When the French revolution created strong nation states, the criminal gangs moved to other poorly controlled regions like the Balkans and Southern Italy, where the seeds were sown for the Sicilian Mafia - the linchpin of organized crime in the New World.

=== Computational approach ===
While most of the conceptual frameworks used to model organized crime emphasize the role of &quot;actors&quot; or &quot;activities&quot;, computational approaches built on the foundations of data science and artificial intelligence are focusing on deriving new insights on organized crime from big data. For example, novel machine learning models have been applied to study and detect urban crime and online prostitution networks. Big data has also been used to develop online tools predicting the risk for an individual to be a victim of online sex trade or getting drawn into online sex work. In addition, data from Twitter and Google Trends have been used to study the public perceptions of organized crime.

==Typical activities==

Organized crime groups provide a range of illegal services and goods. Organized crime often victimizes businesses through the use of extortion or theft and fraud activities like hijacking cargo trucks and ships, robbing goods, committing bankruptcy fraud (also known as &quot;bust-out&quot;), insurance fraud or stock fraud (insider trading). Organized crime groups also victimize individuals by car theft (either for dismantling at &quot;chop shops&quot; or for export), art theft, Metal theft, bank robbery, burglary, jewelry and gems theft and heists, shoplifting, computer hacking, credit card fraud, economic espionage, embezzlement, identity theft, and securities fraud (&quot;pump and dump&quot; scam). Some organized crime groups defraud national, state, or local governments by bid rigging public projects, counterfeiting money, smuggling or manufacturing untaxed alcohol (rum-running) or cigarettes (buttlegging), and providing immigrant workers to avoid taxes.

Organized crime groups seek out corrupt public officials in executive, law enforcement, and judicial roles so that their criminal rackets and activities on the black market can avoid, or at least receive early warnings about, investigation and prosecution.

Activities of organized crime include loansharking of money at very high interest rates, blackmailing, assassination, backyard breeding, bombings, bookmaking and illegal gambling, confidence tricks, forging early release prison documents, copyright infringement, counterfeiting of intellectual property, metal theft, fencing, kidnapping, sex trafficking, smuggling, drug trafficking, arms trafficking, impersonating armored truck drivers, oil smuggling, antiquities smuggling, organ trafficking, contract killing, identity document forgery, money laundering, bribery, seduction, electoral fraud, insurance fraud, point shaving, price fixing, cargo theft via fictions pickup, illegal taxicab operation, illegal dumping of toxic waste, illegal trading of nuclear materials, military equipment smuggling, nuclear weapons smuggling, passport fraud, providing illegal immigration and cheap labor, people smuggling, trading in endangered species, and trafficking in human beings. Organized crime groups also do a range of business and labor racketeering activities, such as skimming casinos, insider trading, setting up monopolies in industries such as garbage collecting, construction and cement pouring, bid rigging, getting &quot;no-show&quot; and &quot;no-work&quot; jobs, political corruption and bullying.

===Violence===
====Assault====
The commission of violent crime may form part of a criminal organization&#x27;s &#x27;tools&#x27; used to achieve criminogenic goals (for example, its threatening, authoritative, coercive, terror-inducing, or rebellious role), due to psycho-social factors (cultural conflict, aggression, rebellion against authority, access to illicit substances, counter-cultural dynamic), or may, in and of itself, be crime rationally chosen by individual criminals and the groups they form. Assaults are used for coercive measures, to &quot;rough up&quot; debtors, competition or recruits, in the commission of robberies, in connection to other property offenses, and as an expression of counter-cultural authority; violence is normalized within criminal organizations (in direct opposition to mainstream society) and the locations they control. Whilst the intensity of violence is dependent on the types of crime the organization is involved in (as well as their organizational structure or cultural tradition) aggressive acts range on a spectrum from low-grade physical assaults to major trauma assaults. Bodily harm and grievous bodily harm, within the context of organized crime, must be understood as indicators of intense social and cultural conflict, motivations contrary to the security of the public, and other psycho-social factors.

====Murder====
Murder has evolved from the honor and vengeance killings of the yakuza or Sicilian mafia which placed large physical and symbolic importance on the act of murder, its purposes and consequences, to a much less discriminate form of expressing power, enforcing criminal authority, achieving retribution or eliminating competition. The role of the hit man has been generally consistent throughout the history of organized crime, whether that be due to the efficiency or expediency of hiring a professional assassin or the need to distance oneself from the commission of murderous acts (making it harder to prove criminal culpability). This may include the assassination of notable figures (public, private or criminal), once again dependent on authority, retribution or competition. Revenge killings, armed robberies, violent disputes over controlled territories and offenses against members of the public must also be considered when looking at the dynamic between different criminal organizations and their (at times) conflicting needs. After killing their victims, the gangsters often try to destroy evidence by getting rid of the victims remains in such a way as to prevent, hinder, or delay the discovery of the body, to prevent identification of the body, or to prevent autopsy. The different ways that organized criminals have been known to dispose of dead bodies include but are not limited to hiding the bodies in trash or landfills, feeding the bodies to animals (such as pigs or rats), destruction by industrial process (such as machinery, chemical bath, molten metal or a junked car), injection into the legitimate body disposal system (such as morgues, funeral homes, cemeteries, crematoriums, funeral pyres or cadaver donations) or covert killings at health care facilities, disguising as animal flesh (such as food waste or restaurant food), creating false evidence of the circumstances of death and letting investigators dispose of the body, possibly obscuring identity, abandonment in a remote area where the body can degrade significantly, while exposure to elements (such as rain, wind, heat, etc.) as well as animal activity (such as consumption by scavengers) can contaminate the crime scene or destroy evidence before being discovered, if ever, such as a wilderness area (such as national parks or nature reserves) or an abandoned area (such as an abandoned building, well or mine). However, there are also many instances of gangsters putting the bodies of their victims on display as a form of psychological warfare against their enemies.

====Vigilantism====

Criminal syndicates often commit acts of vigilantism by enforcing laws, investigating certain criminal acts and punishing those who violate such rules. People who are often targeted by organized criminals tend to be individualistic criminals, people who committed crimes that are considered particularly heinous by society, people who committed wrongdoings against members or associates, rivals or terrorist groups. One reason why criminal groups might commit vigilantism in their neighborhoods is to prevent heavy levels of community policing, that could be harmful to their illicit businesses; additionally the vigilante acts could help the gangs to ingratiate themselves in their communities.

In the US during the roaring twenties, the anti-catholic and anti-semitic Ku Klux Klan was known to be a staunch enforcer of prohibition, as a result Italian, Irish, Polish and Jewish gangsters would at times have violent confrontations against the KKK. On one occasion FBI informant and mobster Gregory Scarpa kidnapped and tortured a local Klansman into revealing the bodies of Civil rights workers who had been killed by the KKK. During World War II, America had a growing number of Nazi supporters that formed the German American Bund, which was known to be threatening to local Jewish people, as a result Jewish mobsters (such as Meyer Lansky, Bugsy Siegel and Jack Ruby) were often hired by the American Jewish community to help defend against the Nazi bund, even going as far as attacking and killing Nazi sympathizers during bund meetings. Vigilante groups such as the Black Panther Party, White Panther Party, and Young Lords have been accused of committing crimes in order to fund their political activities.

While protection racketeering is often seen as nothing more than extortion, criminal syndicates that participate in protection rackets have at times provided genuine protection against other criminals for their clients, the reason for this is because the criminal organization would want the business of their clients to do better so that the gang can demand even more protection money, additionally if the gang has enough knowledge of the local fencers, they may even be able to track down and retrieve any objects that were stolen from the business owner, to further help their clients the gang may also force out, disrupt, vandalize, steal from or shutdown competing businesses for their clients. In Colombia the insurgent groups were trying to steal land, kidnap family members, and extort money from the drug barons. As a result the drug lords of the Medellín Cartel formed a paramilitary vigilante group known as Muerte a Secuestradores (&quot;Death to Kidnappers&quot;) to defend the cartel against the FARC and M-19, even kidnapping and torturing the leader of M-19 before leaving him tied up in front of a police station. During the Medellín Cartel&#x27;s war against the Colombian government, both the Norte del Valle Cartel and Cali Cartel formed and operated a vigilante group called Los Pepes (which also comprised members of the Colombian government, police and former members of the Medellín Cartel) to bring about the downfall of Pablo Escobar; they did so by bombing the properties of the Medellín Cartel and kidnapping, torturing and killing Escobar&#x27;s associates as well as working alongside the Search Bloc, which would eventually lead to the dismantling of the Medellín Cartel and the death of Pablo Escobar. Because of the high levels of corruption, the Oficina de Envigado would do things to help the police and vice versa, to the point where the police and the cartel would sometimes do operations together against other criminals; additionally the leaders of La Oficina would often act as judges to mediate disputes between the various different drug gangs throughout Colombia, which according to some helped prevented a lot of disputes from turning violent.

On Somalia coastline many people rely on fishing for economic survival, because of this Somali pirates are often known to attack foreign vessels who partake in illegal fishing and overfishing in their waters and vessels that illegally dump waste into their waters. As a result, marine biologists say that the local fishery is recovering. In Mexico a vigilante group called Grupos de autodefensa comunitaria was formed to counter the illegal loggers, the La Familia Michoacana Cartel and a drug cartel/cult known as the Knights Templar Cartel; as they grew, they were being joined by former cartel members and as they got bigger they began to sell drugs in order to buy weapons. The Knights Templar Cartel was eventually defeated and dissolved by the vigilantes&#x27; actions but they ended up forming their own cartel called Los Viagras, which has links with the Jalisco New Generation Cartel. The Minuteman Project is a far-right paramilitary organization that seeks to prevent illegal immigration across the US-Mexico border; however, doing so is detrimental to gangs like Mara Salvatrucha, who make money through people smuggling, and as a result MS-13 is known to commit acts of violence against members of the Minutemen, to prevent them from interfering with their illegal immigration activities. Throughout the world there are various anti-gang vigilante groups, who profess to be fighting against gang influence, but share characteristics and acts similarly to gangs, including Sombra Negra, Friends Stand United, People Against Gangsterism and Drugs, and OG Imba. Gangs that are involved in drug trafficking often commit violent acts to stop or force out independent dealers—drug dealers with no gang ties—to keep them from taking customers.

In America, there is an animal welfare organization called Rescue Ink, in which outlaw biker gang members volunteer to rescue animals in need and combat against people who commit animal cruelty, such as breaking up cockfighting rings, stopping the killing of stray cats, breaking up dog fighting rings, and rescuing pets from abusive owners. In the American prison system, prison gangs are often known to physically harm and even kill inmates who have committed such crimes as child murder, serial killing, pedophilia, hate crimes, domestic violence, and rape, and inmates who have committed crimes against the elderly, animals, the disabled, the poor and the less fortunate. In many minority communities and poor neighborhoods, residents often distrust law enforcement, as a result the gang syndicates often take over to &quot;police&quot; their neighborhoods by committing acts against people who had committed crimes such as bullying, muggings, home invasions, hate crimes, stalking, sexual assault, domestic violence and child molestation, as well as mediating disputes between neighbors. The ways that the gangs would punish such individuals could range from forced apologies, being threatened, being forced to return stolen objects, vandalizing property, arson, being forced to move, bombings, being assaulted or battered, kidnappings, false imprisonment, torture or being murdered. Some criminal syndicates have been known to hold their own &quot;trials&quot; for members of theirs who had been accused of wrongdoing; the punishments that the accused member would face if &quot;found guilty&quot; would vary depending on the offense.

====Terrorism====

In addition to what is considered traditional organized crime involving direct crimes of fraud swindles, scams, racketeering and other acts motivated for the accumulation of monetary gain, there is also non-traditional organized crime which is engaged in for political or ideological gain or acceptance. Such crime groups are often labelled terrorist groups or narcoterrorists.

There is no universally agreed, legally binding, criminal law definition of terrorism. Common definitions of terrorism refer only to those violent acts which are intended to create fear (terror), are perpetrated for a religious, political or ideological goal, deliberately target or disregard the safety of non-combatants (e.g., neutral military personnel or civilians), and are committed by non-government agencies. Some definitions also include acts of unlawful violence and war, especially crimes against humanity (&quot;see the Nuremberg Trials&quot;), Allied authorities deeming the German Nazi Party, its paramilitary and police organizations, and numerous associations subsidiary to the Nazi Party &quot;criminal organizations&quot;. The use of similar tactics by criminal organizations for protection rackets or to enforce a code of silence is usually not labeled terrorism though these same actions may be labeled terrorism when done by a politically motivated group.

Notable groups include the Medellín Cartel, Corleonesi Mafia, various Mexican Cartels, and Jamaican Posse.

====Other====
* Arms trafficking
* Metal theft
* Arson
* Coercion
* Extortion
* Protection racket
* Sexual assault

===Financial crime===
Organized crime groups generate large amounts of money by activities such as drug trafficking, arms smuggling, extortion, theft, and financial crime. These illegally sourced assets are of little use to them unless they can disguise it and convert it into funds that are available for investment into legitimate enterprise. The methods they use for converting its &#x27;dirty&#x27; money into &#x27;clean&#x27; assets encourages corruption. Organized crime groups need to hide the money&#x27;s illegal origin. This allows for the expansion of OC groups, as the &#x27;laundry&#x27; or &#x27;wash cycle&#x27; operates to cover the money trail and convert proceeds of crime into usable assets. Money laundering is bad for international and domestic trade, banking reputations and for effective governments and rule of law. This is due to the methods used to hide the proceeds of crime. These methods include, but are not limited to: buying easily transported values, transfer pricing, and using &quot;underground banks,&quot; as well as infiltrating firms in the legal economy.

Launderers will also co-mingle illegal money with revenue made from businesses in order to further mask their illicit funds. Accurate figures for the amounts of criminal proceeds laundered are almost impossible to calculate, rough estimates have been made, but only give a sense of the scale of the problem and not quite how great the problem truly is. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime conducted a study, they estimated that in 2009, money laundering equated to about 2.7% of global GDP being laundered; this is equal to about 1.6 trillion US dollars. The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF), an intergovernmental body set up to combat money laundering, has stated that &quot;A sustained effort between 1996 and 2000 by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) to produce such estimates failed.&quot; However, anti-money laundering efforts that seize money laundered assets in 2001 amounted to $386 million. The rapid growth of money laundering is due to:
* the scale of organized crime precluding it from being a cash business - groups have little option but to convert its proceeds into legitimate funds and do so by investment, by developing legitimate businesses and purchasing property;
* globalization of communications and commerce - technology has made rapid transfer of funds across international borders much easier, with groups continuously changing techniques to avoid investigation; and,
* a lack of effective financial regulation in parts of the global economy.

Money laundering is a three-stage process:
* Placement: (also called immersion) groups &#x27;smurf&#x27; small amounts at a time to avoid suspicion; physical disposal of money by moving crime funds into the legitimate financial system; may involve bank complicity, mixing licit and illicit funds, cash purchases and smuggling currency to safe havens.
* Layering: disguises the trail to foil pursuit. Also called &#x27;heavy soaping&#x27;. It involves creating false paper trails, converting cash into assets by cash purchases.
* Integration: (also called &#x27;spin dry): Making it into clean taxable income by real-estate transactions, sham loans, foreign bank complicity and false import and export transactions.

Means of money laundering:
* Money transmitters, black money markets purchasing goods, gambling, increasing the complexity of the money trail.
* Underground banking (flying money), involves clandestine &#x27;bankers&#x27; around the world.
* It often involves otherwise legitimate banks and professionals.

The policy aim in this area is to make the financial markets transparent, and minimize the circulation of criminal money and its cost upon legitimate markets.

====Counterfeiting====

Counterfeiting money is another financial crime. The counterfeiting of money includes illegally producing money that is then used to pay for anything desired. In addition to being a financial crime, counterfeiting also involves manufacturing or distributing goods under assumed names. Counterfeiters benefit because consumers believe they are buying goods from companies that they trust, when in reality they are buying low quality counterfeit goods. In 2007, the OECD reported the scope of counterfeit products to include food, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, electrical components, tobacco and even household cleaning products in addition to the usual films, music, literature, games and other electrical appliances, software and fashion. A number of qualitative changes in the trade of counterfeit products:
* a large increase in fake goods which are dangerous to health and safety;
* most products repossessed by authorities are now household items rather than luxury goods;
* a growing number of technological products; and,
* production is now operated on an industrial scale.

====Tax evasion====

The economic effects of organized crime have been approached from a number of both theoretical and empirical positions, however the nature of such activity allows for misrepresentation. The level of taxation taken by a nation-state, rates of unemployment, mean household incomes and level of satisfaction with government and other economic factors all contribute to the likelihood of criminals to participate in tax evasion. As most organized crime is perpetrated in the liminal state between legitimate and illegitimate markets, these economic factors must adjusted to ensure the optimal amount of taxation without promoting the practice of tax evasion. As with any other crime, technological advancements have made the commission of tax evasion easier, faster and more globalized. The ability for organized criminals to operate fraudulent financial accounts, utilize illicit offshore bank accounts, access tax havens or tax shelters, and operating goods smuggling syndicates to evade importation taxes help ensure financial sustainability, security from law enforcement, general anonymity and the continuation of their operations.

===Cybercrime===
====Internet fraud====

Identity theft is a form of fraud or cheating of another person&#x27;s identity in which someone pretends to be someone else by assuming that person&#x27;s identity, typically in order to access resources or obtain credit and other benefits in that person&#x27;s name. Victims of identity theft (those whose identity has been assumed by the identity thief) can suffer adverse consequences if held accountable for the perpetrator&#x27;s actions, as can organizations and individuals who are defrauded by the identity thief, and to that extent are also victims. Internet fraud refers to the actual use of Internet services to present fraudulent solicitations to prospective victims, to conduct fraudulent transactions, or to transmit the proceeds of fraud to financial institutions or to others connected with the scheme. In the context of organized crime, both may serve as means through which other criminal activity may be successfully perpetrated or as the primary goal themselves. Email fraud, advance-fee fraud, romance scams, employment scams, and other phishing scams are the most common and most widely used forms of identity theft, though with the advent of social networking fake websites, accounts and other fraudulent or deceitful activity has become commonplace.

====Copyright infringement====

Copyright infringement is the unauthorized or prohibited use of works under copyright, infringing the copyright holder&#x27;s exclusive rights, such as the right to reproduce or perform the copyrighted work, or to make derivative works. Whilst almost universally considered under civil procedure, the impact and intent of organized criminal operations in this area of crime has been the subject of much debate. Article 61 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) requires that signatory countries establish criminal procedures and penalties in cases of willful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale. More recently copyright holders have demanded that states provide criminal sanctions for all types of copyright infringement. Organized criminal groups capitalize on consumer complicity, advancements in security and anonymity technology, emerging markets and new methods of product transmission, and the consistent nature of these provides a stable financial basis for other areas of organized crime.

====Cyberwarfare====
Cyberwarfare refers to politically motivated hacking to conduct sabotage and espionage. It is a form of information warfare sometimes seen as analogous to conventional warfare although this analogy is controversial for both its accuracy and its political motivation. It has been defined as activities by a nation-state to penetrate another nation&#x27;s computers or networks with the intention of causing civil damage or disruption. Moreover, it acts as the &quot;fifth domain of warfare,&quot; and William J. Lynn, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense, states that &quot;as a doctrinal matter, the Pentagon has formally recognized cyberspace as a new domain in warfare . . . [which] has become just as critical to military operations as land, sea, air, and space.&quot; Cyber espionage is the practice of obtaining confidential, sensitive, proprietary or classified information from individuals, competitors, groups, or governments using illegal exploitation methods on internet, networks, software or computers. There is also a clear military, political, or economic motivation. Unsecured information may be intercepted and modified, making espionage possible internationally. The recently established Cyber Command is currently debating whether such activities as commercial espionage or theft of intellectual property are criminal activities or actual &quot;breaches of national security.&quot; Furthermore, military activities that use computers and satellites for coordination are at risk of equipment disruption. Orders and communications can be intercepted or replaced. Power, water, fuel, communications, and transportation infrastructure all may be vulnerable to sabotage. According to Clarke, the civilian realm is also at risk, noting that the security breaches have already gone beyond stolen credit card numbers, and that potential targets can also include the electric power grid, trains, or the stock market.

====Computer viruses====
The term &quot;computer virus&quot; may be used as an overarching phrase to include all types of true viruses, malware, including computer worms, Trojan horses, most rootkits, spyware, dishonest adware and other malicious and unwanted software (though all are technically unique), and proves to be quite financially lucrative for criminal organizations, offering greater opportunities for fraud and extortion whilst increasing security, secrecy and anonymity. Worms may be utilized by organized crime groups to exploit security vulnerabilities (duplicating itself automatically across other computers a given network), while a Trojan horse is a program that appears harmless but hides malicious functions (such as retrieval of stored confidential data, corruption of information, or interception of transmissions). Worms and Trojan horses, like viruses, may harm a computer system&#x27;s data or performance. Applying the Internet model of organized crime, the proliferation of computer viruses and other malicious software promotes a sense of detachment between the perpetrator (whether that be the criminal organization or another individual) and the victim; this may help to explain vast increases in cyber-crime such as these for the purpose of ideological crime or terrorism. In mid July 2010, security experts discovered a malicious software program that had infiltrated factory computers and had spread to plants around the world. It is considered &quot;the first attack on critical industrial infrastructure that sits at the foundation of modern economies,&quot; notes the &quot;New York Times.&quot;

===White-collar crime and corruption===

====Corporate crime====

Corporate crime refers to crimes committed either by a corporation (i.e., a business entity having a separate legal personality from the natural persons that manage its activities), or by individuals that may be identified with a corporation or other business entity (see vicarious liability and corporate liability). Corporate crimes are motivated by either the individuals desire or the corporations desire to increase profits. The cost of corporate crimes to United States taxpayers is about $500 billion. Note that some forms of corporate corruption may not actually be criminal if they are not specifically illegal under a given system of laws. For example, some jurisdictions allow insider trading. The different businesses that organized crime figures have been known to operate is vast, including but not limited to pharmacies, import-export companies, check-cashing stores, tattoo parlors, zoos, online dating sites, liquor stores, motorcycle shops, banks, hotels, ranches and plantations, electronic stores, beauty salons, real estate companies, daycares, framing stores, taxicab companies, phone companies, shopping malls, jewelry stores, modeling agencies, dry cleaners, pawn shops, pool halls, clothing stores, freight companies, charity foundations, youth centers, recording studios, sporting goods stores, furniture stores, gyms, insurance companies, security companies, law firms, and private military companies.

====Labor racketeering====
Labor racketeering, as defined by the United States Department of Labor, is the infiltrating, exploiting, and controlling of employee benefit plan, union, employer entity, or workforce that is carried out through illegal, violent, or fraudulent means for profit or personal benefit. Labor racketeering has developed since the 1930s, affecting national and international construction, mining, energy production and transportation sectors immensely. Activity has focused on the importation of cheap or unfree labor, involvement with union and public officials (political corruption), and counterfeiting.

====Political corruption====

Political corruption is the use of legislated powers by government officials for illegitimate private gain. Misuse of government power for other purposes, such as repression of political opponents and general police brutality, is not considered political corruption. Neither are illegal acts by private persons or corporations not directly involved with the government. An illegal act by an officeholder constitutes political corruption only if the act is directly related to their official duties. Forms of corruption vary, but include bribery, extortion, cronyism, nepotism, patronage, graft, and embezzlement. While corruption may facilitate criminal enterprise such as drug trafficking, money laundering, and human trafficking, it is not restricted to these activities. The activities that constitute illegal corruption differ depending on the country or jurisdiction. For instance, certain political funding practices that are legal in one place may be illegal in another. In some cases, government officials have broad or poorly defined powers, which make it difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal actions. Worldwide, bribery alone is estimated to involve over 1 trillion US dollars annually. A state of unrestrained political corruption is known as a kleptocracy, literally meaning &quot;rule by thieves&quot;.

===Drug trafficking===

There are three major regions that center around drug trafficking, known as the Golden Triangle (Burma, Laos, Thailand), Golden Crescent (Afghanistan) and Central and South America. There are suggestions that due to the continuing decline in opium production in South East Asia, traffickers may begin to look to Afghanistan as a source of heroin.&quot;

With respect to organized crime and accelerating synthetic drug production in East and Southeast Asia, especially the Golden Triangle, Sam Gor, also known as The Company, is the most prominent international crime syndicate based in Asia-Pacific. It is made up of members of five different triads. Sam Gor is understood to be headed by Chinese-Canadian Tse Chi Lop. The Cantonese Chinese syndicate is primarily involved in drug trafficking, earning at least $8 billion per year. Sam Gor is alleged to control 40% of the Asia-Pacific methamphetamine market, while also trafficking heroin and ketamine. The organization is active in a variety of countries, including Myanmar, Thailand, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, China and Taiwan. Sam Gor previously produced meth in Southern China and is now believed to manufacture mainly in the Golden Triangle, specifically Shan State, Myanmar, responsible for much of the massive surge of crystal meth in recent years. The group is understood to be headed by Tse Chi Lop, a Chinese-Canadian gangster born in Guangzhou, China. Tse is a former member of the Hong Kong-based crime group, the Big Circle Gang. In 1988, Tse immigrated to Canada. In 1998, Tse was convicted of transporting heroin into the United States and served nine years behind bars. Tse has been compared in prominence to Joaquín &quot;El Chapo&quot; Guzmán and Pablo Escobar.

The U.S. supply of heroin comes mainly from foreign sources which include Southeast Asia&#x27;s Golden Triangle, Southwest Asia, and Latin America. Heroin comes in two forms. The first is its chemical base form which presents itself as brown and the second is a salt form that is white. The former is mainly produced in Afghanistan and some south-west countries while the latter had a history of being produced in only south-east Asia, but has since moved to also being produced in Afghanistan. There is some suspicion white Heroin is also being produced in Iran and Pakistan, but it is not confirmed. This area of Heroin production is referred to as the Golden Crescent. Heroin is not the only drug being used in these areas. The European market has shown signs of growing use in opioids on top of the long-term heroin use.

Drug traffickers produce drugs in drug laboratories and drug farms. A drug lab can range in size from small workshops to the size of small towns (such as Tranquilandia). A drug farm is a place where drug crops are grown before being made into illegal narcotics. A drug farm can range in size from smallholdings to large plantations. In addition to drug crops, it is also not uncommon for drug farms to also host livestock, both to have a legal source of revenue to help disguise the dirty money and so that the livestock can provide a source of organic fertilizer (such as manure) for the drug crops. There are multiple instances where traffickers set up some of their drug farms, safe houses and drug labs in remote wilderness areas. Once produced, the fully processed narcotics are then transported to more populated areas to be sold. Oftentimes the traffickers stationed in these remote criminal settlements, sustain themselves with a combination of survival skills and with food, supplies and workers being brought to them by associates. The reason that traffickers have been known to establish such remote compounds is so that the surrounding area can help to provide varying degrees of natural cover. Additionally the traffickers may also hope, that the surrounding terrain and local wildlife might serve to deter or impede either investigative authorities or rival gangs if the location of the clandestine compound were revealed. While usually thought of as an urban issue, drug trafficking is also known to be a problem in both suburban and rural areas as well.

===Human trafficking===
====Sex trafficking====

Human trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation is a major cause of contemporary sexual slavery and is primarily for prostituting women and children into sex industries. Sexual slavery encompasses most, if not all, forms of forced prostitution. The terms &quot;forced prostitution&quot; or &quot;enforced prostitution&quot; appear in international and humanitarian conventions but have been insufficiently understood and inconsistently applied. &quot;Forced prostitution&quot; generally refers to conditions of control over a person who is coerced by another to engage in sexual activity. Official numbers of individuals in sexual slavery worldwide vary. In 2001 International Organization for Migration estimated 400,000, the Federal Bureau of Investigation estimated 700,000 and UNICEF estimated 1.75 million. The most common destinations for victims of human trafficking are Thailand, Japan, Israel, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Turkey and the United States, according to a report by UNODC.

====Illegal immigration and people smuggling====
People smuggling is defined as &quot;the facilitation, transportation, attempted transportation or illegal entry of a person or persons across an international border, in violation of one or more countries laws, either clandestinely or through deception, such as the use of fraudulent documents&quot;. The term is understood as and often used interchangeably with migrant smuggling, which is defined by the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime as &quot;...the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a state party of which the person is not a national&quot;. This practice has increased over the past few decades and today now accounts for a significant portion of illegal immigration in countries around the world. People smuggling generally takes place with the consent of the person or persons being smuggled, and common reasons for individuals seeking to be smuggled include employment and economic opportunity, personal or familial betterment, and escape from persecution or conflict.

====Contemporary slavery and forced labor====
The number of slaves today remains as high as 12 million to 27 million. This is probably the smallest proportion of slaves to the rest of the world&#x27;s population in history. Most are debt slaves, largely in South Asia, who are under debt bondage incurred by lenders, sometimes even for generations. It is the fastest growing criminal industry and is predicted to eventually outgrow drug trafficking.

==Historical origins==
===Pre-nineteenth century===
Today, crime is sometimes thought of as an urban phenomenon, but for most of human history it was the rural interfaces that encountered the majority of crimes (bearing in mind the fact that for most of human history, rural areas were the vast majority of inhabited places). For the most part, within a village, members kept crime at very low rates; however, outsiders such as pirates, highwaymen and bandits attacked trade routes and roads, at times severely disrupting commerce, raising costs, insurance rates and prices to the consumer. According to criminologist Paul Lunde, &quot;Piracy and banditry were to the pre-industrial world what organized crime is to modern society.&quot;
As Lunde states, &quot;Barbarian conquerors, whether Vandals, Goths, the Norse, Turks or Mongols are not normally thought of as organized crime groups, yet they share many features associated with thriving criminal organizations. They were for the most part non-ideological, predominantly ethnically based, used violence and intimidation, and adhered to their own codes of law.&quot; In Ancient Rome, there was an infamous outlaw called Bulla Felix who organized and led a gang of up to six hundred bandits. Terrorism is linked to organized crime, but has political aims rather than solely financial ones, so there is overlap but separation between terrorism and organized crime.

==== Fencing in Ming and Qing China ====
A fence or receiver (銷贓者), was a merchant who bought and sold stolen goods. Fences were part of the extensive network of accomplices in the criminal underground of Ming and Qing China. Their occupation entailed criminal activity, but as fences often acted as liaisons between the more respectable community to the underground criminals, they were seen as living a &quot;precarious existence on the fringes of respectable society&quot;.

A fence worked alongside bandits, but in a different line of work. The network of criminal accomplices that was often acquired was essential to ensuring both the safety and the success of fences.

The path into the occupation of a fence stemmed, in a large degree, from necessity. As most fences came from the ranks of poorer people, they often took whatever work they could – both legal and illegal.

Like most bandits operated within their own community, fences also worked within their own town or village. For example, in some satellite areas of the capital, military troops lived within or close to the commoner population and they had the opportunity to hold illegal trades with commoners.

In areas like Baoding and Hejian, local peasants and community members not only purchased military livestock such as horses and cattle, but also helped to hide the &quot;stolen livestock from military allured by the profits&quot;. Local peasants and community members became fences and they hid criminal activities from officials in return for products or money from these soldiers.

===== Types of fences =====
Most fences were not individuals who only bought and sold stolen goods to make a living. The majority of fences had other occupations within the &quot;polite&quot; society and held a variety of official occupations. These occupations included laborers, coolies, and peddlers. Such individuals often encountered criminals in markets in their line of work, and, recognizing a potential avenue for an extra source of income, formed acquaintances and temporary associations for mutual aid and protection with criminals. In one example, an owner of a tea house overheard the conversation between Deng Yawen, a criminal and others planning a robbery and he offered to help to sell the loot for an exchange of spoils.

At times, the robbers themselves filled the role of fences, selling to people they met on the road. This may actually have been preferable for robbers in certain circumstances, because they would not have to pay the fence a portion of the spoils.

Butchers were also prime receivers for stolen animals because of the simple fact that owners could no longer recognize their livestock once butchers slaughtered them. Animals were very valuable commodities within Ming China and a robber could potentially sustain a living from stealing livestock and selling them to butcher-fences.

Although the vast majority of the time, fences worked with physical stolen property, fences who also worked as itinerant barbers also sold information as a good. Itinerant barbers often amassed important sources of information and news as they traveled, and sold significant pieces of information, often to criminals in search of places to hide or individuals to rob. In this way, itinerant barbers also served the role as a keeper of information that could be sold to both members of the criminal underground, as well as powerful clients in performing the function of a spy.

Fences not only sold items such as jewelry and clothing but was also involved in trafficking hostages that bandits had kidnapped. Women and children were the easiest and among the most common &quot;objects&quot; the fences sold. Most of the female hostages were sold to fences and then sold as prostitutes, wives or concubines. One example of human trafficking can be seen from Chen Akuei&#x27;s gang who abducted a servant girl and sold her to Lin Baimao, who in turn sold her for thirty parts of silver as wives. In contrast to women, who required beauty to sell for a high price, children were sold regardless of their physical appearance or family background. Children were often sold as servants or entertainers, while young girls were often sold as prostitutes.

===== Network of connections =====
Like merchants of honest goods, one of the most significant tools of a fence was their network of connections. As they were the middlemen between robbers and clients, fences needed to form and maintain connections in both the &quot;polite&quot; society, as well as among criminals. However, there were a few exceptions in which members of the so-called &quot;well-respected&quot; society became receivers and harborers. They not only help bandits to sell the stolen goods but also acted as agents of bandits to collect protection money from local merchants and residents. These &quot;part-time&quot; fences with high social status used their connection with bandits to help themselves gain social capital as well as wealth.

It was extremely important to their occupation that fences maintained a positive relationship with their customers, especially their richer gentry clients. When some members of the local elites joined the ranks of fences, they not only protected bandits to protect their business interests, they actively took down any potential threats to their illegal profiting, even government officials. In the Zhejiang Province, the local elites not only got the provincial commissioner, Zhu Wan, dismissed from his office but also eventually &quot;[drove] him to suicide&quot;. This was possible because fences often had legal means of making a living, as well as illegal activities and could threaten to turn in bandits to the authorities.

It was also essential for them to maintain a relationship with bandits. However, it was just as true that bandits needed fences to make a living. As a result, fences often held dominance in their relationship with bandits and fences could exploit their position, cheating the bandits by manipulating the prices they paid bandits for the stolen property.

===== Safe houses =====
Aside from simply buying and selling stolen goods, fences often played additional roles in the criminal underground of early China. Because of the high floating population in public places such as inns and tea houses, they often became ideal places for bandits and gangs to gather to exchange information and plan for their next crime. Harborers, people who provided safe houses for criminals, often played the role of receiving stolen goods from their harbored criminals to sell to other customers. Safe houses included inns, tea houses, brothels, opium dens, as well as gambling parlors and employees or owners of such institutions often functioned as harborers, as well as fences. These safe houses were located in places with high floating populations and people from all kinds of social backgrounds.

Brothels themselves helped these bandits to hide and sell stolen goods because of the special Ming Law that exempted brothels from being held responsible &quot;for the criminal actions of their clients.&quot; Even though the government required owners of these places to report any suspicious activities, lack of enforcement from the government itself and some of the owners being fences for the bandits made an ideal safe house for bandits and gangs.

Pawnshops were also often affiliated with fencing stolen goods. The owners or employees of such shops often paid cash for stolen goods at a price a great deal below market value to bandits, who were often desperate for money, and resold the goods to earn a profit.

===== Punishments for fences =====
Two different Ming Laws, the &quot;Da Ming Lü&quot; 大明律 and the &quot;Da Gao&quot; 大诰, drafted by the Hongwu Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang, sentenced fences with different penalties based on the categories and prices of the products that were stolen.

In coastal regions, illegal trading with foreigners, as well as smuggling, became a huge concern for the government during the middle to late Ming era. In order to prohibit this crime, the government passed a law in which illegal smugglers who traded with foreigners without the consent of the government would be punished with exile to the border for military service.

In areas where military troops were stationed, stealing and selling military property would result in a more severe punishment. In the Jiaqing time, a case was recorded of stealing and selling military horses. The emperor himself gave direction that the thieves who stole the horses and the people who helped to sell the horses would be put on cangue and sent to labor in a border military camp.

In the salt mines, the penalty for workers who stole salt and people who sold the stolen salt was the most severe. Anyone who was arrested and found guilty of stealing and selling government salt was put to death.

===Nineteenth century===
During the Victorian era, criminals and gangs started to form organizations which would collectively become London&#x27;s criminal underworld. Criminal societies in the underworld started to develop their own ranks and groups which were sometimes called &quot;families&quot; and were often made up of lower-classes and operated on pick-pocketry, prostitution, forgery and counterfeiting, commercial burglary and even money laundering schemes. Unique also were the use of slang and argots used by Victorian criminal societies to distinguish each other, like those propagated by street gangs like the Peaky Blinders. One of the most infamous crime bosses in the Victorian underworld was Adam Worth, who was nicknamed &quot;the Napoleon of the criminal world&quot; or &quot;the Napoleon of Crime&quot; and became the inspiration behind the popular character of Professor Moriarty.

Organized crime in the United States first came to prominence in the Old West and historians such as Brian J. Robb and Erin H. Turner traced the first organized crime syndicates to the Coschise Cowboy Gang and the Wild Bunch. The Cochise Cowboys, though loosely organized, were unique for their criminal operations in the Mexican border, in which they would steal and sell cattle as well smuggled contraband goods in between the countries. In the Old west there were other examples of gangs that operated in ways similar to an organized crime syndicate such as the Innocents gang, the Jim Miller gang, the Soapy Smith gang, the Belle Starr gang and the Bob Dozier gang.

===Twentieth century===

Donald Cressey&#x27;s Cosa Nostra model studied Mafia families exclusively and this limits his broader findings. Structures are formal and rational with allocated tasks, limits on entrance, and influence on the rules established for organizational maintenance and sustainability. In this context there is a difference between organized and professional crime; there is well-defined hierarchy of roles for leaders and members, underlying rules and specific goals that determine their behavior and these are formed as a social system, one that was rationally designed to maximize profits and to provide forbidden goods. Albini saw organized criminal behavior as consisting of networks of patrons and clients, rather than rational hierarchies or secret societies.

The networks are characterized by a loose system of power relations. Each participant is interested in furthering his own welfare. Criminal entrepreneurs are the patrons and they exchange information with their clients in order to obtain their support. Clients include members of gangs, local and national politicians, government officials and people engaged in legitimate business. People in the network may not directly be part of the core criminal organization. Furthering the approach of both Cressey and Albini, Ianni and Ianni studied Italian-American crime syndicates in New York and other cities.

Kinship is seen as the basis of organized crime rather than the structures Cressey had identified; this includes fictive godparental and affinitive ties as well as those based on blood relations and it is the impersonal actions, not the status or affiliations of their members, that define the group. Rules of conduct and behavioral aspects of power and networks and roles include the following:
* family operates as a social unit, with social and business functions merged;
* leadership positions down to middle management are kinship based;
* the higher the position, the closer the kinship relationship;
* group assigns leadership positions to a central group of family members, including fictive god-parental relationship reinforcement;
* the leadership group are assigned to legal or illegal enterprises, but not both; and,
* transfer of money, from legal and illegal business, and back to illegal business is by individuals, not companies.
Strong family ties are derived from the traditions of southern Italy, where family rather than the church or state is the basis of social order and morality.

====The &quot;disorganized crime&quot; and choice theses====
One of the most important trends to emerge in criminological thinking about OC in recent years is the suggestion that it is not, in a formal sense, &quot;organized&quot; at all. Evidence includes lack of centralized control, absence of formal lines of communication, fragmented organizational structure. It is distinctively disorganized. For example, Seattle&#x27;s crime network in the 1970s and 80s consisted of groups of businessmen, politicians and of law enforcement officers. They all had links to a national network via Meyer Lansky, who was powerful, but there was no evidence that Lansky or anyone else exercised centralized control over them.

While some crime involved well-known criminal hierarchies in the city, criminal activity was not subject to central management by these hierarchies nor by other controlling groups, nor were activities limited to a finite number of objectives. The networks of criminals involved with the crimes did not exhibit organizational cohesion. Too much emphasis had been placed on the Mafia as controlling OC. The Mafia were certainly powerful but they &quot;were part of a heterogeneous underworld, a network characterized by complex webs of relationships.&quot; OC groups were violent and aimed at making money but because of the lack of structure and fragmentation of objectives, they were &quot;disorganized&quot;.

Further studies showed neither bureaucracy nor kinship groups are the primary structure of organized crime; rather, the primary structures were found to lie in partnerships or a series of joint business ventures. Despite these conclusions, all researchers observed a degree of managerial activities among the groups they studied. All observed networks and a degree of persistence, and there may be utility in focusing on the identification of organizing roles of people and events rather than the group&#x27;s structure. There may be three main approaches to understand the organizations in terms of their roles as social systems:
* organizations as rational systems: Highly formalized structures in terms of bureaucracy&#x27;s and hierarchy, with formal systems of rules regarding authority and highly specific goals;
* organizations as natural systems: Participants may regard the organization as an end in itself, not merely a means to some other end. Promoting group values to maintain solidarity is high on the agenda. They do not rely on profit maximization. Their perversity and violence in respect of relationships is often remarkable, but they are characterized by their focus on the connections between their members, their associates and their victims; and,
* organizations open systems: High levels of interdependence between themselves and the environment in which they operate. There is no one way in which they are organized or how they operate. They are adaptable and change to meet the demands of their changing environments and circumstances.
Organized crime groups may be a combination of all three.

====International governance approach====
International consensus on defining organized crime has become important since the 1970s due to its increased prevalence and impact. e.g., UN in 1976 and EU 1998. OC is &quot;...the large scale and complex criminal activity carried on by groups of persons, however loosely or tightly organized for the enrichment of those participating at the expense of the community and its members. It is frequently accomplished through ruthless disregard of any law, including offences against the person and frequently in connection with political corruption.&quot; (UN) &quot;A criminal organization shall mean a lasting, structured association of two or more persons, acting in concert with a view to committing crimes or other offenses which are punishable by deprivation of liberty or a detention order of a maximum of at least four years or a more serious penalty, whether such crimes or offenses are an end in themselves or a means of obtaining material benefits and, if necessary, of improperly influencing the operation of public authorities.&quot; (UE) Not all groups exhibit the same characteristics of structure. However, violence and corruption and the pursuit of multiple enterprises and continuity serve to form the essence of OC activity.

There are eleven characteristics from the European Commission and Europol pertinent to a working definition of organized crime. Six of those must be satisfied and the four in italics are mandatory. Summarized, they are:
* &quot;more than two people&quot;;
* their own appointed tasks;
* activity over a &quot;prolonged or indefinite period of time&quot;;
* the use discipline or control;
* perpetration of &quot;serious criminal offense&quot;s;
* operations on an international or transnational level;
* the use violence or other intimidation;
* the use of commercial or businesslike structures;
* engagement in money laundering;
* exertion of influence on politics, media, public administration, judicial authorities or the economy; and,
* &quot;motivated by the pursuit of profit or power,&quot;
with the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (the &quot;Palermo Convention&quot;) having a similar definition:
* organized criminal: structured group, three or more people, one or more serious crimes, in order to obtain financial or other material benefit;
* serious crime: offense punishable by at least four years in prison; and,
* structured group: Not randomly formed but does not need formal structure,
Others stress the importance of power, profit and perpetuity, defining organized criminal behavior as:
* nonideological: i.e., profit driven;
* hierarchical: few elites and many operatives;
* limited or exclusive membership: maintain secrecy and loyalty of members;
* perpetuating itself: Recruitment process and policy;
* willing to use illegal violence and bribery;
* specialized division of labor: to achieve organization goal;
* monopolistic: Market control to maximize profits; and,
* has explicit rules and regulations: Codes of honor.

Definitions need to bring together its legal and social elements. OC has widespread social, political and economic effects. It uses violence and corruption to achieve its ends: &quot;OC when group primarily focused on illegal profits systematically commit crimes that adversely affect society and are capable of successfully shielding their activities, in particular by being willing to use physical violence or eliminate individuals by way of corruption.&quot;

It is a mistake to use the term &quot;OC&quot; as though it denotes a clear and well-defined phenomenon. The evidence regarding OC &quot;shows a less well-organized, very diversified landscape of organizing criminals…the economic activities of these organizing criminals can be better described from the viewpoint of &#x27;crime enterprises&#x27; than from a conceptually unclear frameworks such as &#x27;OC&#x27;.&quot; Many of the definitions emphasize the &#x27;group nature&#x27; of OC, the &#x27;organization&#x27; of its members, its use of violence or corruption to achieve its goals and its extra-jurisdictional character...OC may appear in many forms at different times and in different places. Due to the variety of definitions, there is &quot;evident danger&quot; in asking &quot;what is OC?&quot; and expecting a simple answer.

====The locus of power and organized crime====
Some espouse that all organized crime operates at an international level, though there is currently no international court capable of trying offenses resulting from such activities (the International Criminal Court&#x27;s remit extends only to dealing with people accused of offenses against humanity, e.g., genocide). If a network operates primarily from one jurisdiction and carries out its illicit operations there and in some other jurisdictions it is &#x27;international,&#x27; though it may be appropriate to use the term &#x27;transnational&#x27; only to label the activities of a major crime group that is centered in no one jurisdiction but operating in many. The understanding of organized crime has therefore progressed to combined internationalization and an understanding of social conflict into one of power, control, efficiency risk and utility, all within the context of organizational theory. The accumulation of social, economic and political power have sustained themselves as a core concerns of all criminal organizations:
* social: criminal groups seek to develop social control in relation to particular communities;
* economic: seek to exert influence by means of corruption and by coercion of legitimate and illegitimate praxis; and,
* political: criminal groups use corruption and violence to attain power and status.

Contemporary organized crime may be very different from traditional Mafia style, particularly in terms of the distribution and centralization of power, authority structures and the concept of &#x27;control&#x27; over one&#x27;s territory and organization. There is a tendency away from centralization of power and reliance upon family ties towards a fragmentation of structures and informality of relationships in crime groups. Organized crime most typically flourishes when a central government and civil society is disorganized, weak, absent or untrustworthy.

This may occur in a society facing periods of political, economic or social turmoil or transition, such as a change of government or a period of rapid economic development, particularly if the society lacks strong and established institutions and the rule of law. The dissolution of the Soviet Union and the Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe that saw the downfall of the Communist Bloc created a breeding ground for criminal organizations.

The newest growth sectors for organized crime are identity theft and online extortion. These activities are troubling because they discourage consumers from using the Internet for e-commerce. E-commerce was supposed to level the playing ground between small and large businesses, but the growth of online organized crime is leading to the opposite effect; large businesses are able to afford more bandwidth (to resist denial-of-service attacks) and superior security. Furthermore, organized crime using the Internet is much harder to trace down for the police (even though they increasingly deploy cybercops) since most police forces and law enforcement agencies operate within a local or national jurisdiction while the Internet makes it easier for criminal organizations to operate across such boundaries without detection.

In the past criminal organizations have naturally limited themselves by their need to expand, putting them in competition with each other. This competition, often leading to violence, uses valuable resources such as manpower (either killed or sent to prison), equipment and finances. In the United States, James &quot;Whitey&quot; Bulger, the Irish Mob boss of the Winter Hill Gang in Boston turned informant for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). He used this position to eliminate competition and consolidate power within the city of Boston which led to the imprisonment of several senior organized crime figures including Gennaro Angiulo, underboss of the Patriarca crime family. Infighting sometimes occurs within an organization, such as the Castellamarese war of 1930–31 and the Boston Irish Mob Wars of the 1960s and 1970s.

Today criminal organizations are increasingly working together, realizing that it is better to work in cooperation rather than in competition with each other (once again, consolidating power). This has led to the rise of global criminal organizations such as Mara Salvatrucha, 18th Street gang and Barrio Azteca. The American Mafia, in addition to having links with organized crime groups in Italy such as the Camorra, the &#x27;Ndrangheta, Sacra Corona Unita and Sicilian Mafia, has at various times done business with the Irish Mob, Jewish-American organized crime, the Japanese yakuza, Indian mafia, the Russian mafia, Thief in law and Post-Soviet Organized crime groups, the Chinese triads, Chinese Tongs and Asian street gangs, Motorcycle Gangs and numerous White, Black and Hispanic prison and street gangs. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated that organized crime groups held $322 billion in assets in 2005.

This rise in cooperation between criminal organizations has meant that law enforcement agencies are increasingly having to work together. The FBI operates an organized crime section from its headquarters in Washington, D.C. and is known to work with other national (e.g., Polizia di Stato, Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police), federal (e.g., Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Drug Enforcement Administration, United States Marshals Service, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, United States Secret Service, US Diplomatic Security Service, United States Postal Inspection Service, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, United States Border Patrol, and the United States Coast Guard), state (e.g., Massachusetts State Police Special Investigation Unit, New Jersey State Police organized crime unit, Pennsylvania State Police organized crime unit and the New York State Police Bureau of Criminal Investigation) and city (e.g., New York City Police Department Organized Crime Unit, Philadelphia Police Department Organized crime unit, Chicago Police Organized Crime Unit and the Los Angeles Police Department Special Operations Division) law enforcement agencies.

==Academic analysis==

===Criminal psychology===
Criminal psychology is defined as the study of the intentions, behaviors, and actions of a criminal or someone who allows themselves to participate in criminal behavior. The goal is to understand what is going on in the criminal&#x27;s head and explain why they are doing what they are doing. This varies depending on whether the person is facing the punishment for what they did, are roaming free, or if they are punishing themselves. Criminal psychologists get called to court to explain the inside the mind of the criminal.

====Rational choice====

This theory treats all individuals as rational operators, committing criminal acts after consideration of all associated risks (detection and punishment) compared with the rewards of crimes (personal, financial etc.). Little emphasis is placed on the offenders&#x27; emotional state. The role of criminal organizations in lowering the perceptions of risk and increasing the likelihood of personal benefit is prioritized by this approach, with the organizations structure, purpose, and activity being indicative of the rational choices made by criminals and their organizers.

====Deterrence====

This theory sees criminal behavior as reflective of an individual, internal calculation by the criminal that the benefits associated with offending (whether financial or otherwise) outweigh the perceived risks. The perceived strength, importance or infallibility of the criminal organization is directly proportional to the types of crime committed, their intensity and arguably the level of community response. The benefits of participating in organized crime (higher financial rewards, greater socioeconomic control and influence, protection of the family or significant others, perceived freedoms from &#x27;oppressive&#x27; laws or norms) contribute greatly to the psychology behind highly organized group offending.

====Social learning====

Criminals learn through associations with one another. The success of organized crime groups is therefore dependent upon the strength of their communication and the enforcement of their value systems, the recruitment and training processes employed to sustain, build or fill gaps in criminal operations. An understanding of this theory sees close associations between criminals, imitation of superiors, and understanding of value systems, processes and authority as the main drivers behind organized crime. Interpersonal relationships define the motivations the individual develops, with the effect of family or peer criminal activity being a strong predictor of inter-generational offending. This theory also developed to include the strengths and weaknesses of reinforcement, which in the context of continuing criminal enterprises may be used to help understand propensities for certain crimes or victims, level of integration into the mainstream culture and likelihood of recidivism / success in rehabilitation.

====Enterprise====

Under this theory, organized crime exists because legitimate markets leave many customers and potential customers unsatisfied. High demand for a particular good or service (e.g., drugs, prostitution, arms, slaves), low levels of risk detection and high profits lead to a conducive environment for entrepreneurial criminal groups to enter the market and profit by supplying those goods and services. For success, there must be:
* an identified market; and,
* a certain rate of consumption (demand) to maintain profit and outweigh perceived risks.

Under these conditions competition is discouraged, ensuring criminal monopolies sustain profits. Legal substitution of goods or services may (by increasing competition) force the dynamic of organized criminal operations to adjust, as will deterrence measures (reducing demand), and the restriction of resources (controlling the ability to supply or produce to supply).

====Differential association====

Sutherland goes further to say that deviancy is contingent on conflicting groups within society, and that such groups struggle over the means to define what is criminal or deviant within society. Criminal organizations therefore gravitate around illegal avenues of production, profit-making, protectionism or social control and attempt (by increasing their operations or membership) to make these acceptable. This also explains the propensity of criminal organizations to develop protection rackets, to coerce through the use of violence, aggression and threatening behavior (at times termed &#x27;terrorism&#x27;). Preoccupation with methods of accumulating profit highlight the lack of legitimate means to achieve economic or social advantage, as does the organization of white-collar crime or political corruption (though it is debatable whether these are based on wealth, power or both). The ability to effect social norms and practices through political and economic influence (and the enforcement or normalization of criminogenic needs) may be defined by differential association theory.

===Critical criminology and sociology===

====Social disorganization====

Social disorganization theory is intended to be applied to neighborhood level street crime, thus the context of gang activity, loosely formed criminal associations or networks, socioeconomic demographic impacts, legitimate access to public resources, employment or education, and mobility give it relevance to organized crime. Where the upper- and lower-classes live in close proximity this can result in feelings of anger, hostility, social injustice and frustration. Criminals experience poverty; and witness affluence they are deprived of and which is virtually impossible for them to attain through conventional means. The concept of neighborhood is central to this theory, as it defines the social learning, locus of control, cultural influences and access to social opportunity experienced by criminals and the groups they form. Fear of or lack of trust in mainstream authority may also be a key contributor to social disorganization; organized crime groups replicate such figures and thus ensure control over the counter-culture. This theory has tended to view violent or antisocial behavior by gangs as reflective of their social disorganization rather than as a product or tool of their organization.

====Anomie====

Sociologist Robert K. Merton believed deviance depended on society&#x27;s definition of success, and the desires of individuals to achieve success through socially defined avenues. Criminality becomes attractive when expectations of being able to fulfill goals (therefore achieving success) by legitimate means cannot be fulfilled. Criminal organizations capitalize on states with a lack of norm by imposing criminogenic needs and illicit avenues to achieve them. This has been used as the basis for numerous meta-theories of organized crime through its integration of social learning, cultural deviance, and criminogenic motivations. If crime is seen as a function of anomie, organized behavior produces stability, increases protection or security, and may be directly proportional to market forces as expressed by entrepreneurship- or risk-based approaches. It is the inadequate supply of legitimate opportunities that constrains the ability for the individual to pursue valued societal goals and reduces the likelihood that using legitimate opportunities will enable them to satisfy such goals (due to their position in society).

====Cultural deviance====
Criminals violate the law because they belong to a unique subculture - the counter-culture - their values and norms conflicting with those of the working-, middle- or upper-classes upon which criminal laws are based. This subculture shares an alternative lifestyle, language and culture, and is generally typified by being tough, taking care of their own affairs and rejecting government authority. Role models include drug dealers, thieves and pimps, as they have achieved success and wealth not otherwise available through socially-provided opportunities. It is through modeling organized crime as a counter-cultural avenue to success that such organizations are sustained.

====Alien conspiracy/queer ladder of mobility====

The alien conspiracy theory and queer ladder of mobility theories state that ethnicity and &#x27;outsider&#x27; status (immigrants, or those not within the dominant ethnocentric groups) and their influences are thought to dictate the prevalence of organized crime in society. The alien theory posits that the contemporary structures of organized crime gained prominence during the 1860s in Sicily and that elements of the Sicilian population are responsible for the foundation of most European and North American organized crime, made up of Italian-dominated crime families. Bell&#x27;s theory of the &#x27;queer ladder of mobility&#x27; hypothesized that &#x27;ethnic succession&#x27; (the attainment of power and control by one more marginalized ethnic group over other less marginalized groups) occurs by promoting the perpetration of criminal activities within a disenfranchised or oppressed demographic. Whilst early organized crime was dominated by the Irish Mob (early 1800s), they were relatively substituted by the Sicilian Mafia and Italian-American Mafia, the Aryan Brotherhood (1960s onward), Colombian Medellín Cartel and Cali cartel (mid-1970s - 1990s), and more recently the Mexican Tijuana Cartel (late 1980s onward), Mexican Los Zetas (late 1990s to onward), the Russian Mafia (1988 onward), terrorism-related organized crime Al-Qaeda (1988 onward), the Taliban (1994 onward), and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (2010s to onward). Many argue this misinterprets and overstates the role of ethnicity in organized crime. A contradiction of this theory is that syndicates had developed long before large-scale Sicilian immigration in the 1860s, with these immigrants merely joining a widespread phenomenon of crime and corruption.

==Legislative frameworks and policing measures==

;International
* Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (the &#x27;Palermo Convention&#x27;) - the international treaty against organized crime; includes the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air
;Canada
* Criminal Code, RSC 1985, c C-46, ss 467.1 to 467.2 . 
;China
* Anti-Organized Crime Law of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
;India
* Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act
;Republic of Ireland
* Criminal Assets Bureau
;Italy
*Article 41-bis prison regime

;United Kingdom
* Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005
;United States
* Federal Anti-Racketeering Act (the &#x27;Hobbs Act&#x27;) 1946
* Federal Wire Act 1961
* Bank Secrecy Act 1970
* Organized Crime Control Act 1970
* Title 21 of the United States Code 1970
* Continuing Criminal Enterprise (contemporary)
* Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (the &#x27;RICO Act&#x27;) 1970
* Money Laundering Control Act 1986
* United States Patriot Act 2001
* Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009

==See also==
* List of criminal enterprises, gangs, and syndicates
* Timeline of organized crime
* Global Organized Crime Index

==References==
==External links==

* Mob Life: Gangster Kings of Crime — slideshow by &quot;Life&quot; magazine
* UNODC — United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — sub-section dealing with organized crime worldwide
* &quot;Organized Crime&quot; — Oxford Bibliographies Online: Criminology. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="0" end="15" title="Organized crime" label="Organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697179" start="33" end="46" title="transnational organized crime" label="transnational"/>
<link wikidata="Q312484" start="275" end="290" title="terrorist organizations" label="terrorist group"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="293" end="305" title="Rebel groups" label="rebel forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="311" end="321" title="Separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="527" end="540" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="883" end="899" title="protection racket" label="protection money"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="918" end="930" title="Street gangs" label="Street gangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071976" start="1149" end="1155" title="Chicago Outfit" label="outfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="1159" end="1163" title="gang" label="gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612699" start="1165" end="1177" title="crime family" label="crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="1179" end="1184" title="mafia" label="mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102072" start="1592" end="1605" title="Italian Mafia" label="Italian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="1622" end="1642" title="American Mafia" label="American counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="1744" end="1757" title="Russian mafia" label="Russian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329978" start="1771" end="1777" title="triad (organized crime)" label="triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="1818" end="1824" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="1875" end="1885" title="militaries" label="militaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="1887" end="1900" title="police forces" label="police forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="2146" end="2154" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="2156" end="2166" title="loan shark" label="loan shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="2171" end="2187" title="Illegal drug trade" label="drug-trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="2189" end="2201" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="2207" end="2212" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137778" start="2315" end="2333" title="white-collar crime" label="white-collar crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449702" start="2335" end="2351" title="financial crimes" label="financial crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571535" start="2353" end="2368" title="political crime" label="political crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="2371" end="2381" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="2401" end="2408" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q392160" start="2511" end="2523" title="failed state" label="failed state"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="2755" end="2764" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006045" start="2914" end="2931" title="business oligarch" label="business oligarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="3030" end="3043" title="kleptocracies" label="kleptocracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q604883" start="3045" end="3056" title="mafia state" label="mafia state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9048751" start="3059" end="3070" title="narco-state" label="narco-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="3075" end="3093" title="narcokleptocracy" label="narcokleptocracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543464" start="3126" end="3137" title="clientelism" label="clientelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="3142" end="3162" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102059" start="3303" end="3330" title="Organized Crime Control Act" label="Organized Crime Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="3523" end="3535" title="Racket (crime)" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="3740" end="3762" title="Italian-American Mafia" label="Italian-American Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="3881" end="3907" title="U.S. Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="4284" end="4315" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586503" start="4677" end="4684" title="Sinaloa Cartel" label="Sinaloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126837" start="4686" end="4708" title="Jalisco New Generation Cartel" label="Jalisco New Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575189" start="4710" end="4716" title="Juárez Cartel" label="Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473300" start="4718" end="4722" title="Gulf Cartel" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q248337" start="4724" end="4733" title="Los Zetas Cartel" label="Los Zetas"/>
<link wikidata="Q816215" start="4739" end="4752" title="Beltrán-Leyva Cartel" label="Beltrán-Leyva"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="4815" end="4831" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581248" start="4873" end="4904" title="Sustainable Development Goal 16" label="Sustainable Development Goal 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="4972" end="4983" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="2030 Agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="5005" end="5025" title="football hooliganism" label="football hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="5668" end="5673" title="Employment" label="labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q578361" start="7238" end="7252" title="house of cards" label="house of cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="10402" end="10418" title="social exclusion" label="social exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="12490" end="12510" title="vertical integration" label="vertical integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="14719" end="14733" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="14735" end="14751" title="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta" label="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q329978" start="14753" end="14783" title="Triad society" label="ethnic Chinese criminal groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="14794" end="14800" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="14805" end="14815" title="Boryokudan" label="Boryokudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034076" start="14818" end="14851" title="Illegal drug trade in Colombia" label="Colombian drug trafficking groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843062" start="14853" end="14877" title="Organized crime in Nigeria" label="Nigerian organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405176" start="14886" end="14900" title="Corsican mafia" label="Corsican mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059422" start="14902" end="14924" title="Kkangpae" label="Korean criminal groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843053" start="14929" end="14944" title="Jamaican posses" label="Jamaican posses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374463" start="15849" end="15861" title="data science" label="data science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="15866" end="15889" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="15952" end="15960" title="big data" label="big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="15981" end="15997" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q847115" start="16288" end="16301" title="Google Trends" label="Google Trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q548007" start="16790" end="16799" title="car theft" label="car theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756454" start="16866" end="16875" title="art theft" label="art theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336585" start="16877" end="16888" title="Metal theft" label="Metal theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q806824" start="16890" end="16902" title="bank robbery" label="bank robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q383906" start="16949" end="16960" title="shoplifting" label="shoplifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="16962" end="16978" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="computer hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333375" start="16999" end="17017" title="Economic Espionage Act of 1996" label="economic espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="17019" end="17031" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q471880" start="17033" end="17047" title="identity theft" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570975" start="17053" end="17069" title="securities fraud" label="securities fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268220" start="17077" end="17090" title="pump and dump" label="pump and dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903976" start="17181" end="17192" title="bid rigging" label="bid rigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977245" start="17276" end="17287" title="rum-running" label="rum-running"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116027" start="17304" end="17315" title="illicit cigarette trade" label="buttlegging"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="17399" end="17406" title="Corruption" label="corrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="17488" end="17504" title="Racketeering" label="criminal rackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="17527" end="17539" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="17714" end="17726" title="blackmailing" label="blackmailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="17728" end="17741" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q227675" start="17743" end="17760" title="Backyard breeder" label="backyard breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="17762" end="17769" title="bombing" label="bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q664702" start="17772" end="17782" title="bookmaking" label="bookmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520201" start="17787" end="17803" title="illegal gambling" label="illegal gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="17805" end="17821" title="confidence trick" label="confidence trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="17864" end="17886" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="17888" end="17902" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336585" start="17929" end="17940" title="metal theft" label="metal theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q113588644" start="17942" end="17949" title="fence (criminal)" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="17951" end="17961" title="kidnapping" label="kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q21129531" start="17963" end="17978" title="sex trafficking" label="sex trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="17980" end="17989" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="17991" end="18007" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431020" start="18009" end="18025" title="arms trafficking" label="arms trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906114" start="18079" end="18100" title="antiquities" label="antiquities smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147995" start="18102" end="18119" title="organ trafficking" label="organ trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="18121" end="18137" title="contract killing" label="contract killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656872" start="18139" end="18164" title="identity document forgery" label="identity document forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="18166" end="18182" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="18184" end="18191" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527023" start="18193" end="18202" title="seduction" label="seduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="18204" end="18219" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q838081" start="18221" end="18236" title="insurance fraud" label="insurance fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208291" start="18238" end="18251" title="point shaving" label="point shaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="18253" end="18265" title="price fixing" label="price fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067871" start="18300" end="18325" title="illegal taxicab operation" label="illegal taxicab operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16925235" start="18454" end="18468" title="passport fraud" label="passport fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="18570" end="18597" title="trafficking in human beings" label="trafficking in human beings"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738925" start="18693" end="18701" title="Skimming (fraud)" label="skimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="18896" end="18916" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="19440" end="19447" title="Assault" label="Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="19462" end="19470" title="coercive" label="coercive"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="19560" end="19569" title="robbery" label="robberies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064904" start="20033" end="20054" title="Major trauma" label="major trauma assaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="20308" end="20314" title="Murder" label="Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="20372" end="20378" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="20382" end="20396" title="Sicilian mafia" label="Sicilian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="20652" end="20659" title="hit man" label="hit man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21652" end="21674" title="Disposal of human corpses#Criminal disposal" label="dispose of dead bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="21786" end="21789" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="21794" end="21797" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="22473" end="22482" title="scavenger" label="scavenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360677" start="22505" end="22516" title="crime scene" label="crime scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="22821" end="22842" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256171" start="23413" end="23431" title="community policing" label="community policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="23571" end="23582" title="community" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q338154" start="23628" end="23641" title="Anti-Catholicism in the United States" label="anti-catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853398" start="23646" end="23658" title="Antisemitism in the United States" label="anti-semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="23659" end="23671" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="23735" end="23742" title="American Mafia" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="23744" end="23749" title="Irish Mob" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q656916" start="23751" end="23757" title="Polish-American organized crime" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q620642" start="23762" end="23768" title="Jewish-American organized crime" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914799" start="23881" end="23895" title="Gregory Scarpa" label="Gregory Scarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q468158" start="24103" end="24123" title="German American Bund" label="German American Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q312167" start="24220" end="24232" title="Meyer Lansky" label="Meyer Lansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q315487" start="24234" end="24246" title="Bugsy Siegel" label="Bugsy Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192519" start="24251" end="24260" title="Jack Ruby" label="Jack Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="24462" end="24481" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985133" start="24483" end="24502" title="White Panther Party" label="White Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572855" start="24508" end="24519" title="Young Lords" label="Young Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="24721" end="24738" title="protection racket" label="protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q113588644" start="25051" end="25058" title="Fence (criminal)" label="fencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046933" start="25461" end="25476" title="Medellín Cartel" label="Medellín Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112713" start="25524" end="25547" title="Muerte a Secuestradores" label="Muerte a Secuestradores"/>
<link wikidata="Q155801" start="25615" end="25619" title="Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia" label="FARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789014" start="25624" end="25628" title="19th of April Movement" label="M-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518627" start="25817" end="25839" title="Norte del Valle Cartel" label="Norte del Valle Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026717" start="25844" end="25855" title="Cali Cartel" label="Cali Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758113" start="25901" end="25910" title="Los Pepes" label="Los Pepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441623" start="26224" end="26235" title="Search Bloc" label="Search Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754732" start="26385" end="26404" title="Oficina de Envigado" label="Oficina de Envigado"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="26882" end="26896" title="Piracy off the coast of Somalia" label="Somali pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q675637" start="26954" end="26969" title="illegal fishing" label="illegal fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="26974" end="26985" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="27109" end="27116" title="fishery" label="fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16301685" start="27167" end="27200" title="Grupos de autodefensa comunitaria" label="Grupos de autodefensa comunitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="27227" end="27242" title="Illegal logging" label="illegal loggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384591" start="27248" end="27276" title="La Familia Michoacana" label="La Familia Michoacana Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="27295" end="27299" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422424" start="27313" end="27335" title="Knights Templar Cartel" label="Knights Templar Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782218" start="27619" end="27630" title="Los Viagras" label="Los Viagras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126837" start="27657" end="27686" title="Jalisco New Generation Cartel" label="Jalisco New Generation Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435477" start="27692" end="27709" title="Minuteman Project" label="Minuteman Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="27715" end="27724" title="Far-right politics in the United States" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="27773" end="27792" title="illegal immigration" label="illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="27804" end="27820" title="US-Mexico border" label="US-Mexico border"/>
<link wikidata="Q127784" start="27869" end="27885" title="MS-13" label="Mara Salvatrucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854900" start="27910" end="27926" title="people smuggling" label="people smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559322" start="28279" end="28291" title="Sombra Negra" label="Sombra Negra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464553" start="28293" end="28313" title="Friends Stand United" label="Friends Stand United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254846" start="28315" end="28351" title="People Against Gangsterism and Drugs" label="People Against Gangsterism and Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28357" end="28364" title="Waray-Waray gangs#Philippine Drug War" label="OG Imba"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="28569" end="28583" title="animal welfare" label="animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849110" start="28625" end="28642" title="Outlaw motorcycle club" label="outlaw biker gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="28760" end="28769" title="cockfight" label="cockfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="28810" end="28814" title="cats" label="cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288265" start="28828" end="28840" title="Dog fighting in the United States" label="dog fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="28861" end="28865" title="pets" label="pets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494324" start="28918" end="28929" title="prison gang" label="prison gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13587273" start="29022" end="29034" title="child murder" label="child murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="29036" end="29050" title="serial killing" label="serial killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="29052" end="29062" title="pedophilia" label="pedophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="29064" end="29075" title="hate crimes" label="hate crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="29077" end="29094" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="29100" end="29104" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q427883" start="29156" end="29163" title="Elder abuse" label="elderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="29165" end="29172" title="Animal cruelty" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281181" start="29178" end="29186" title="Disability abuse" label="disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="29332" end="29347" title="Gang" label="gang syndicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="29473" end="29481" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560381" start="29493" end="29507" title="home invasions" label="home invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="29522" end="29530" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="29532" end="29546" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="29570" end="29587" title="child molestation" label="child molestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="29784" end="29795" title="vandalizing" label="vandalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918584" start="29829" end="29833" title="Relocation (personal)" label="move"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="29835" end="29839" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="29851" end="29858" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796687" start="29864" end="29872" title="battery (crime)" label="battered"/>
<link wikidata="Q694752" start="29887" end="29905" title="false imprisonment" label="false imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="29907" end="29914" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q312484" start="30547" end="30563" title="List of designated terrorist groups" label="terrorist groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916410" start="30567" end="30582" title="Narcoterrorism" label="narcoterrorists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30647" end="30670" title="definition of terrorism#In international law" label="definition of terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="30892" end="30905" title="non-combatant" label="non-combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="30914" end="30921" title="Neutrality (international relations)" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="30922" end="30940" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="30944" end="30953" title="civilians" label="civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="31040" end="31048" title="Law" label="unlawful"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="31078" end="31101" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="31117" end="31133" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="Nuremberg Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="31173" end="31190" title="German Nazi Party" label="German Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="31383" end="31400" title="protection racket" label="protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144676" start="31418" end="31433" title="code of silence" label="code of silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046933" start="31590" end="31605" title="Medellín Cartel" label="Medellín Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280643" start="31607" end="31623" title="Corleonesi Mafia" label="Corleonesi Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260006" start="31633" end="31648" title="Mexican cartel" label="Mexican Cartels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843053" start="31654" end="31668" title="Jamaican Posse" label="Jamaican Posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431020" start="31687" end="31703" title="Arms trafficking" label="Arms trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336585" start="31706" end="31717" title="Metal theft" label="Metal theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="31720" end="31725" title="Arson" label="Arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="31728" end="31736" title="Coercion" label="Coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="31739" end="31748" title="Extortion" label="Extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="31751" end="31768" title="Protection racket" label="Protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="31771" end="31785" title="Sexual assault" label="Sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q681487" start="33452" end="33499" title="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering" label="Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899301" start="35135" end="35152" title="Money transmitter" label="Money transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="37576" end="37589" title="offshore bank" label="offshore bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="37607" end="37616" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358351" start="37621" end="37632" title="tax shelter" label="tax shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="37902" end="37907" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="38477" end="38485" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251652" start="38858" end="38869" title="Email fraud" label="Email fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q830193" start="38871" end="38888" title="advance-fee fraud" label="advance-fee fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964861" start="38890" end="38902" title="romance scam" label="romance scam"/>
<link wikidata="Q830193" start="38905" end="38921" title="employment scams" label="employment scams"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="38933" end="38941" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="39258" end="39267" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146011" start="39308" end="39323" title="exclusive right" label="exclusive right"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="39401" end="39416" title="derivative work" label="derivative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="39462" end="39477" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q331647" start="39611" end="39677" title="Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights" label="Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="39730" end="39738" title="criminal" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="40320" end="40327" title="Computer crime" label="hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039245" start="40339" end="40347" title="Cyber spying" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="40352" end="40361" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q911036" start="40379" end="40398" title="information warfare" label="information warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q429245" start="40430" end="40450" title="conventional warfare" label="conventional warfare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40476" end="40489" title="#Controversy over terms" label="controversial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968865" start="40775" end="40790" title="William J. Lynn" label="William J. Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="40804" end="40824" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="40867" end="40879" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="41049" end="41058" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="41415" end="41424" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783579" start="41476" end="41489" title="Cyber Command" label="Cyber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="41727" end="41736" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="41945" end="41953" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="42334" end="42341" title="malware" label="malware"/>
<link wikidata="Q180712" start="42353" end="42366" title="computer worm" label="computer worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q14639" start="42369" end="42381" title="Trojan horse (computing)" label="Trojan horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645" start="42389" end="42396" title="rootkit" label="rootkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="42399" end="42406" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q193345" start="42418" end="42424" title="adware" label="adware"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="42612" end="42617" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="42622" end="42631" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="42751" end="42766" title="vulnerability (computing)" label="vulnerabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="43954" end="43965" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="43975" end="43990" title="business entity" label="business entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q154954" start="44036" end="44050" title="natural person" label="natural person"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202230" start="44171" end="44190" title="vicarious liability (criminal)" label="vicarious liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172471" start="44195" end="44214" title="corporate liability" label="corporate liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="44587" end="44602" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="44735" end="44758" title="import-export companies" label="import-export companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736510" start="44760" end="44780" title="Check-cashing business" label="check-cashing stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="44932" end="44953" title="real estate company" label="real estate companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q860792" start="44965" end="44979" title="Picture frame" label="framing stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911824" start="45094" end="45103" title="pool hall" label="pool hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501371" start="45123" end="45140" title="Freight company" label="freight companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077064" start="45142" end="45161" title="Charity (practice)" label="charity foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116826" start="45265" end="45283" title="Security company" label="security companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="45285" end="45294" title="law firms" label="law firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057214" start="45300" end="45326" title="private military companies" label="private military companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="45856" end="45868" title="unfree labor" label="unfree labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="45915" end="45935" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="45942" end="45956" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="46107" end="46117" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="46152" end="46162" title="Political repression" label="repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="46198" end="46214" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="46526" end="46533" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="46535" end="46544" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="46546" end="46554" title="cronyism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="46556" end="46564" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="46566" end="46575" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592497" start="46577" end="46582" title="Graft (politics)" label="graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="46588" end="46600" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="46662" end="46678" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="46680" end="46696" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="46702" end="46719" title="human trafficking" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="47259" end="47270" title="kleptocracy" label="kleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="47393" end="47409" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q815470" start="47424" end="47439" title="Golden Triangle (Southeast Asia)" label="Golden Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140225" start="47465" end="47480" title="Golden Crescent" label="Golden Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q815470" start="47816" end="47831" title="Golden Triangle (Southeast Asia)" label="Golden Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799308" start="47833" end="47840" title="Sam Gor" label="Sam Gor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="47930" end="47942" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799308" start="47995" end="48002" title="Sam Gor" label="Sam Gor"/>
<link wikidata="Q95686870" start="48050" end="48061" title="Tse Chi Lop" label="Tse Chi Lop"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="48230" end="48245" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="48277" end="48283" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="48288" end="48296" title="ketamine" label="ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q815470" start="48530" end="48545" title="Golden Triangle (Southeast Asia)" label="Golden Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="48560" end="48570" title="Shan State" label="Shan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="48572" end="48579" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q95686870" start="48696" end="48707" title="Tse Chi Lop" label="Tse Chi Lop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="48745" end="48754" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413459" start="48826" end="48841" title="Big Circle Gang" label="Big Circle Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q456321" start="49025" end="49060" title="Joaquín &amp;quot;El Chapo&amp;quot; Guzmán" label="Joaquín &amp;quot;El Chapo&amp;quot; Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q187447" start="49065" end="49078" title="Pablo Escobar" label="Pablo Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q815470" start="49177" end="49192" title="Golden Triangle (Southeast Asia)" label="Golden Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125767" start="49941" end="49958" title="Clandestine chemistry" label="drug laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q656720" start="50015" end="50023" title="workshop" label="workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065830" start="50061" end="50074" title="Tranquilandia" label="Tranquilandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="50204" end="50216" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="50319" end="50328" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q539815" start="50452" end="50470" title="organic fertilizer" label="organic fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="50480" end="50486" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q531349" start="50588" end="50598" title="safe house" label="safe house"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="50624" end="50634" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q891382" start="50860" end="50875" title="survival skills" label="survival skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="51197" end="51205" title="wildlife" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="51443" end="51449" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="51456" end="51466" title="rural area" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="51527" end="51544" title="Human trafficking" label="Human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="51690" end="51704" title="Prostitution" label="sex industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667359" start="51797" end="51816" title="forced prostitution" label="forced prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="52199" end="52239" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="52263" end="52294" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="52317" end="52323" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q636107" start="52536" end="52541" title="United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime" label="UNODC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854900" start="52593" end="52609" title="People smuggling" label="People smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q331504" start="53000" end="53063" title="Convention against Transnational Organized Crime" label="United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="53765" end="53771" title="Slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165988" start="53938" end="53949" title="debt bondage" label="debt slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="53962" end="53972" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165988" start="53988" end="54000" title="debt bondage" label="debt bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="54013" end="54020" title="Loan sharks" label="lenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="54137" end="54153" title="illegal drug trade" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="54584" end="54591" title="piracy" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="54593" end="54603" title="Highwayman" label="highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="54608" end="54615" title="banditry" label="bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="54792" end="54798" title="Piracy" label="Piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="54803" end="54811" title="banditry" label="banditry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="54917" end="54926" title="Barbarian" label="Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="54947" end="54954" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="54956" end="54961" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="54967" end="54972" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="54974" end="54979" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="54983" end="54990" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="55281" end="55293" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004156" start="55331" end="55342" title="Bulla Felix" label="Bulla Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="55649" end="55657" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q708433" start="55678" end="55690" title="Possession of stolen goods" label="stolen goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="55780" end="55784" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="55789" end="55793" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="56078" end="56085" title="banditry" label="bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q58584" start="56764" end="56771" title="Baoding" label="Baoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601618" start="56776" end="56782" title="Hejian" label="Hejian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="57045" end="57064" title="Crime" label="criminal activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="59113" end="59124" title="human trafficking" label="trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="59326" end="59337" title="Prostitution" label="prostitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="59348" end="59358" title="concubinage" label="concubines"/>
<link wikidata="Q599151" start="60931" end="60951" title="government officials" label="government officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="60960" end="60977" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="63334" end="63348" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936360" start="64191" end="64197" title="cangue" label="cangue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384423" start="64251" end="64255" title="Salt in Chinese history" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="64495" end="64508" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q15091547" start="65083" end="65097" title="Peaky Blinders" label="Peaky Blinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q351199" start="65169" end="65179" title="Adam Worth" label="Adam Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q283111" start="65342" end="65360" title="Professor Moriarty" label="Professor Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="65432" end="65440" title="Old West" label="Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696357" start="65548" end="65568" title="Cochise County Cowboys" label="Coschise Cowboy Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077264" start="65577" end="65587" title="Butch Cassidy&amp;#x27;s Wild Bunch" label="Wild Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036083" start="65928" end="65942" title="Innocents (gang)" label="Innocents gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987624" start="65948" end="65963" title="Jim Miller (outlaw)" label="Jim Miller gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q162160" start="65969" end="65985" title="Soapy Smith" label="Soapy Smith gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q238789" start="65991" end="66007" title="Belle Starr" label="Belle Starr gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240240" start="66059" end="66073" title="Donald Cressey" label="Donald Cressey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="66081" end="66092" title="Cosa Nostra" label="Cosa Nostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="66107" end="66112" title="American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312167" start="69120" end="69132" title="Meyer Lansky" label="Meyer Lansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377422" start="71002" end="71021" title="profit maximization" label="profit maximization"/>
<link wikidata="Q331504" start="73670" end="73718" title="Convention against Transnational Organized Crime" label="Convention against Transnational Organized Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q181865" start="77820" end="77833" title="civil society" label="civil society"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="78134" end="78145" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="78151" end="78182" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="78191" end="78210" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="78214" end="78228" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="78258" end="78272" title="Communist Bloc" label="Communist Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q471880" start="78378" end="78392" title="identity theft" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="78404" end="78413" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="78495" end="78503" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="78508" end="78518" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="78725" end="78734" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="78746" end="78770" title="denial-of-service attack" label="denial-of-service attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="78926" end="78934" title="cybercrime" label="cybercop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625085" start="78966" end="78990" title="list of law enforcement agencies" label="law enforcement agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q557801" start="79461" end="79492" title="Whitey Bulger" label="James &amp;quot;Whitey&amp;quot; Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="79498" end="79507" title="Irish Mob" label="Irish Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020460" start="79520" end="79536" title="Winter Hill Gang" label="Winter Hill Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="79540" end="79546" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="79554" end="79563" title="informant" label="informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="79572" end="79603" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533376" start="79788" end="79803" title="Gennaro Angiulo" label="Gennaro Angiulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883466" start="79805" end="79814" title="underboss" label="underboss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348115" start="79822" end="79844" title="Patriarca crime family" label="Patriarca crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q611027" start="79910" end="79928" title="Castellamarese war" label="Castellamarese war"/>
<link wikidata="Q127784" start="80254" end="80270" title="Mara Salvatrucha" label="Mara Salvatrucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q94270" start="80272" end="80288" title="18th Street gang" label="18th Street gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863712" start="80293" end="80306" title="Barrio Azteca" label="Barrio Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="80312" end="80326" title="American Mafia" label="American Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q468804" start="80405" end="80412" title="Camorra" label="Camorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="80418" end="80434" title="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta" label="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q927629" start="80436" end="80454" title="Sacra Corona Unita" label="Sacra Corona Unita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="80459" end="80473" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="80519" end="80528" title="Irish Mob" label="Irish Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q620642" start="80530" end="80561" title="Jewish-American organized crime" label="Jewish-American organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="80576" end="80582" title="yakuza" label="yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056525" start="80584" end="80596" title="Organised crime in India" label="Indian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="80602" end="80615" title="Russian mafia" label="Russian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q558641" start="80617" end="80629" title="Thief in law" label="Thief in law"/>
<link wikidata="Q329978" start="80682" end="80688" title="triad (organized crime)" label="triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083702" start="80698" end="80703" title="Tong (organization)" label="Tongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849110" start="80728" end="80744" title="Outlaw motorcycle club" label="Motorcycle Gangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="81137" end="81153" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q897817" start="81202" end="81218" title="Polizia di Stato" label="Polizia di Stato"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="81220" end="81258" title="Federal Security Service (Russia)" label="Russian Federal Security Service (FSB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q335175" start="81267" end="81296" title="Royal Canadian Mounted Police" label="Royal Canadian Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q434371" start="81314" end="81365" title="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives" label="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="81367" end="81398" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="81400" end="81430" title="United States Marshals Service" label="United States Marshals Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="81432" end="81467" title="Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q503224" start="81469" end="81497" title="United States Secret Service" label="United States Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776176" start="81502" end="81529" title="Diplomatic Security Service" label="Diplomatic Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495411" start="81531" end="81570" title="United States Postal Inspection Service" label="United States Postal Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="81572" end="81606" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="81608" end="81635" title="United States Border Patrol" label="United States Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="81645" end="81670" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075576" start="81686" end="81712" title="Massachusetts State Police" label="Massachusetts State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q15679789" start="81741" end="81764" title="New Jersey State Police" label="New Jersey State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q10348331" start="81787" end="81812" title="Pennsylvania State Police" label="Pennsylvania State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057860" start="81842" end="81863" title="New York State Police" label="New York State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="81914" end="81945" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182789" start="81968" end="81998" title="Philadelphia Police Department" label="Philadelphia Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340186" start="82021" end="82035" title="Chicago Police" label="Chicago Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="82065" end="82094" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="86564" end="86581" title="protection racket" label="protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="86682" end="86691" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137778" start="86858" end="86876" title="white-collar crime" label="white-collar crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="86880" end="86900" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q312843" start="88492" end="88508" title="Robert K. Merton" label="Robert K. Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="90758" end="90764" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404308" start="91030" end="91047" title="Ethnic succession theory" label="ethnic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="91327" end="91336" title="Irish Mob" label="Irish Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="91392" end="91406" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="91411" end="91433" title="Italian-American Mafia" label="Italian-American Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717903" start="91439" end="91456" title="Aryan Brotherhood" label="Aryan Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046933" start="91483" end="91498" title="Medellín Cartel" label="Medellín Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026717" start="91503" end="91514" title="Cali cartel" label="Cali cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784430" start="91566" end="91580" title="Tijuana Cartel" label="Tijuana Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q248337" start="91610" end="91619" title="Los Zetas" label="Los Zetas"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="91648" end="91661" title="Russian Mafia" label="Russian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="91711" end="91719" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="91739" end="91746" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="91766" end="91802" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q331504" start="92193" end="92241" title="Convention against Transnational Organized Crime" label="Convention against Transnational Organized Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924287" start="92344" end="92438" title="Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children" label="Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251927" start="92447" end="92510" title="Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air" label="Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091694" start="92521" end="92534" title="Criminal Code (Canada)" label="Criminal Code"/>
<link wikidata="" start="92584" end="92647" title=":s:Anti-organized Crime Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Anti-Organized Crime Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733324" start="92657" end="92699" title="Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act" label="Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185528" start="92723" end="92745" title="Criminal Assets Bureau" label="Criminal Assets Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303403" start="92754" end="92782" title="Article 41-bis prison regime" label="Article 41-bis prison regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454900" start="92802" end="92845" title="Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005" label="Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874855" start="92863" end="92920" title="Hobbs Act" label="Federal Anti-Racketeering Act (the &amp;#x27;Hobbs Act&amp;#x27;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440502" start="92928" end="92944" title="Federal Wire Act" label="Federal Wire Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855967" start="92952" end="92968" title="Bank Secrecy Act" label="Bank Secrecy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102059" start="92976" end="93003" title="Organized Crime Control Act" label="Organized Crime Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810056" start="93011" end="93045" title="Title 21 of the United States Code" label="Title 21 of the United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165391" start="93053" end="93083" title="Continuing Criminal Enterprise" label="Continuing Criminal Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418478" start="93101" end="93178" title="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act" label="Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (the &amp;#x27;RICO Act&amp;#x27;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899152" start="93186" end="93214" title="Money Laundering Control Act" label="Money Laundering Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="93222" end="93247" title="United States Patriot Act" label="United States Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839076" start="93255" end="93297" title="Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009" label="Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614668" start="93314" end="93365" title="List of criminal enterprises, gangs, and syndicates" label="List of criminal enterprises, gangs, and syndicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806138" start="93368" end="93395" title="Timeline of organized crime" label="Timeline of organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q132477319" start="93398" end="93426" title="Global Organized Crime Index" label="Global Organized Crime Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="93520" end="93524" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22626" wikidata="Q1303493" url="?curid=22626" title="One Foot in the Grave">
<text>One Foot in the Grave is a British television sitcom written by David Renwick. There were six series (each consisting of six half-hour episodes) and seven Christmas specials over a period of ten years from early 1990 to late 2000. The first five series were broadcast between January 1990 and January 1995. For the next five years, the show appeared only as Christmas specials, followed by the sixth and final series in 2000.

The series features the exploits of Victor Meldrew, played by Richard Wilson, and his long-suffering wife, Margaret, played by Annette Crosbie. Wilson initially turned down the part of Meldrew and David Renwick considered Les Dawson for the role, until Wilson changed his mind. The programmes invariably deal with Meldrew&#x27;s battle against a long series of problems, some of which he creates for himself.

The location is set in an unnamed town in Southern England, where Victor takes involuntary early retirement. His various efforts to keep himself busy while encountering various misfortunes and misunderstandings are the themes of the sitcom. Indoor scenes were videotaped at BBC Television Centre with most exterior scenes filmed on Tresillian Way in Walkford in Christchurch, Dorset. Despite its traditional production, the series subverts its domestic sitcom setting with elements of black humour and surrealism.

The series was occasionally the subject of controversy for some of its darker story elements, but nevertheless received a number of awards, including the 1992 BAFTA for Best Comedy. The programme came 80th in the British Film Institute&#x27;s 100 Greatest British Television Programmes. Four episodes were remade for BBC Radio 2. The series inspired a novel, published in 1992, featuring the most memorable moments from the first two series and the first Christmas special.

==Plot==
The series features the exploits, mishaps and misadventures of irascible early retiree Victor Meldrew, who, after being made redundant from his job as a security guard at the age of 60, finds himself at war with the world and everything in it. Meldrew, cursed with misfortune and always complaining, is married to long-suffering wife Margaret, who is often left exasperated by his many misfortunes.

Amongst other witnesses to Victor&#x27;s wrath are tactless family friend Jean Warboys and next-door neighbours Patrick (Victor&#x27;s nemesis) and Pippa Trench. Patrick often discovers Victor in inexplicably bizarre or compromising situations, leading him to believe he is insane. The Meldrews&#x27; neighbour on the other side, overly cheery charity worker Nick Swainey, also adds to Victor&#x27;s frustration.

Although set in a traditional suburban setting, the show subverts this genre with a strong overtone of black comedy. Series One&#x27;s &quot;The Valley of Fear&quot; is an episode which caused controversy, when Victor found a frozen cat in his freezer. Writer David Renwick also combined farce with elements of tragedy. For example, in the final episode, Victor is killed by a hit-and-run driver, and although there is no explicit reference that Victor and Margaret had children, the episode &quot;Timeless Time&quot; contained a reference to someone named Stuart; the strong implication being that they once had a son who had died as a child.

A number of episodes were also experimental in that they took place entirely in one setting. Such episodes include &quot;The Beast in the Cage&quot; (where Victor, Margaret and Mrs Warboys are stuck in a traffic jam), &quot;Timeless Time&quot; (where Victor and Margaret are in bed suffering insomnia), &quot;The Trial&quot; (where Victor is left alone in the house waiting to see if he has to take part in jury service), &quot;Rearranging the Dust&quot; (where Victor and Margaret have a long wait in their solicitor&#x27;s waiting room), and &quot;Threatening Weather&quot; (where Victor and Margaret try to cope during a power cut on the hottest night of the year).

Despite Margaret&#x27;s frequent exasperation with her husband&#x27;s antics, the series shows the couple have a deep affection for one another.

==Episodes==

==Characters==
===Main characters===
Victor Meldrew (Richard Wilson) – Victor is the main protagonist of the sitcom and finds himself constantly battling against all that life throws at him as he becomes entangled in complicated misfortunes and farcical situations. Renwick once pointed out in an interview that the name &quot;Victor&quot; was ironic, since he almost always ends up a loser. From being buried alive to being prosecuted for attacking a feisty pit bull terrier with a collection of coconut meringues, Victor tries to adjust to life after an automatic security system made him redundant at the office where he worked as a security guard, but to no avail. He believes everything is going wrong for him all the time and he has the right to be upset because it is always someone else&#x27;s fault. Victor does not see himself as retired and is always trying to find another job, but most of his attempts end in failure.

Victor is a tragic comedy character and sympathy is directed towards him as he becomes embroiled in complex misunderstandings, bureaucratic vanity and, at times, sheer bad luck. The audience sees a philosophical ebb and flow to his character, however, along with a degree of optimism. Yet his polite façade collapses when events get the better of him and a full verbal onslaught is forthcoming. &quot;Victor-isms&quot; include &quot;I do not believe it!&quot;, &quot;I don&#x27;t believe it!&quot;, &quot;Un-be-lievable!&quot;, &quot;What in the name of bloody hell?&quot;, &quot;In the name of sanity!&quot; Despite his grumpy demeanour Victor isn&#x27;t totally devoid of compassion; in &quot;Hearts of Darkness&quot; he liberates elderly nursing home residents who were being mistreated by the staff, and in &quot;Descent into The Maelstrom&quot; he calls an incident room number and gives the location of an emotionally disturbed woman who abducted a baby and stole Margaret&#x27;s mother&#x27;s pearl earrings, which resulted in the woman being picked up by the police. However, because the woman was a friend of Margaret, and knowing she meant a lot to her, Victor never said anything.

Victor has also shown a vast amount of loyalty to Margaret as, throughout their entire 42 years of lifelong marriage together, not once has the thought of infidelity ever occurred to him. In &quot;Rearranging the Dust&quot;, Victor and Margaret recollect the days of their courtship at a party after which Victor says &quot;You were always my first choice&quot;, which leaves Margaret stunned. In another episode, Margaret recounts the time Victor took her to the funfair and they ended up getting stuck in the hall of mirrors for over an hour. Victor had said he did not mind as he was happy to stay there and look at all the reflections of her. Victor&#x27;s very best act of compassion comes in the episode &quot;The Wisdom of the Witch&quot; in which he ends up saving Patrick&#x27;s life from his new secretary&#x27;s psychopathic boyfriend by forcing Patrick&#x27;s would-be murderer, along with himself as well, out of the window of the house in which they are trapped during a snowstorm.

Margaret Meldrew (née Pellow) (Annette Crosbie) – Victor&#x27;s long-suffering, tolerant and kind-hearted wife. Margaret tries to maintain a degree of calmness and to rise above her husband&#x27;s antics. However, she is often engulfed in these follies, mishaps and confusion and often vents her anger at Victor. In early episodes, her character acts more as a comic foil to Victor&#x27;s misfortunes. Examples include fearfully asking if a cat found frozen in their freezer is definitely dead and mentioning a friend who died of a terminal illness. When Victor reminds her that the woman actually fell from a cliff, Margaret retorts she only did so because &quot;she went to the seaside to convalesce&quot;.

In later episodes, Margaret develops into a more complex character. She is shown to be fiercely protective of her marriage to Victor by becoming easily suspicious and jealous—for example, of a Dutch marionette that Victor becomes occupied with repairing in the episode &quot;Hole in the Sky&quot;, eventually leading her to destroy it. In &quot;The Affair of the Hollow Lady&quot;, a greengrocer (played by Barbara Windsor) develops a soft spot for Victor and tries to convince Margaret that he has been unfaithful to her. In revenge, Margaret assaults her with a pair of boxing gloves. However, Margaret herself is shown to have contemplated infidelity with a man called Ben whom she met on holiday in the episode &quot;Warm Champagne&quot;. She decides against cheating on Victor. In this episode, she sums up her relationship with Victor by telling Ben, &quot;He&#x27;s the most sensitive person I&#x27;ve ever met and that&#x27;s why I love him and why I constantly want to ram his head through a television screen.&quot; She also begins to develop a sense of cynicism, slowly coming to see the world the way Victor sees it. This is especially evident in &quot;Things Aren&#x27;t Simple Anymore&quot; in which she remarks that the world is &quot;all speed and greed&quot; and that &quot;nobody does anything about anything&quot;. In &quot;Rearranging the Dust&quot;, Margaret recounts the time she first chose Victor at a party and, during a power cut, &quot;shared their bodies&quot; in the garden. After this moment of passion, they went back inside and when the lights came back on, Margaret realised that she had &quot;grabbed hold of the wrong person&quot;. Margaret&#x27;s demeanour seemed to stem from an incident at school when she was a child. When she was five, she had two budgies; one day when she opened the door of their cage, one flew straight out and hit the window, killing itself, while the other stayed in the cage despite her best efforts to get it to come out. The next day at school her teacher asked the class to write a story about something that had happened to them so Margaret wrote her story about the budgies. Her teacher made Margaret read it out loud in front of the whole class which resulted in everyone laughing at her. She then realised that the teacher had done it deliberately just to be cruel to her—whereupon she understood why the other budgie never wanted to leave its cage.

Margaret could be said to have a catchphrase, typically a long, exasperated use of the word &quot;God&quot;, usually when coming to a realisation about the reason behind one of Victor&#x27;s mishaps. These mishaps are occasionally inadvertently aided by herself in some way, such as leaving the phone off the hook or giving permission to someone to enter the Meldrews&#x27; house when she is not there. Margaret works at a florist&#x27;s until series five, when the shop closes. In a later series she has found a new job as a caregiver for the elderly, where she inadvertently discovers on a TV documentary that she has actually been unwittingly used as a sex worker by a man who did not need personal care but just enjoyed being bathed and dressed anyway. It is presumed that she left the job after making this discovery, as it is never mentioned again.

===Supporting characters===
Jean Warboys (Doreen Mantle) – Mrs Warboys is a friend of Margaret&#x27;s (and a rather annoying one in Victor&#x27;s eyes) who has attached herself to the Meldrews, accompanying them on many of their exploits. Until the fourth series she is married to (unseen) Chris until he leaves her for a private detective she had hired, believing he was having an affair, and they divorce.

She often bears the brunt of Victor&#x27;s temper due to muddled misunderstandings and in part due to her aloof nature. One such occasion saw Victor asking her to pick up a suit of his from the dry-cleaners, only for her to return with a gorilla suit. Another occasion saw her persuading Victor to take on a dog whose owner had just died. Victor spent time building a kennel in the garden and when Mrs Warboys arrives with the dog, she forgets to mention that the dog is stuffed, much to Victor and Margaret&#x27;s consternation. On another occasion she wins a competition where the prize is either £500 or to have a life-size waxwork model made of herself, which had to be delivered to the Meldrews&#x27; house; she chooses the waxwork. As it turns out, she hates it as much as Victor and Margaret do, and the waxwork ends up in the dustbin.

Despite being friends, she has driven Margaret to distraction on several occasions, most notably in &quot;Only a Story&quot;, when she stayed with the Meldrews after her flat had been flooded and enraged Margaret with her complaining and laziness. Jean is also shown as a somewhat absent-minded character, as she has a pet cockatiel despite her lifelong allergy to feathers. She would often bore the Meldrews by showing them her complete collection of holiday pictures at the most unwelcome times. A running joke is her beating Victor at board games, including Trivial Pursuit and chess, while having a conversation with someone else. Doreen Mantle described her character as &quot;wanting to do the right thing but always finding out that it was the wrong thing&quot;. Victor&#x27;s annoyance with her is often demonstrated by shouting her name, sometimes repeatedly, in an impatient tone.

Patrick Trench (Angus Deayton) – Patrick and his wife Pippa live next door to Victor from the second series. Patrick often catches Victor engrossed in seemingly preposterous situations, all of which in context are perfectly innocuous. The couple&#x27;s relationship with their neighbours begins badly after Victor mistakes Patrick and Pippa for distant relations when they arrive outside with three suitcasesnot realising that they are his next-door neighbours, having been on a lengthy holiday from the day Victor and Margaret moved in. Victor subsequently invites the bemused pair to stay; this and later incidents cause Patrick to suspect that Victor is quite insane, possibly bordering on malicious.

However, Patrick&#x27;s rift with Victor eventually transforms him into a rather cynical character (much like Victor) and he often responds to him in similarly petty or vindictive ways as a means of trying to settle the score, such as writing complaints and grievances on Post-it Notes. This aspect of Patrick&#x27;s character came to a head in the episode &quot;The Executioner&#x27;s Song&quot; where his face temporarily morphs into that of Victor&#x27;s as he looks into a mirror.

It is mentioned several times that Patrick would like to have children. After Pippa miscarries and Patrick is, so he claims, rendered infertile by a freak accident (for which he unfairly blames Victor), he adopts a dachshund called Denzil, which Pippa describes as his &quot;baby substitute&quot;. Denzil frequently appears with Patrick through series 3–5. Despite their animosity towards each other, Victor ends up saving Patrick&#x27;s life in &quot;The Wisdom of the Witch&quot;.

Pippa Trench (née Croker) (Janine Duvitski) – Patrick&#x27;s wife – a bus driver – sought friendly relations with the Meldrews and, after a while, became good friends with Margaret. The two women usually attempt to get their husbands to make peace with each other at least once per series. Eventually Patrick proposes that the Trenches move house, but they soon realise that the Meldrew curse has followed them: Victor sent workmen to their home, thinking they were removal men who had initially come to the wrong house. They were in fact from a house clearance firm Margaret had employed to clear her late cousin Ursula&#x27;s country mansion. The workmen consequently cleared Patrick and Pippa&#x27;s house of their entire furniture and sold it for a mere £475. Pippa is slightly dim-witted (Victor once described her as a &quot;gormless twerp&quot; on an answering machine message, unaware she was listening)for example, believing Victor had murdered an elderly blind man simply because the victim had been found clutching a double-one domino in his hand and Victor had two pimples on his nose.

New neighbours Derek and Betty McVitie replaced the Trenches for the 1997 special &quot;Endgame&quot;. However, this turned out to be their only appearances in the series and they were said to have emigrated by the penultimate episode, which caused Nick Swainey to leap straight in with the offer for their old house. Series six saw the Trenches return as prominent characters, albeit living in a house some distance from the Meldrews. Despite appearing in five out of six series and three Christmas specials, neither of the Trenches ever share a scene with Mrs Warboys and Pippa only ever shares one scene with Nick Swainey (in the episode &quot;Who Will Buy?&quot;).

Nick Swainey (Owen Brenman) – The excessively cheerful and often oblivious Mr Swainey appeared in the first episode, encouraging Victor to join his OAPs&#x27; trip to Eastbourne and being greeted with Victor&#x27;s trademark abuse. When the Meldrews move house, they discover he is their neighbour, living on the other side of the Meldrews from the Trenches. He remains continuously optimistic; even his being told to &quot;piss off&quot; by Victor is laughed off. Despite this run-in he later befriends Victor and they frequently chat in their gardens, where Victor is often surprised by Mr Swainey&#x27;s activities, ranging from archery and preparing amateur dramatics props, to bizarre games he arranges for his senile, bedridden mother, whom the audience never actually see. Despite his cheery demeanour, he does occasionally drop his guard, once displaying apparent depression at being nothing more than &quot;an overgrown Boy Scout&quot;. Following his mother&#x27;s death, he moved house near the end of the series, but only went as far as the Trenches&#x27;/McVities&#x27; old house, claiming he had &quot;always wanted to live in an end house, without leaving the area&quot;. This took Victor by surprise; he did not learn where Mr Swainey was moving to until, while reminiscing in the garden about his departure, Mr Swainey suddenly appeared from the other side.

===Other characters===
Ronnie and Mildred (Gordon Peters and Barbara Ashcroft) – Ronnie and Mildred were a constantly cheerful, but incredibly boring, couple who provided yet another annoyance to the Meldrews, who dreaded any upcoming visits to them; Victor once said that he had hoped they were both dead. In &quot;The Worst Horror of All&quot;, when the couple attempted a surprise visit, the Meldrews hid in their house to give the impression they were away on holiday and then took the phone off the hook for several days afterwards, though these efforts to avoid them were in vain. They are referenced a number of times in the series for giving the Meldrews bizarre and always unwanted presents that are seldom opened, usually involving a garish photograph of themselves. In the final series, however it was clear that their cheerfulness was a façade and, in a particularly dark scene, Mildred hanged herself &quot;during a game of Happy Families&quot;. The shot of Mildred&#x27;s feet dangling outside the window is usually cut from pre-watershed screenings.

Alfred Meldrew (Richard Pearson) - Victor&#x27;s absent-minded brother, who lives in New Zealand. During the episode &quot;The Broken Reflection&quot;, he comes to visit after 25 years, to the disdain of Victor. Alfred is an eccentric character, often walking around with his hat on fire and bringing over his and Victor&#x27;s great-grandfather&#x27;s skull. He is a clumsy character too, mistaking the table cloth for a napkin and dropping the entire contents of the table all over the floor when he stands up and breaking a mirror in the middle of the night after mistaking his own reflection for a burglar. Victor starts to warm to Alfred towards the end of his visit, but Alfred leaves early the next day after finding an unpleasant message about him that Victor had accidentally recorded on a dictaphone. He is not seen again, but keeps in touch with the Meldrews, as Victor is seen looking at some photographs Alfred had sent over in &quot;The Trial&quot;.

Cousin Wilfred (John Rutland) – Mrs. Warboys&#x27; cousin Wilfred, first appeared in an episode in the third series. In the final series the character returned, but the effects of a stroke had rendered him mute and forced him to &quot;speak&quot; with the aid of an electronic voice generator. His poor typing on the generator led to several misunderstandings, such as asking Victor for a &quot;bra of soup&quot; (as opposed to a &quot;bar of soap&quot;) and describing a visit to his &quot;brothel&quot; (as opposed to &quot;brother&quot;).

Great Aunt Joyce and Uncle Dick - Unseen characters, they are sometimes mentioned by Victor and Margaret, as an aging, grim couple whom Victor and Margaret dread having anything to do with. Great Aunt Joyce is mentioned as having a glass eye and has the habit of knitting bizarre items (such as six-fingered gloves) for Victor. Uncle Dick has a wooden arm; in the final Comic Relief (2001) episode, it transpires that a nurse had mistakenly placed a drip in the false arm for 18 hours after a trip to hospital after trying to remove a kidney stone with a wire coat hanger.

Mimsy Berkovitz - Another unseen character, she is the local agony aunt, whom many of the characters turn to for advice. In the episode &quot;The Secret of the Seven Sorcerers&quot;, Patrick is heard talking to her on the radio, seeking her advice on how to cope when Victor and Margaret invite him and Pippa around to dinner.

Mrs Birkett (Gabrielle Blunt) An elderly neighbour in the first series. She accidentally gets trapped in the Meldrews&#x27; loft when Victor closes the trap door whilst she is up there looking for jumble that Margaret has prepared. She continues to be mentioned throughout the rest of the series but is not seen again.

Martin Trout (Peter Cook) - A paparazzo in the 1993 Christmas special &quot;One Foot in the Algarve&quot;. He manages to take a number of compromising photographs involving a high-ranking politician. Trout compares the potential impact of the photos to the Profumo affair. On his way to sell the images, he loses the roll of film whilst arguing at a phone box with the Meldrews and subsequently pursues them across the Algarve to retrieve it. He suffers a number of disasters both related and unrelated to Victor and Margaret&#x27;s own misfortunes, only to find that the film had actually fallen into the lining of his jacket and had been with him for much of his journey. He lost it in the door of the Meldrews&#x27; car. Retrieving the roll after a brief spell in hospital, Trout attempts to leave the Algarve in a taxi but is involved in a car crash.

===Guest appearances===

==Production==
The production of the show was in a conventional sitcom format, with episodes taped live in front of a studio audience, interposed with pre-filmed location material.

The series&#x27; opening credits were designed by Pete Wane and feature footage of a &quot;Galapagos Giant Turtle&quot;, at the request of writer David Renwick, which &quot;[serves] as a metaphor for grumpy old Victor Meldrew.&quot; Wane found the footage of the creature to be &quot;not very upbeat visually for a comedy,&quot; but he found, &quot;to [his] relief a shot of it stumbling on a rock which gave the sequence a bit of a lift.&quot;

Most of the first five series of &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; were produced and directed by Susan Belbin, the exceptions being &quot;Love and Death&quot;, which was partly directed by veteran sitcom director Sydney Lotterby and &quot;Starbound&quot;, for which Gareth Gwenlan (who in fact had originally commissioned the series in 1989) stepped in to direct some sequences after Belbin was taken ill. Afterward, Belbin retired owing to ill-health, and the final series was produced by Jonathan P. Llewellyn and directed by Christine Gernon. Wilson and Renwick felt that Gernon&#x27;s experience of working with Belbin on earlier series of &quot;One Foot&quot; as a production secretary and assistant, as well as other shows, meant that her style was similar to Belbin&#x27;s, aiding the transition between directors.

The show used Bournemouth to film some exterior sequences because of its favourable climate, easy access to London and economical benefits relative to filming in the capital. After the first series was filmed, the house—near Pokesdown, Bournemouth—which had been used for the Meldrews&#x27; house in location sequences, changed hands and the new owners demanded nearly triple the usage fees that the previous owners had asked for. Rather than agree to this, the production team decided to find a new house and the first episode of the second series was rewritten to have the Meldrews&#x27; house destroyed in a fire (this was filmed on waste ground in Northcote Road, Springbourne). This also gave the opportunity for a new interior set to be designed, as Belbin had been unhappy with the original set designed for the series, which she felt was too restrictive to shoot in.

Beginning with series two, the exterior scenes of the Meldrew&#x27;s home were filmed at Tresillian Way, Walkford, near Christchurch in Dorset. These later series make extensive use of specific street and garden locations in most episodes, particularly for scenes involving the Meldrew&#x27;s neighbours. Most outside locations were filmed in and around Bournemouth and Christchurch. These include Richmond Hill, Undercliff Drive and Boscombe Pier, Bournemouth Town Hall, Lansdowne College, Christchurch Hospital and the former Royal Victoria Hospital (Boscombe). Later episodes, such as &quot;Hearts of Darkness&quot;, were filmed entirely on location. Victor&#x27;s death by a hit and run driver in the final episode was filmed at Shawford railway station, Hampshire. Fans left floral tributes at the site.

Over the show&#x27;s history, it featured a number of notable comic actors in one-off roles. These include Susie Blake, John Bird, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Peter Cook, Diana Coupland, Phil Daniels, Edward de Souza, Hannah Gordon, Georgina Hale, Roy Hudd, Jimmy Jewel, Rula Lenska, Stephen Lewis, Paul Merton, Brian Murphy, Christopher Ryan, Jim Sweeney, Barbara Windsor, Joan Sims and Ray Winstone. Two of Angus Deayton&#x27;s former &quot;Radio Active&quot; and &quot;KYTV&quot; co-stars, Geoffrey Perkins and Michael Fenton Stevens were cast, in separate episodes, as respectively the brother and brother-in-law of Deayton&#x27;s character. A few actors little-known at the time also appeared in one-off roles before going on to greater fame, including Lucy Davis, Joanna Scanlan, Eamonn Walker and Arabella Weir.

==Music==
The &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; theme song was written, composed and sung by Eric Idle. A longer version was produced for the special &quot;One Foot in the Algarve&quot;, released as a single with five remixes and a karaoke version in November 1994. Idle included a live version of the song on his album &quot;Eric Idle Sings Monty Python&quot;. It is preluded by a similar adaptation of &quot;Bread of Heaven&quot; to that used in the episode &quot;The Beast in the Cage&quot; by disgruntled car mechanics.
The title music on the TV series is accompanied at the beginning and end of each episode by footage of Galápagos tortoises.

The series also made extensive use of incidental music, composed by Ed Welch, which often hinted at a particular genre to fit the mood of the scenes, frequently incorporating well-known pieces of music such as &quot;God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen&quot; or &quot;Intermezzo&quot; from Jean Sibelius&#x27; &quot;Karelia Suite&quot;. In the Christmas special &quot;Endgame&quot; during Margaret&#x27;s alleged death scene, a compilation of clips from past episodes are accompanied by the song &quot;River Runs Deep&quot; performed by J. J. Cale. The final episode ended with a montage of some of the mishaps Victor encountered, which were mentioned in the episode – backed by &quot;End of the Line&quot; by the Traveling Wilburys.

==Awards==
The programme received a number of prestigious awards. In 1992, it won a BAFTA as Best Comedy (Programme or Series). During its ten-year run, the series was nominated a further six times. Richard Wilson also won Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1992 and 1994 and Annette Crosbie was nominated for the same award in 1994.

The series also won the Best Television Sitcom in 1992 from the Royal Television Society and the British Comedy Award for Best Sitcom in 1992, 1995 and 2001.

In 2004, &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; came tenth in a BBC poll to find &quot;Britain&#x27;s Best Sitcom&quot; with 31,410 votes. The programme also came 80th in the British Film Institute&#x27;s 100 Greatest British Television Programmes.

==Controversies==
A number of complaints were made during the series&#x27; run for its depiction of animal deaths. For example, in the episode &quot;The Valley of Fear&quot;, a dead cat is found in the Meldrews&#x27; freezer; in another, a tortoise is roasted in a brazier. However, this was later cited as a positive feature of the programme&#x27;s daring scripts in &quot;Britain&#x27;s Best Sitcom&quot; by its advocate Rowland Rivron. The programme was censored, however, for a scene in the episode &quot;Hearts of Darkness&quot; in which an elderly resident is abused in an old people&#x27;s home and, following complaints, the scene was slightly cut when the episode was repeated. In the DVD commentary for the episode, David Renwick stated his continued opposition to the cuts. Another controversial scene in the episode &quot;Tales of Terror&quot; saw the Meldrews visit Ronnie and Mildred on the understanding that Mildred had gone upstairs during a game of Happy Families and not returned; Ronnie then shows her feet hanging outside of the window, revealing that she has ended her life by suicide. The Broadcasting Standards Commission received complaints about this scene.

When the final episode, &quot;Things Aren&#x27;t Simple Any More&quot; originally aired on 20 November 2000 at 9pm, it coincided with the broadcast of the first jackpot winner in the British version of &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?&quot;, which had been filmed the Sunday before the broadcast. ITV was accused of engineering this in order to damage the final episode&#x27;s expected high ratings, but was later cleared by the Independent Television Commission.

==Cultural impact==

Due to the series&#x27; popularity, people who constantly complain and are irritated by minor things are often compared to Victor Meldrew by the British media. Renwick disputes this usage however, claiming that Victor&#x27;s reactions are entirely in proportion to the things that happen to him.

Renwick integrated some of the plots and dialogue from the series into a novel, which was first published by BBC Books in 1992. A second novel, &quot;One Foot in the Grave and Counting&quot;, was published in 2021. Renwick also adapted four episodes for BBC Radio 2, which first aired between 21 January 1995 and 11 February 1995. The episodes are &quot;Alive and Buried&quot;, &quot;In Luton Airport, No One Can Hear You Scream&quot;, &quot;Timeless Time&quot; and &quot;The Beast in the Cage&quot;. They are regularly repeated on the digital speech station BBC Radio 4 Extra and are available on audio CD.

Wilson dislikes saying his character&#x27;s catchphrase (&quot;I don&#x27;t believe it!&quot;) and only performs the line for charity events for a small fee. This became a joke in the actor&#x27;s guest appearance as himself in the &quot;Father Ted&quot; episode &quot;The Mainland&quot;, where Ted annoys him by constantly repeating his catchphrase. The situation was conceived when &quot;Father Ted&quot; writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews sat behind Wilson at a performance of &quot;Le Cirque du Soleil&quot; at the Royal Albert Hall. They considered how &quot;tasteless and wrong&quot; it would be to lean forward to him every time that an acrobat did a stunt and yell the catchphrase and then they realised that that&#x27;s exactly what their fictional priests would do. This was also played upon when Wilson made a guest appearance on the comedy TV quiz show &quot;Shooting Stars&quot;, in which Vic Reeves and Bob Mortimer purposefully misquoted his catchphrase by referring to him as &quot;Richard &#x27;I don&#x27;t believe you&#x27; Wilson&quot;.

===&quot;One Foot in the Grave - 30 Years Of Laughs&quot;===
In April 2023, Channel 5 aired a 67-minute special retrospective for their &quot;Comedy Classics&quot; series. Cast, crew and celebrities discuss and pay tribute to the show. The documentary features an interview with Wilson, sharing his memories of the show, along with other cast members Doreen Mantle, who was 96 years old at the time, Angus Deayton, as well as director Christine Gernon.

==VHS and DVD releases==
All six series and specials were initially available on BBC Worldwide VHS video tapes during the late 1990s and early 2000s. The Comic Relief Shorts from 1993 and 2001 have not been released on DVD. A One Foot in the Grave Very Best of DVD featuring five of the greatest episodes was released on 22 October 2001 in Region 2. Then on 8 July 2004, a One Foot in the Grave Very Best of was also released in Region 4. Each series was gradually released on DVD in Region 2 between 2004 and 2006, with a complete series 1-6 box set towards the end of 2006. A slimmer series 1-6 box set was released in 2010 in Region 2.

==Foreign versions==
===&quot;One Leg in the Grave&quot;===
A German version was made of the series in 1996–97, &quot;Mit einem Bein im Grab&quot; (&quot;One Leg in the Grave&quot;), directed by Thomas Nennstiel and Frank Strecker. It was broadcast on Das Erste. It starred Heinz Schubert as &quot;Viktor Bölkhoff&quot;, Brigitte Böttrich as &quot;Margret Bölkhoff&quot; and Irm Hermann as &quot;Lisbeth Albermann&quot;.

===&quot;A Foot in the Grave&quot;===
A Swedish version, &quot;En fot i graven&quot; (&quot;A Foot in the Grave&quot;) was made in 2001. Produced by commercial television channel TV4 and aired on SVT, it starred Gösta Ekman as &quot;Victor Melldrov&quot; and Lena Söderblom as his wife. A total of 12 episodes were broadcast.

===&quot;With One Foot in the Grave&quot;===
In 2006 a Dutch version was made under the title &quot;Met één been in het graf&quot; (&quot;With One Foot in the Grave&quot;) airing on NCRV. It starred Serge Henri Valcke as Victor Monter. The series was directed by Zdenek Kraus, who had directed the highly successful series &quot;Toen Was Geluk Heel Gewoon&quot; (&quot;Then Happiness Was Common&quot;, based on the American sitcom &quot;The Honeymooners&quot;) and was adapted for Dutch television by Ger Apeldoorn and Harm Edens, who also wrote Het Zonnetje in Huis. The series only lasted one series.

===&quot;Cosby&quot;===

The American version, &quot;Cosby&quot;, ran on CBS from 1996 to 2000. Named after its star Bill Cosby (whose character was named Hilton Lucas), it was a looser and lighter adaptation, with Renwick listed as a consultant.

==See also==
* &quot;Waiting for God&quot; (TV series)

==References==
===Bibliography===

==External links==
* &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; at the former BBC Guide to Comedy (archive)
* 
* &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; at the British Film Institute
* 
* 
* &quot;One Foot in the Grave&quot; at the MBC&#x27;s Encyclopedia of Television
* DVD Review for Complete Series, and production history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q918098" start="46" end="52" title="British sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238999" start="64" end="77" title="David Renwick" label="David Renwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148365" start="155" end="172" title="Christmas special" label="Christmas special"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926148" start="463" end="477" title="Victor Meldrew" label="Victor Meldrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q516671" start="489" end="503" title="Richard Wilson (Scottish actor)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851506" start="554" end="569" title="Annette Crosbie" label="Annette Crosbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529406" start="649" end="659" title="Les Dawson" label="Les Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134643" start="879" end="895" title="Southern England" label="Southern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q795613" start="1111" end="1132" title="BBC Television Centre" label="BBC Television Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47490988" start="1187" end="1195" title="Walkford" label="Walkford"/>
<link wikidata="Q925424" start="1199" end="1211" title="Christchurch, Dorset" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="1213" end="1219" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="1322" end="1334" title="Black comedy" label="black humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="1339" end="1349" title="Surreal humour" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="1511" end="1516" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="1565" end="1587" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135735" start="1595" end="1637" title="100 Greatest British Television Programmes" label="100 Greatest British Television Programmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="1669" end="1680" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="2680" end="2686" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="2753" end="2765" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="2938" end="2943" title="farce" label="farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="2961" end="2968" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784357" start="2986" end="3003" title="Things Aren&amp;#x27;t Simple Any More" label="the final episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q386899" start="3027" end="3038" title="Hit and run" label="hit-and-run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949058" start="3363" end="3386" title="bottle episode" label="entirely in one setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714040" start="3702" end="3714" title="jury service" label="jury service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926148" start="4162" end="4176" title="Victor Meldrew" label="Victor Meldrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q516671" start="4178" end="4192" title="Richard Wilson (Scottish actor)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="4215" end="4226" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851506" start="7278" end="7293" title="Annette Crosbie" label="Annette Crosbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="7608" end="7618" title="double act" label="comic foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q449062" start="8364" end="8379" title="Barbara Windsor" label="Barbara Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q895679" start="8529" end="8542" title="boxing gloves" label="boxing gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q637125" start="10801" end="10808" title="florist" label="florist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297670" start="11276" end="11289" title="Doreen Mantle" label="Doreen Mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q526231" start="11516" end="11522" title="unseen character" label="unseen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586484" start="11881" end="11893" title="gorilla suit" label="gorilla suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q243237" start="12114" end="12121" title="taxidermy" label="stuffed"/>
<link wikidata="Q514809" start="12810" end="12819" title="cockatiel" label="cockatiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="13068" end="13073" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131672" start="13395" end="13408" title="Angus Deayton" label="Angus Deayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q181331" start="14356" end="14368" title="Post-it Note" label="Post-it Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="14785" end="14794" title="dachshund" label="dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154545" start="15081" end="15096" title="Janine Duvitski" label="Janine Duvitski"/>
<link wikidata="Q32907" start="16093" end="16099" title="domino" label="domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186995" start="16837" end="16849" title="Owen Brenman" label="Owen Brenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585671" start="18241" end="18254" title="Gordon Peters" label="Gordon Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252573" start="19135" end="19149" title="Happy Families" label="Happy Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150376" start="19280" end="19295" title="Richard Pearson (actor)" label="Richard Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19349" end="19360" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088327" start="20063" end="20073" title="dictaphone" label="dictaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="21142" end="21154" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q914229" start="21407" end="21417" title="agony aunt" label="agony aunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516056" start="21687" end="21702" title="Gabrielle Blunt" label="Gabrielle Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="22008" end="22018" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401251" start="22251" end="22265" title="Profumo affair" label="Profumo affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628266" start="22993" end="23008" title="studio audience" label="studio audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q20014035" start="23148" end="23170" title="Galápagos tortoise" label="Galapagos Giant Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238999" start="23203" end="23216" title="David Renwick" label="David Renwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647563" start="23600" end="23612" title="Susan Belbin" label="Susan Belbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660022" start="23716" end="23731" title="Sydney Lotterby" label="Sydney Lotterby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098302" start="23769" end="23783" title="Gareth Gwenlan" label="Gareth Gwenlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="24340" end="24351" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208629" start="24551" end="24560" title="Pokesdown" label="Pokesdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9340645" start="24994" end="25006" title="Springbourne" label="Springbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q925424" start="25572" end="25584" title="Christchurch, Dorset" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320452" start="25600" end="25613" title="Richmond Hill, Bournemouth" label="Richmond Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q608194" start="25636" end="25649" title="Boscombe Pier" label="Boscombe Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q26669047" start="25651" end="25672" title="Bournemouth Town Hall" label="Bournemouth Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950301" start="25674" end="25691" title="Bournemouth and Poole College" label="Lansdowne College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109080" start="25693" end="25714" title="Christchurch Hospital, Dorset" label="Christchurch Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q20047279" start="25730" end="25753" title="Royal Victoria Hospital, Bournemouth" label="Royal Victoria Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q608194" start="25755" end="25763" title="Boscombe" label="Boscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295440" start="25935" end="25959" title="Shawford railway station" label="Shawford railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="25961" end="25970" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649006" start="26119" end="26130" title="Susie Blake" label="Susie Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221952" start="26132" end="26141" title="John Bird (actor)" label="John Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="26143" end="26160" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="26162" end="26172" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271132" start="26174" end="26188" title="Diana Coupland" label="Diana Coupland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671473" start="26190" end="26202" title="Phil Daniels" label="Phil Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234562" start="26204" end="26219" title="Edward de Souza" label="Edward de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230790" start="26221" end="26234" title="Hannah Gordon" label="Hannah Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548249" start="26236" end="26249" title="Georgina Hale" label="Georgina Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372976" start="26251" end="26259" title="Roy Hudd" label="Roy Hudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072751" start="26261" end="26272" title="Jimmy Jewel" label="Jimmy Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378908" start="26274" end="26285" title="Rula Lenska" label="Rula Lenska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052248" start="26287" end="26300" title="Stephen Lewis (actor)" label="Stephen Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q786637" start="26302" end="26313" title="Paul Merton" label="Paul Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231556" start="26315" end="26327" title="Brian Murphy (actor)" label="Brian Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360810" start="26329" end="26345" title="Christopher Ryan" label="Christopher Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198418" start="26347" end="26358" title="Jim Sweeney (comedian)" label="Jim Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q449062" start="26360" end="26375" title="Barbara Windsor" label="Barbara Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q449036" start="26377" end="26386" title="Joan Sims" label="Joan Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q310932" start="26391" end="26403" title="Ray Winstone" label="Ray Winstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131672" start="26412" end="26425" title="Angus Deayton" label="Angus Deayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414129" start="26496" end="26512" title="Geoffrey Perkins" label="Geoffrey Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830261" start="26517" end="26539" title="Michael Fenton Stevens" label="Michael Fenton Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q436620" start="26761" end="26771" title="Lucy Davis" label="Lucy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179659" start="26773" end="26787" title="Joanna Scanlan" label="Joanna Scanlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276942" start="26789" end="26802" title="Eamonn Walker" label="Eamonn Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621173" start="26807" end="26820" title="Arabella Weir" label="Arabella Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="26871" end="26881" title="theme song" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="26916" end="26925" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386773" start="27149" end="27177" title="Eric Idle Sings Monty Python" label="Eric Idle Sings Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008016" start="27233" end="27248" title="Bread of Heaven" label="Bread of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q20014035" start="27450" end="27468" title="Galápagos tortoise" label="Galápagos tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335557" start="27540" end="27548" title="Ed Welch" label="Ed Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512638" start="27688" end="27717" title="God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen" label="God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="27755" end="27768" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299710" start="27781" end="27794" title="Karelia Suite" label="Karelia Suite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27809" end="27846" title="List of One Foot in the Grave episodes#Christmas Specials (1995 to 1997)" label="Christmas special &amp;quot;Endgame&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q44833" start="28002" end="28012" title="J. J. Cale" label="J. J. Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443475" start="28150" end="28165" title="End of the Line (Traveling Wilburys song)" label="End of the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q332399" start="28179" end="28197" title="Traveling Wilburys" label="Traveling Wilburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="28284" end="28289" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q516671" start="28399" end="28413" title="Richard Wilson (Scottish actor)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851506" start="28481" end="28496" title="Annette Crosbie" label="Annette Crosbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446049" start="28604" end="28628" title="Royal Television Society" label="Royal Television Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="28637" end="28657" title="British Comedy Award" label="British Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q769567" start="28781" end="28807" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Best Sitcom" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Best Sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="28869" end="28891" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135735" start="28899" end="28941" title="BFI TV 100" label="100 Greatest British Television Programmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="29184" end="29192" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372181" start="29367" end="29381" title="Rowland Rivron" label="Rowland Rivron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252573" start="29911" end="29925" title="Happy Families" label="Happy Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="30056" end="30089" title="Broadcasting Standards Commission" label="Broadcasting Standards Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784357" start="30159" end="30193" title="Things Aren&amp;#x27;t Simple Any More" label="Things Aren&amp;#x27;t Simple Any More"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303510" start="30284" end="30304" title="Judith Keppel" label="first jackpot winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997397" start="30337" end="30367" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (British game show)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="30430" end="30433" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177022" start="30449" end="30531" title="Counterprogramming (television)" label="engineering this in order to damage the final episode&amp;#x27;s expected high ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017292" start="30562" end="30595" title="Independent Television Commission" label="Independent Television Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="30772" end="30777" title="News media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="31170" end="31181" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="31475" end="31492" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 4 Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366945" start="31763" end="31773" title="Father Ted" label="Father Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749670" start="31794" end="31806" title="The Mainland (Father Ted)" label="The Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858466" start="31820" end="31823" title="Father Ted Crilly" label="Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q947387" start="31940" end="31954" title="Graham Linehan" label="Graham Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799674" start="31959" end="31973" title="Arthur Mathews (writer)" label="Arthur Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q504715" start="32018" end="32037" title="Le Cirque du Soleil" label="Le Cirque du Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="32051" end="32068" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500603" start="32403" end="32417" title="Shooting Stars (British TV series)" label="Shooting Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="32666" end="32675" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297670" start="32941" end="32954" title="Doreen Mantle" label="Doreen Mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131672" start="32990" end="33003" title="Angus Deayton" label="Angus Deayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="33139" end="33142" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="33198" end="33210" title="Comic Relief (charity)" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="33746" end="33752" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33802" end="33824" title=":de:Mit einem Bein im Grab" label="Mit einem Bein im Grab"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33936" end="33945" title=":de:Das Erste" label="Das Erste"/>
<link wikidata="Q101855" start="33958" end="33972" title="Heinz Schubert (actor)" label="Heinz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q78441" start="34059" end="34070" title="Irm Hermann" label="Irm Hermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="34146" end="34153" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34169" end="34184" title=":sv:En fot i graven" label="En fot i graven"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34302" end="34305" title=":sv:SVT" label="SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q925877" start="34318" end="34329" title="Gösta Ekman" label="Gösta Ekman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981805" start="34365" end="34379" title="Lena Söderblom" label="Lena Söderblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="34488" end="34493" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34533" end="34557" title=":nl:Met één been in het graf" label="Met één been in het graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360325" start="34615" end="34619" title="KRO-NCRV" label="NCRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q774834" start="34762" end="34788" title="Toen Was Geluk Heel Gewoon" label="Toen Was Geluk Heel Gewoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q742551" start="34870" end="34886" title="The Honeymooners" label="The Honeymooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135981" start="35090" end="35095" title="Cosby (TV series)" label="Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="35110" end="35113" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="35154" end="35164" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032548" start="35300" end="35339" title="Waiting for God (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Waiting for God&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="35445" end="35464" title="BBC Guide to Comedy" label="BBC Guide to Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="35521" end="35543" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q840284" start="35593" end="35596" title="Museum of Broadcast Communications" label="MBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22627" wikidata="Q223983" url="?curid=22627" title="Oscar">
<text>Oscar, OSCAR, or The Oscar may refer to:
== People and fictional and mythical characters ==
* Oscar (given name), including lists of people and fictional characters named Oscar, Óscar or Oskar
* Oscar (footballer, born 1954), Brazilian footballer José Oscar Bernardi
* Oscar (footballer, born 1991), Brazilian footballer Oscar dos Santos Emboaba Júnior
* Oscar (Irish mythology), son of Oisín and grandson of Finn mac Cumhall

== Places in the United States ==
* Oscar, Kentucky, an unincorporated community
* Oscar, Louisiana, an unincorporated community
* Oscar, Missouri, an unincorporated community
* Oscar, Oklahoma, an unincorporated community
* Oscar, Pennsylvania, an unincorporated community
* Oscar, Texas, an unincorporated community
* Oscar, West Virginia, an unincorporated community
* Oscar Township, Otter Tail County, Minnesota, a civil township
* Lake Oscar (disambiguation)

== Animals ==
* Oscar (bionic cat), a cat that had implants after losing both hind paws
* Oscar (bull) (died 1983) a ProRodeo Hall of Fame bucking bull
* Oscar (fish), &quot;Astronotus ocellatus&quot;
* Oscar (therapy cat), a cat purported to predict the deaths of hospice patients
* Oscar, a nickname for Beast of Busco, a North American cryptid turtle
* Oscar, a nickname for Unsinkable Sam, a World War II ship&#x27;s cat that survived three ships sinking

== Arts and entertainment ==
=== Film ===
* Oscar, another name for an Academy Awards
* &quot;The Oscar&quot; (film), starring Stephen Boyd
* &quot;Oscar&quot; (1967 film), starring Louis de Funès
* &quot;Oscar&quot; (1991 film), starring Sylvester Stallone

=== Other uses in arts and entertainment ===
* &quot;Oscar&quot; (opera), a 2013 opera about Oscar Wilde, by Theodore Morrison
* &quot;Oscar&quot; (video game), a 1993 platform game
* &quot;Oscar&quot; (TV serial), a 1985 British TV serial
* OSC OSCar, a music synthesizer manufactured by the Oxford Synthesizer Company

== Military ==
* Oscar, the letter O in the ICAO spelling alphabet (NATO phonetic alphabet)
* Oscar, Allied codename for the Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa, a World War II Japanese fighter aircraft
* Oscar-class submarine, a Soviet/Russian Navy submarine class
* Oscar (paradummy), American nickname for decoys dropped during the 1944 invasion of Normandy
* OSCAR (Optimum Survival Containment and Recovery), an escape pod project for the Vought F-8 Crusader fighter aircraft

== Science and technology ==
* OSCAR McMaster, an electronic medical record system
* OSCAR protocol, a protocol used by AOL Instant Messenger
* Open Source Cluster Application Resources, a Linux-based software installation
* OSCAR (gene), short for Osteoclast-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor
* Ocean Surface Current Analysis – Real time, a website that provides data on ocean currents
* OSCAR (Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio), a designation for amateur radio satellites

== Transport ==
* OScar, a project aiming to design an open source vehicle
* OScar (Danish automobile), a Danish sports car
* &quot;MSC Oscar&quot;, container ship
* &quot;Oscar&quot;, a a whaling ship sunk off Aberdeen in 1813
* Outer Suburban CAR, a name for the NSW TrainLink H set, a type of electric train in Australia

== Other uses ==
* List of storms named Oscar, storms bearing this name
* Oscar Health, a U.S. health insurance company
* Out of School Care and Recreation
* OSCAR Radio, a school FM radio station in Northamptonshire, England

== See also ==
* Student Oscars (Student Academy Awards), the Student Film Awards
* King Oscar (disambiguation)
* Veal Oscar, a culinary creation
* Oskar (disambiguation)
* Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator (OSCR)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223983" start="0" end="5" title="Oscar" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q223983" start="7" end="13" title="Oscar" label="OSCAR,"/>
<link wikidata="Q223983" start="17" end="26" title="Oscar" label="The Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951683" start="94" end="112" title="Oscar (given name)" label="Oscar (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q714500" start="195" end="224" title="Oscar (footballer, born 1954)" label="Oscar (footballer, born 1954)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19497" start="269" end="298" title="Oscar (footballer, born 1991)" label="Oscar (footballer, born 1991)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032632" start="355" end="378" title="Oscar (Irish mythology)" label="Oscar (Irish mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105832" start="463" end="478" title="Oscar, Kentucky" label="Oscar, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696984" start="510" end="526" title="Oscar, Louisiana" label="Oscar, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089627" start="558" end="573" title="Oscar, Missouri" label="Oscar, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105839" start="605" end="620" title="Oscar, Oklahoma" label="Oscar, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752882" start="652" end="671" title="Oscar, Pennsylvania" label="Oscar, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q113331289" start="703" end="715" title="Oscar, Texas" label="Oscar, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105834" start="747" end="767" title="Oscar, West Virginia" label="Oscar, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910167" start="799" end="843" title="Oscar Township, Otter Tail County, Minnesota" label="Oscar Township, Otter Tail County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20818396" start="864" end="891" title="Lake Oscar (disambiguation)" label="Lake Oscar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105840" start="909" end="927" title="Oscar (bionic cat)" label="Oscar (bionic cat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073823" start="983" end="995" title="Oscar (bull)" label="Oscar (bull)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442" start="1047" end="1059" title="Oscar (fish)" label="Oscar (fish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185550" start="1096" end="1115" title="Oscar (therapy cat)" label="Oscar (therapy cat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084285" start="1199" end="1213" title="Beast of Busco" label="Beast of Busco"/>
<link wikidata="Q893453" start="1271" end="1285" title="Unsinkable Sam" label="Unsinkable Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1424" end="1438" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q426293" start="1441" end="1469" title="The Oscar (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Oscar&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754968" start="1495" end="1524" title="Oscar (1967 film)" label="&amp;quot;Oscar&amp;quot; (1967 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q302682" start="1552" end="1581" title="Oscar (1991 film)" label="&amp;quot;Oscar&amp;quot; (1991 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931537" start="1659" end="1684" title="Oscar (opera)" label="&amp;quot;Oscar&amp;quot; (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105842" start="1741" end="1771" title="Oscar (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Oscar&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105837" start="1796" end="1825" title="Oscar (TV serial)" label="&amp;quot;Oscar&amp;quot; (TV serial)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072995" start="1854" end="1863" title="OSC OSCar" label="OSC OSCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190194" start="1977" end="1999" title="ICAO spelling alphabet" label="ICAO spelling alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="2058" end="2081" title="Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa" label="Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q513869" start="2126" end="2147" title="Oscar-class submarine" label="Oscar-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051444" start="2189" end="2206" title="Oscar (paradummy)" label="Oscar (paradummy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q502126" start="2365" end="2384" title="Vought F-8 Crusader" label="Vought F-8 Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254135" start="2434" end="2448" title="OSCAR McMaster" label="OSCAR McMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008089" start="2488" end="2502" title="OSCAR protocol" label="OSCAR protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096214" start="2547" end="2588" title="Open Source Cluster Application Resources" label="Open Source Cluster Application Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049649" start="2628" end="2640" title="OSCAR (gene)" label="OSCAR (gene)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2751" end="2795" title="Ocean current#OSCAR: Near-realtime global ocean surface current data set" label="website that provides data on ocean currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q455647" start="2866" end="2889" title="amateur radio satellite" label="amateur radio satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q996889" start="2910" end="2915" title="OScar" label="OScar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110339243" start="2969" end="2994" title="OScar (Danish automobile)" label="OScar (Danish automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759253" start="3024" end="3033" title="MSC Oscar" label="MSC Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q103935527" start="3079" end="3119" title="The Wreck of the Oscar (1 April 1813)" label="a whaling ship sunk off Aberdeen in 1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122978" start="3157" end="3176" title="NSW TrainLink H set" label="NSW TrainLink H set"/>
<link wikidata="Q30701913" start="3236" end="3262" title="List of storms named Oscar" label="List of storms named Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204297" start="3291" end="3303" title="Oscar Health" label="Oscar Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111609" start="3339" end="3372" title="Out of School Care and Recreation" label="Out of School Care and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017233" start="3375" end="3386" title="OSCAR Radio" label="OSCAR Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q375039" start="3461" end="3475" title="Student Oscars" label="Student Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q117207235" start="3528" end="3555" title="King Oscar (disambiguation)" label="King Oscar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13584745" start="3558" end="3568" title="Veal Oscar" label="Veal Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178739" start="3592" end="3614" title="Oskar (disambiguation)" label="Oskar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079411" start="3617" end="3657" title="Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator" label="Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22629" wikidata="Q2359535" url="?curid=22629" title="Ottoman Turks">
<text>The Ottoman Turks () were a Turkic ethnic group native to Anatolia. Originally from Central Asia, they migrated to Anatolia in the 13th century and founded the Ottoman Empire, in which they remained socio-politically dominant for the entirety of the six centuries that it existed. Their descendants are the present-day Turkish people, who comprise the majority of the population in the Republic of Turkey, which was established shortly after the end of World War I.

Reliable information about the early history of the Ottoman Turks remains scarce, but they take their Turkish name from Osman I, who founded the House of Osman alongside the Ottoman Empire; the name &quot;Osman&quot; was altered to &quot;Ottoman&quot; when it was transliterated into some European languages over time. The Ottoman principality, expanding from Söğüt, gradually began incorporating other Turkish-speaking Muslims and non-Turkish Christians into their realm. By the 1350s, they had begun crossing into Europe and eventually came to dominate the Mediterranean Sea. In 1453, the fall of Constantinople, which had served as the capital city of the Byzantine Empire, enabled the Ottoman Turks to control all major land routes between Asia and Europe. This development forced Western Europeans to find other ways to trade with Asians. Following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, the Ottoman Turkish identity ceased to exist; the Ottoman Turkish language, which was written using the Perso-Arabic script, developed into the modern Latinized Turkish language.

== History ==


=== Migration to Anatolia from Central Asia ===
The Ottomans first became known to the West in the 13th century, when they migrated from their homeland in Central Asia westward to the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum in Anatolia. The Ottoman Turks established a beylik in Western Anatolia under Ertugrul, the capital of which was . Ertugrul, leader of the nomadic Kayı tribe, first established a principality as part of the decaying Seljuk empire. His son Osman expanded the principality; the polity and the people were named &quot;Ottomans&quot; by Europeans after him (&quot;Ottoman&quot; being a corruption of &quot;Osman&quot;). Osman&#x27;s son Orhan expanded the growing realm into an empire, taking Nicaea (present-day İznik) and crossed the Dardanelles in 1362. All coins unearthed in during the two centuries before Orhan bear the names of Illkhanate rulers. The Seljuks were under the suzerainty of the Illkhanates and later the Turco-Mongol conqueror Tamerlane. 
The Ottoman Empire came into its own when Mehmed II captured the reduced Byzantine Empire&#x27;s well-defended capital, Constantinople in 1453.

=== Ottoman Empire until World War I ===
The Ottoman Empire came to rule much of the Balkans, the Caucasus, the Middle East (excluding Iran), and North Africa over the course of several centuries, with an advanced army and navy. The Empire lasted until the end of the First World War, when it was defeated by the Allies and partitioned. Following the successful Turkish War of Independence that ended with the Turkish national movement retaking most of the land lost to the Allies, the movement abolished the Ottoman sultanate on November 1, 1922, and proclaimed the Republic of Turkey on October 29, 1923. The movement nullified the Treaty of Sèvres and negotiated the significantly more favorable Treaty of Lausanne (1923), assuring recognition of modern Turkish national borders, termed &quot;Misak-ı Milli&quot; (National Pact).

=== Definition of a Turk ===
Not all Ottoman Empire citizens were Muslims and not all Ottoman Muslims were Turks, but starting from 1924, every citizen of the newly found Turkish Republic became considered as &quot;Turk&quot;. Article 88 of 1924 Constitution, which was based on the 1921 Constitution, states that the name Turk, as a political term, shall be understood to include all citizens of the Turkish Republic, without distinction of, or reference to race or religion.

==Culture==

The conquest of Constantinople began to make the Ottomans the rulers of one of the most profitable empires, connected to the flourishing Islamic cultures of the time, and at the crossroads of trade into Europe. The Ottomans made major developments in calligraphy, writing, law, architecture, and military science, and became the standard of opulence.

===Calligraphy===
Because Islam is a monotheistic religion that focuses heavily on learning the central text of the Quran and Islamic culture has historically tended towards discouraging or prohibiting figurative art, calligraphy became one of the foremost of the arts. 

The early Yâkût period was supplanted in the late 15th century by a new style pioneered by Şeyh Hamdullah (1429–1520), which became the basis for Ottoman calligraphy, focusing on the Nesih version of the script, which became the standard for copying the Quran (see Islamic calligraphy).

The next great change in Ottoman calligraphy came from the style of Hâfiz Osman (1642–1698), whose rigorous and simplified style found favour with an empire at its peak of territorial extent and governmental burdens. 

The late calligraphic style of the Ottomans was created by Mustafa Râkim (1757–1826) as an extension and reform of Osman&#x27;s style, placing greater emphasis on technical perfection, which broadened the calligraphic art to encompass the sülüs script as well as the Nesih script.

===Poetry===

Ottoman poetry included epic-length verse but is better known for shorter forms such as the gazel. For example, the epic poet Ahmedi (-1412) is remembered for his &quot;Alexander the Great&quot;. His contemporary Sheykhi wrote verses on love and romance. Yaziji-Oglu produced a religious epic on Mohammed&#x27;s life, drawing from the stylistic advances of the previous generation and Ahmedi&#x27;s epic forms.

===Painting===

By the 14th century, the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s prosperity made manuscript works available to merchants and craftsmen, and produced a flowering of miniatures that depicted pageantry, daily life, commerce, cities and stories, and chronicled events. 

By the late 18th century, European influences in painting were clear, with the introduction of oils, perspective, figurative paintings, use of anatomy and composition.

==See also==
*Ottoman Turkish language
**Ottoman Turkish alphabet
*Turkic peoples
**Turkish people
*Demographics of the Ottoman Empire
**Ottoman Arabs
**Ottoman Armenians
**Ottoman Greeks
**Ottoman Jews
**Ottoman Kurds

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; Primary sources


== External links ==

*BBC website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="4" end="17" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="28" end="47" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="58" end="66" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="84" end="96" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="160" end="174" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="319" end="333" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="386" end="404" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="453" end="464" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="587" end="594" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q193383" start="612" end="626" title="Ottoman dynasty" label="House of Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12798054" start="672" end="677" title="Osman (name)" label="Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="756" end="774" title="Languages of Europe" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="827" end="832" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="887" end="894" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="911" end="921" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q24945849" start="983" end="989" title="Muslim Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1026" end="1043" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="1058" end="1080" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1126" end="1142" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="1211" end="1215" title="West Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="1252" end="1269" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="1325" end="1358" title="dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="dissolution of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="1410" end="1434" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="1464" end="1483" title="Perso-Arabic script" label="Perso-Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q29575627" start="1511" end="1520" title="Latin-script alphabet" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1639" end="1647" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1711" end="1723" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="1740" end="1763" title="Seljuk Sultanate of Rum" label="Seljuk Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1767" end="1775" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="1809" end="1815" title="Duchy" label="beylik"/>
<link wikidata="Q243245" start="1842" end="1850" title="Ertugrul" label="Ertugrul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417344" start="1911" end="1921" title="Kayı tribe" label="Kayı tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="2003" end="2008" title="Osman I" label="Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="2253" end="2259" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="2296" end="2307" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="2563" end="2572" title="Mehmed the Conqueror" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2594" end="2610" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2641" end="2655" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="2751" end="2758" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="2764" end="2772" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2778" end="2789" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="2812" end="2824" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="2880" end="2884" title="Military of the Ottoman Empire" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="2889" end="2893" title="Ottoman Navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="2979" end="2985" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="2990" end="3001" title="Partitioning of the Ottoman Empire" label="partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="3028" end="3055" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="3076" end="3101" title="Turkish national movement" label="Turkish national movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809270" start="3161" end="3192" title="Abolition of the Ottoman Sultanate" label="abolished the Ottoman sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3233" end="3251" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="3300" end="3316" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="3365" end="3390" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)"/>
<link wikidata="Q643030" start="3462" end="3475" title="Misak-ı Milli" label="Misak-ı Milli"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="3607" end="3612" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535453" start="3741" end="3758" title="Turkish Constitution of 1924" label="1924 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q847806" start="3783" end="3800" title="Turkish Constitution of 1921" label="1921 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="4007" end="4021" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="4369" end="4374" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="4459" end="4464" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q669432" start="4517" end="4559" title="Aniconism in Islam" label="discouraging or prohibiting figurative art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561135" start="4706" end="4720" title="Sheikh Hamdullah" label="Şeyh Hamdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510712" start="4798" end="4803" title="Nesih" label="Nesih"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="4880" end="4899" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="Islamic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963076" start="4971" end="4982" title="Hâfiz Osman" label="Hâfiz Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584758" start="5181" end="5194" title="Mustafa Râkim" label="Mustafa Râkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q260780" start="5361" end="5366" title="Thuluth" label="sülüs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529053" start="5510" end="5515" title="gazel" label="gazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="5587" end="5606" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="6278" end="6302" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman Turkish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992372" start="6305" end="6329" title="Ottoman Turkish alphabet" label="Ottoman Turkish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="6331" end="6345" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="6348" end="6362" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256115" start="6364" end="6398" title="Demographics of the Ottoman Empire" label="Demographics of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6401" end="6414" title="Arabs#Ottoman era (1517–1918)" label="Ottoman Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q891146" start="6417" end="6434" title="Armenians in the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467740" start="6437" end="6451" title="Ottoman Greeks" label="Ottoman Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368712" start="6454" end="6466" title="History of the Jews in the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q118247609" start="6469" end="6482" title="Ottoman Kurds" label="Ottoman Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="6537" end="6551" title="Primary source" label="Primary source"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22637" wikidata="Q252733" url="?curid=22637" title="Object Management Group">
<text>The Object Management Group (OMG) is a computer industry standards consortium. OMG task forces develop enterprise integration standards for a range of technologies.

== Business activities ==
The goal of the OMG was a common portable and interoperable object model with methods and data that work using all types of development environments on all types of platforms.

The group provides only specifications, not implementations. But before a specification can be accepted as a standard by the group, the members of the submitter team must guarantee that they will bring a conforming product to market within a year. This is an attempt to prevent unimplemented (and unimplementable) standards. Other private companies or open source groups are encouraged to produce conforming products and OMG is attempting to develop mechanisms to enforce true interoperability.

OMG hosts four technical meetings per year for its members and interested nonmembers. The Technical Meetings provide a neutral forum to discuss, develop and adopt standards that enable software interoperability.

== History ==
Founded in 1989 by eleven companies (including Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Sun Microsystems, Apple Computer, American Airlines, iGrafx, and Data General), OMG&#x27;s initial focus was to create a heterogeneous distributed object standard. The founding executive team included Christopher Stone and John Slitz. Current leadership includes chairman and CEO Richard Soley, President and COO Bill Hoffman and Vice President and Technical Director Jason McC. Smith.

Since 2000, the group&#x27;s international headquarters has been located in Boston, Massachusetts.

In 1997, the Unified Modeling Language (UML) was added to the list of OMG adopted technologies. UML is a standardized general-purpose modeling language in the field of object-oriented software engineering.

In June 2005, the Business Process Management Initiative (BPMI.org) and OMG announced the merger of their respective Business Process Management (BPM) activities to form the Business Modeling and Integration Domain Task Force (BMI DTF).

In 2006 the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) was adopted as a standard by OMG. In 2007 the Business Motivation Model (BMM) was adopted as a standard by the OMG. The BMM is a metamodel that provides a vocabulary for corporate governance and strategic planning and is particularly relevant to businesses undertaking governance, regulatory compliance, business transformation and strategic planning activities.

In 2009 OMG, together with the Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon launched the Consortium of IT Software Quality (CISQ).

=== 2010 ===
In 2011 OMG formed the Cloud Standards Customer Council. Founding sponsors included CA, IBM, Kaavo, Rackspace and Software AG. The CSCC is an OMG end user advocacy group dedicated to accelerating cloud&#x27;s successful adoption, and drilling down into the standards, security and interoperability issues surrounding the transition to the cloud.

In September 2011, the OMG Board of Directors voted to adopt the Vector Signal and Image Processing Library (VSIPL) as the latest OMG specification. Work for adopting the specification was led by Mentor Graphics&#x27; Embedded Software Division, RunTime Computing Solutions, The Mitre Corporation as well as the High Performance Embedded Computing Software Initiative (HPEC-SI). VSIPL is an application programming interface (API). VSIPL and VSIPL++ contain functions used for common signal processing kernel and other computations. These functions include basic arithmetic, trigonometric, transcendental, signal processing, linear algebra, and image processing. The VSIPL family of libraries has been implemented by multiple vendors for a range of processor architectures, including x86, PowerPC, Cell, and NVIDIA GPUs. VSIPL and VSIPL++ are designed to maintain portability across a range of processor architectures. Additionally, VSIPL++ was designed from the start to include support for parallelism.

Late 2012 early 2013, the group&#x27;s Board of Directors adopted the Automated Function Point (AFP) specification. The push for adoption was led by the Consortium for IT Software Quality (CISQ). AFP provides a standard for automating the popular function point measure according to the counting guidelines of the International Function Point User Group (IFPUG).

On March 27, 2014, OMG announced it would be managing the newly formed Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC).

== Ratified ISO Standards ==
Of the many standards maintained by the OMG, 13 have been ratified as ISO standards. These standards are:
== See also ==
*DIIOP
*ReqIF

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252733" start="4" end="27" title="Object Management Group" label="Object Management Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q252733" start="29" end="32" title="Object Management Group" label="OMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="57" end="66" title="standardization" label="standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="67" end="77" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="1139" end="1154" title="Hewlett-Packard Company" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1156" end="1159" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="1161" end="1177" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="1179" end="1193" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="1195" end="1212" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172222" start="1226" end="1238" title="Data General" label="Data General"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="1296" end="1307" title="Distributed computing" label="distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="1308" end="1314" title="object (computing)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329140" start="1441" end="1454" title="Richard Soley" label="Richard Soley"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1624" end="1630" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1632" end="1645" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="1661" end="1686" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017605" start="2105" end="2140" title="Business Process Model and Notation" label="Business Process Model and Notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001768" start="2194" end="2219" title="Business Motivation Model" label="Business Motivation Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="2417" end="2427" title="governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q626741" start="2429" end="2450" title="regulatory compliance" label="regulatory compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001958" start="2452" end="2475" title="business transformation" label="business transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q932522" start="2480" end="2498" title="strategic planning" label="strategic planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760963" start="2543" end="2573" title="Software Engineering Institute" label="Software Engineering Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="2577" end="2592" title="Carnegie Mellon" label="Carnegie Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994757" start="2606" end="2639" title="CISQ" label="Consortium of IT Software Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q600624" start="2746" end="2748" title="CA Technologies" label="CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2750" end="2753" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343675" start="2755" end="2760" title="Kaavo" label="Kaavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990586" start="2762" end="2771" title="Rackspace" label="Rackspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q567371" start="2776" end="2787" title="Software AG" label="Software AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153205" start="3205" end="3220" title="Mentor Graphics" label="Mentor Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q627039" start="3288" end="3305" title="Mitre Corporation" label="Mitre Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277601" start="4262" end="4276" title="function point" label="function point"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881131" start="4450" end="4480" title="Industrial Internet Consortium" label="Industrial Internet Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="4588" end="4591" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205115" start="4640" end="4645" title="DIIOP" label="DIIOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145498" start="4647" end="4652" title="Requirements_Interchange_Format" label="ReqIF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22638" wikidata="Q226011" url="?curid=22638" title="OMG">
<text>OMG may refer to:

==Acronyms==
* &quot;Oh my God!&quot; (sometimes also &quot;Oh my Goodness!&quot; or &quot;Oh my Gosh!&quot;) is a common abbreviation meaning shock or surprise, often used in SMS messages and Internet communications
* OMG is the IATA code for Omega Airport, Omega, Namibia
* Operational manoeuvre group of the Soviet military
* Outlaw motorcycle gangs
* Order of Mapungubwe (Gold (OMG), for exceptional achievements)
* Oh My Gigabytes!, a Telkomsel Internet package
* One Man Gang wrestling

==Books==
*&quot;OMG! Magazine&quot;, a news, entertainment, and lifestyle magazine
*&quot;Oh My Goddess!&quot;, a 1988 manga
*&quot;OMGWACA&quot;, initialism for the 2019-2023 &quot;Oh My God, What a Complete Aisling&quot; book series

==Film and television==
* &quot;OMG, I&#x27;m a Robot!&quot;, a 2015 Israeli film
* &quot;OMG – Oh My God!&quot;, a 2012 Indian religious comedy-drama film by Umesh Shukla
** &quot;OMG 2&quot;, a 2023 sequel film by Amit Rai
* &quot;Oh My Ghost&quot; (TV series), a 2015 South Korean television series
* &quot;Oh My God&quot; (Louis C.K. special), 2013
* &quot;OMG&quot; (Oh, My Girl!), a 2009 romantic comedy film directed by Dante Nico Garcia
* &quot;&quot;, 2024 Telugu film

==Games==
* OMG (eSports), a Chinese &quot;League of Legends&quot; gaming team
* OMGcon, an anime/gaming convention in Kentucky, US

==Music==
===Bands===
* OMG (group) (Officially Miss Guided), a teenage American girl group
* Oh My Girl, a South Korean girl group
* Old Man Gloom, an American extreme metal band

===Albums===
* &quot;OMG&quot; (album), Rusko
*&quot;OMG&quot; (single album), NewJeans

===Songs===
* &quot;OMG&quot; (Usher song), 2010
* &quot;OMG&quot; (Camila Cabello song), 2017
* &quot;OMG&quot; (Gryffin and Carly Rae Jepsen song), 2019
* &quot;OMG&quot; (NewJeans song), 2023
* &quot;OMG&quot; (Candelita song), a 2024 by Jose Iglesias
* &quot;O.M.G&quot;, by Jenna Rose
* &quot;OMG&quot;, by Little Mix from &quot;Get Weird&quot;
* &quot;OMG&quot;, by Arash
* &quot;OMG&quot;, a song by Koda Kumi from the 2019 album &quot;Re(cord)&quot;
* &quot;OMG!&quot;, single by German rapper Marteria
* &quot;OMG&quot;, song by Sampa the Great
* &quot;OMG (Oh My God)&quot;, by TaeTiSeo from &quot;Twinkle&quot;
* &quot;OMG (Oh My Gosh)&quot;, by Sabrina Washington

==People==
* O&#x27;Shea Jackson Jr., known by his stage name OMG, is an American actor, rapper and son of Ice Cube

==Politics==
* Orkney Manifesto Group, a political party based in Orkney, Scotland

==Science and technology==
* OMG (gene), encodes the oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein in humans
* OMG particle, an ultra-high-energy cosmic ray observed in 1991
* Object Management Group, on computer industry standards
* OM Group, a chemistry firm based in Cleveland, Ohio, United States
* OpenMG, file format&#x27;s filename extension

==See also==
* Oh My God (disambiguation)
* Oh my gosh (disambiguation)
* Oh My Ghost (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226011" start="0" end="3" title="OMG" label="OMG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="195" end="207" title="SMS language#SMS dictionaries" label="SMS messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824649" start="263" end="276" title="Omega Airport" label="Omega Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q839402" start="295" end="322" title="Operational manoeuvre group" label="Operational manoeuvre group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849110" start="348" end="370" title="Outlaw motorcycle gang" label="Outlaw motorcycle gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233010" start="374" end="393" title="Order of Mapungubwe" label="Order of Mapungubwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786124" start="459" end="468" title="Telkomsel" label="Telkomsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720095" start="488" end="500" title="One Man Gang" label="One Man Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="501" end="510" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072709" start="529" end="542" title="OMG! Magazine" label="OMG! Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q467681" start="603" end="617" title="Oh My Goddess!" label="Oh My Goddess!"/>
<link wikidata="Q124535128" start="695" end="729" title="Oh My God, What a Complete Aisling" label="Oh My God, What a Complete Aisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16132832" start="781" end="803" title="OMG, I&amp;#x27;m a Robot!" label="OMG, I&amp;#x27;m a Robot!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306893" start="839" end="855" title="OMG – Oh My God!" label="OMG – Oh My God!"/>
<link wikidata="Q110263831" start="930" end="935" title="OMG 2" label="OMG 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q20062598" start="976" end="1011" title="Oh My Ghost (2015 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Oh My Ghost&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136350" start="1053" end="1095" title="Oh My God (Louis C.K. special)" label="&amp;quot;Oh My God&amp;quot; (Louis C.K. special)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072712" start="1104" end="1134" title="OMG (Oh, My Girl!)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (Oh, My Girl!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21190897" start="1240" end="1253" title="OMG (eSports)" label="OMG (eSports)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072717" start="1309" end="1315" title="OMGcon" label="OMGcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072721" start="1385" end="1396" title="OMG (group)" label="OMG (group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794854" start="1455" end="1465" title="Oh My Girl" label="Oh My Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12127959" start="1495" end="1508" title="Old Man Gloom" label="Old Man Gloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072713" start="1557" end="1580" title="OMG (album)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115173600" start="1589" end="1619" title="OMG (single album)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (single album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923082" start="1645" end="1673" title="OMG (Usher song)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (Usher song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35249249" start="1682" end="1719" title="OMG (Camila Cabello song)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (Camila Cabello song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790091" start="1728" end="1779" title="OMG (Gryffin and Carly Rae Jepsen song)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (Gryffin and Carly Rae Jepsen song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116030175" start="1788" end="1819" title="OMG (NewJeans song)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (NewJeans song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130425972" start="1828" end="1860" title="OMG (Candelita song)" label="&amp;quot;OMG&amp;quot; (Candelita song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186330" start="1872" end="1885" title="Jose Iglesias (baseball)" label="Jose Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177777" start="1910" end="1920" title="Jenna Rose" label="Jenna Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501869" start="1965" end="1974" title="Get Weird" label="Get Weird"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2003" end="2008" title="Arash discography#Singles" label="Arash"/>
<link wikidata="Q78120657" start="2074" end="2082" title="Re(cord)" label="Re(cord)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36815" start="2133" end="2141" title="Marteria" label="Marteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q50720645" start="2169" end="2184" title="Sampa the Great" label="Sampa the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q491654" start="2239" end="2246" title="Twinkle (EP)" label="Twinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q579903" start="2288" end="2306" title="Sabrina Washington" label="Sabrina Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667862" start="2321" end="2344" title="O&amp;#x27;Shea Jackson Jr." label="O&amp;#x27;Shea Jackson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="2415" end="2423" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761668" start="2440" end="2462" title="Orkney Manifesto Group" label="Orkney Manifesto Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030275" start="2538" end="2548" title="OMG (gene)" label="OMG (gene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61931" start="2610" end="2622" title="OMG particle" label="OMG particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q252733" start="2675" end="2698" title="Object Management Group" label="Object Management Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545542" start="2733" end="2741" title="OM Group" label="OM Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q464649" start="2802" end="2808" title="OpenMG" label="OpenMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q397829" start="2864" end="2890" title="Oh My God (disambiguation)" label="Oh My God (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109339670" start="2893" end="2920" title="Oh my gosh (disambiguation)" label="Oh my gosh (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27790488" start="2923" end="2951" title="Oh My Ghost (disambiguation)" label="Oh My Ghost (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22641" wikidata="Q44996" url="?curid=22641" title="Oxford English Dictionary">
<text>The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) is the principal historical dictionary of the English language, published by Oxford University Press (OUP), a University of Oxford publishing house. The dictionary, which published its first edition in 1884, traces the historical development of the English language, providing a comprehensive resource to scholars and academic researchers, and provides ongoing descriptions of English language usage in its variations around the world.

In 1857, work first began on the dictionary, though the first edition was not published In until 1884. It began to be published in unbound fascicles as work continued on the project, under the name of &quot;A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles; Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by The Philological Society&quot;. In 1895, the title &quot;The Oxford English Dictionary&quot; was first used unofficially on the covers of the series, and in 1928 the full dictionary was republished in 10 bound volumes.

In 1933, the title &quot;The Oxford English Dictionary&quot; fully replaced the former name in all occurrences in its reprinting as 12 volumes with a one-volume supplement. More supplements came over the years until 1989, when the second edition was published, comprising 21,728 pages in 20 volumes. Since 2000, compilation of a third edition of the dictionary has been underway, approximately half of which was complete by 2018.

In 1988, the first electronic version of the dictionary was made available, and the online version has been available since 2000. By April 2014, it was receiving over two million visits per month. The third edition of the dictionary is expected to be available exclusively in electronic form; the CEO of OUP has stated that it is unlikely that it will ever be printed.

== Historical nature ==
As a historical dictionary, the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; features entries in which the earliest ascertainable recorded sense of a word, whether current or obsolete, is presented first, and each additional sense is presented in historical order according to the date of its earliest ascertainable recorded use. Following each definition are several brief illustrating quotations presented in chronological order from the earliest ascertainable use of the word in that sense to the last ascertainable use for an obsolete sense, to indicate both its life span and the time since its desuetude, or to a relatively recent use for current ones.

The format of the &quot;OED&quot;″s entries has influenced numerous other historical lexicography projects. The forerunners to the &quot;OED&quot;, such as the early volumes of the &quot;Deutsches Wörterbuch&quot;, had initially provided few quotations from a limited number of sources, whereas the &quot;OED&quot; editors preferred larger groups of quite short quotations from a wide selection of authors and publications. This influenced later volumes of this and other lexicographical works.

== Entries and relative size ==
According to the publishers, it would take a single person 120 years to &quot;key in&quot; the 59 million words of the &quot;OED&quot; second edition, 60 years to proofread them, and 540 megabytes to store them electronically. As of 30 November 2005, the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; contained approximately 301,100 main entries. Supplementing the entry headwords, there are 157,000 bold-type combinations and derivatives; 169,000 italicized-bold phrases and combinations; 616,500 word-forms in total, including 137,000 pronunciations; 249,300 etymologies; 577,000 cross-references; and 2,412,400 usage quotations. The dictionary&#x27;s latest, complete print edition (second edition, 1989) was printed in 20 volumes, comprising 291,500 entries in 21,730 pages. The longest entry in the &quot;OED2&quot; was for the verb &quot;set&quot;, which required 60,000 words to describe some 580 senses (430 for the bare verb, the rest in phrasal verbs and idioms). As entries began to be revised for the &quot;OED3&quot; in sequence starting from M, the record was progressively broken by the verbs &quot;make&quot; in 2000, then &quot;put&quot; in 2007, then &quot;run&quot; in 2011 with 645 senses.

Despite its considerable size, the &quot;OED&quot; is neither the world&#x27;s largest nor the earliest exhaustive dictionary of a language. Another earlier large dictionary is the Grimm brothers&#x27; dictionary of the German language, begun in 1838 and completed in 1961. The first edition of the is the first great dictionary devoted to a modern European language (Italian) and was published in 1612; the first edition of dates from 1694. The official dictionary of Spanish is the (produced, edited, and published by the Royal Spanish Academy), and its first edition was published in 1780. The &quot;Kangxi Dictionary&quot; of Chinese was published in 1716. The largest dictionary by number of pages is believed to be the Dutch .

== History ==
=== Origins ===
The dictionary began as a Philological Society project of a small group of intellectuals in London (and unconnected to Oxford University): Richard Chenevix Trench, Herbert Coleridge, and Frederick Furnivall, who were dissatisfied with the existing English dictionaries. The society expressed interest in compiling a new dictionary as early as 1844, but it was not until June 1857 that they began by forming an &quot;Unregistered Words Committee&quot; to search for words that were unlisted or poorly defined in current dictionaries. In November, Trench&#x27;s report was not a list of unregistered words; instead, it was the study &quot;On Some Deficiencies in our English Dictionaries&quot;, which identified seven distinct shortcomings in contemporary dictionaries:
* Incomplete coverage of obsolete words
* Inconsistent coverage of families of related words
* Incorrect dates for earliest use of words
* History of obsolete senses of words often omitted
* Inadequate distinction among synonyms
* Insufficient use of good illustrative quotations
* Space wasted on inappropriate or redundant content.

The society ultimately realized that the number of unlisted words would be far more than the number of words in the English dictionaries of the 19th century, and shifted their idea from covering only words that were not already in English dictionaries to a larger project. Trench suggested that a new, truly &quot;comprehensive&quot; dictionary was needed. On 7 January 1858, the society formally adopted the idea of a comprehensive new dictionary. Volunteer readers would be assigned particular books, copying passages illustrating word usage onto quotation slips. Later the same year, the society agreed to the project in principle, with the title &quot;A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles&quot; (&quot;NED&quot;).

=== Early editors ===

Richard Chenevix Trench (1807–1886) played the key role in the project&#x27;s first months, but his appointment as Dean of Westminster meant that he could not give the dictionary project the time that it required. He withdrew and Herbert Coleridge became the first editor.

On 12 May 1860, Coleridge&#x27;s dictionary plan was published and research was started. His house was the first editorial office. He arrayed 100,000 quotation slips in a 54 pigeon-hole grid. In April 1861, the group published the first sample pages; later that month, Coleridge died of tuberculosis, aged 30.

Thereupon Furnivall became editor; he was enthusiastic and knowledgeable, but temperamentally ill-suited for the work. Many volunteer readers eventually lost interest in the project, as Furnivall failed to keep them motivated. Furthermore, many of the slips were misplaced.

Furnivall believed that, since many printed texts from earlier centuries were not readily available, it would be impossible for volunteers to efficiently locate the quotations that the dictionary needed. As a result, he founded the Early English Text Society in 1864 and the Chaucer Society in 1868 to publish old manuscripts. Furnivall&#x27;s preparatory efforts lasted 21 years and provided numerous texts for the use and enjoyment of the general public, as well as crucial sources for lexicographers, but they did not actually involve compiling a dictionary. Furnivall recruited more than 800 volunteers to read these texts and record quotations. While enthusiastic, the volunteers were not well trained and often made inconsistent and arbitrary selections. Ultimately, Furnivall handed over nearly two tons of quotation slips and other materials to his successor.

In the 1870s, Furnivall unsuccessfully attempted to recruit both Henry Sweet and Henry Nicol to succeed him. He then approached James Murray, who accepted the post of editor. In the late 1870s, Furnivall and Murray met with several publishers about publishing the dictionary. In 1878, Oxford University Press agreed with Murray to proceed with the massive project; the agreement was formalized the following year. 20 years after its conception, the dictionary project finally had a publisher. It would take another 50 years to complete.
Late in his editorship, Murray learned that one especially prolific reader, W. C. Minor, was confined to a mental hospital for (in modern terminology) schizophrenia. Minor was a Yale University–trained surgeon and a military officer in the American Civil War who had been confined to Broadmoor Asylum for the Criminally Insane after killing a man in London. He invented his own quotation-tracking system, allowing him to submit slips on specific words in response to editors&#x27; requests. The story of how Murray and Minor worked together to advance the &quot;OED&quot; was retold in the 1998 book &quot;The Surgeon of Crowthorne&quot; (US title: &quot;The Professor and the Madman&quot;), which was the basis for a 2019 film, &quot;The Professor and the Madman&quot;, starring Mel Gibson and Sean Penn.

=== Oxford editors ===

During the 1870s, the Philological Society was concerned with the process of publishing a dictionary with such an immense scope. They had pages printed by publishers, but no publication agreement was reached; both the Cambridge University Press and the Oxford University Press were approached. The OUP finally agreed in 1879 (after two years of negotiating by Sweet, Furnivall, and Murray) to publish the dictionary and to pay Murray, who was both the editor and the Philological Society president. The dictionary was to be published as interval fascicles, with the final form in four volumes, totalling 6,400 pages. They hoped to finish the project in ten years.
Murray started the project, working in a corrugated iron outbuilding called the &quot;Scriptorium&quot; which was lined with wooden planks, bookshelves, and 1,029 pigeon-holes for the quotation slips. He tracked and regathered Furnivall&#x27;s collection of quotation slips, which were found to concentrate on rare, interesting words rather than common usages. For instance, there were ten times as many quotations for &quot;abusion&quot; as for &quot;abuse&quot;. He appealed, through newspapers distributed to bookshops and libraries, for readers who would report &quot;as many quotations as you can for ordinary words&quot; and for words that were &quot;rare, obsolete, old-fashioned, new, peculiar or used in a peculiar way&quot;. Murray had American philologist and liberal arts college professor Francis March manage the collection in North America; 1,000 quotation slips arrived daily to the Scriptorium and, by 1880, there were 2,500,000.

The first dictionary fascicle was published on 1 February 1884—twenty-three years after Coleridge&#x27;s sample pages. The full title was &quot;A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles; Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by The Philological Society&quot;; the 352-page volume, words from &quot;A&quot; to &quot;Ant&quot;, cost 12s 6d (). The total sales were only 4,000 copies.

The OUP saw that it would take too long to complete the work with unrevised editorial arrangements. Accordingly, new assistants were hired and two new demands were made on Murray. The first was that he move from Mill Hill to Oxford to work full-time on the project, which he did in 1885. Murray had his Scriptorium re-erected in the back garden of his new property.
Murray resisted the second demand: that if he could not meet schedule, he must hire a second, senior editor to work in parallel to him, outside his supervision, on words from elsewhere in the alphabet. Murray did not want to share the work, feeling that he would accelerate his work pace with experience. That turned out not to be so, and Philip Gell of the OUP forced the promotion of Murray&#x27;s assistant Henry Bradley (hired by Murray in 1884), who worked independently in the British Museum in London beginning in 1888. In 1896, Bradley moved to Oxford University.

Gell continued harassing Murray and Bradley with his business concerns – containing costs and speeding production – to the point where the project&#x27;s collapse seemed likely. Newspapers reported the harassment, particularly the &quot;Saturday Review&quot;, and public opinion backed the editors. Gell was fired, and the university reversed his cost policies. If the editors felt that the dictionary would have to grow larger, it would; it was an important work, and worth the time and money to properly finish.

Neither Murray nor Bradley lived to see it. Murray died in 1915, having been responsible for words starting with &quot;A–D&quot;, &quot;H–K&quot;, &quot;O–P&quot;, and &quot;T&quot;, nearly half the finished dictionary; Bradley died in 1923, having completed &quot;E–G&quot;, &quot;L–M&quot;, &quot;S–Sh&quot;, &quot;St&quot;, and &quot;W–We&quot;. By then, two additional editors had been promoted from assistant work to independent work, continuing without much trouble. William Craigie started in 1901 and was responsible for &quot;N&quot;, &quot;Q–R&quot;, &quot;Si–Sq&quot;, &quot;U–V&quot;, and &quot;Wo–Wy&quot;. The OUP had previously thought London too far from Oxford but, after 1925, Craigie worked on the dictionary in Chicago, where he was a professor. The fourth editor was Charles Talbut Onions, who compiled the remaining ranges starting in 1914: &quot;Su–Sz&quot;, &quot;Wh–Wo&quot;, and &quot;X–Z&quot;.

In 1919–1920, J. R. R. Tolkien was employed by the &quot;OED&quot;, researching etymologies of the &quot;Waggle&quot; to &quot;Warlock&quot; range; later he parodied the principal editors as &quot;The Four Wise Clerks of Oxenford&quot; in the story &quot;Farmer Giles of Ham&quot;.

By early 1894, a total of 11 fascicles had been published, or about one per year: four for &quot;A–B&quot;, five for &quot;C&quot;, and two for &quot;E&quot;. Of these, eight were 352 pages long, while the last one in each group was shorter to end at the letter break (which eventually became a volume break). At this point, it was decided to publish the work in smaller and more frequent instalments; once every three months beginning in 1895 there would be a fascicle of 64 pages, priced at 2s 6d. If enough material was ready, 128 or even 192 pages would be published together. This pace was maintained until World War I forced reductions in staff. Each time enough consecutive pages were available, the same material was also published in the original larger fascicles. Also in 1895, the title &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; was first used. It then appeared only on the outer covers of the fascicles; the original title was still the official one and was used everywhere else.

=== Completion of first edition and first supplement ===
The 125th and last fascicle covered words from &quot;Wise&quot; to the end of &quot;W&quot; and was published on 19 April 1928, and the full dictionary in bound volumes followed immediately. William Shakespeare is the most-quoted writer in the completed dictionary, with &quot;Hamlet&quot; his most-quoted work. George Eliot (Mary Ann Evans) is the most-quoted female writer. Collectively, the Bible is the most-quoted work (in many translations); the most-quoted single work is &quot;Cursor Mundi&quot;.

Additional material for a given letter range continued to be gathered after the corresponding fascicle was printed, with a view towards inclusion in a supplement or revised edition. A one-volume supplement of such material was published in 1933, with entries weighted towards the start of the alphabet where the fascicles were decades old. The supplement included at least one word (&quot;bondmaid&quot;) accidentally omitted when its slips were misplaced; many words and senses newly coined (famously &quot;appendicitis&quot;, coined in 1886 and missing from the 1885 fascicle, which came to prominence when Edward VII&#x27;s 1902 appendicitis postponed his coronation); and some previously excluded as too obscure (notoriously &quot;radium&quot;, omitted in 1903, months before its discoverers Pierre and Marie Curie won the Nobel Prize in Physics). Also in 1933 the original fascicles of the entire dictionary were re-issued, bound into 12 volumes, under the title &quot;The Oxford English Dictionary&quot;. This edition of 13 volumes including the supplement was subsequently reprinted in 1961 and 1970.

=== Second supplement ===
In 1933, Oxford had finally put the dictionary to rest; all work ended, and the quotation slips went into storage. However, the English language continued to change and, by the time 20 years had passed, the dictionary was outdated.

There were three possible ways to update it. The cheapest would have been to leave the existing work alone and simply compile a new supplement of perhaps one or two volumes, but then anyone looking for a word or sense and unsure of its age would have to look in three different places. The most convenient choice for the user would have been for the entire dictionary to be re-edited and retypeset, with each change included in its proper alphabetical place; but this would have been the most expensive option, with perhaps 15 volumes required to be produced. The OUP chose a middle approach: combining the new material with the existing supplement to form a larger replacement supplement.

Robert Burchfield was hired in 1957 to edit the second supplement; Charles Talbut Onions turned 84 that year but was still able to make some contributions as well. The work on the supplement was expected to take about seven years. It actually took 29 years, by which time the new supplement &quot;(OEDS)&quot; had grown to four volumes, starting with &quot;A&quot;, &quot;H&quot;, &quot;O&quot;, and &quot;Sea&quot;. They were published in 1972, 1976, 1982, and 1986 respectively, bringing the complete dictionary to 16 volumes, or 17 counting the first supplement.

Burchfield emphasized the inclusion of modern-day language and, through the supplement, the dictionary was expanded to include a wealth of new words from the burgeoning fields of science and technology, as well as popular culture and colloquial speech. Burchfield said that he broadened the scope to include developments of the language in English-speaking regions beyond the United Kingdom, including North America, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, India, Pakistan, and the Caribbean. Burchfield also removed, for unknown reasons, many entries that had been added to the 1933 supplement. In 2012, an analysis by lexicographer Sarah Ogilvie revealed that many of these entries were in fact foreign loanwords, despite Burchfield&#x27;s claim that he included more such words. The proportion was estimated from a sample calculation to amount to 17% of the foreign loan words and words from regional forms of English. Some of these had only a single recorded usage, but many had multiple recorded citations, and it ran against what was thought to be the established &quot;OED&quot; editorial practice and a perception that he had opened up the dictionary to &quot;World English&quot;.

=== Second edition ===
By the time the new supplement was completed, it was clear that the full text of the dictionary would need to be computerized. Achieving this would require retyping it once, but thereafter it would always be accessible for computer searching—as well as for whatever new editions of the dictionary might be desired, starting with an integration of the supplementary volumes and the main text. Preparation for this process began in 1983, and editorial work started the following year under the administrative direction of Timothy J. Benbow, with John A. Simpson and Edmund S. C. Weiner as co-editors. In 2016, Simpson published his memoir chronicling his years at the OED: &quot;The Word Detective: Searching for the Meaning of It All at the Oxford English Dictionary – A Memoir&quot; (New York: Basic Books).

Thus began the &quot;New Oxford English Dictionary (NOED)&quot; project. In the United States, more than 120 typists of the International Computaprint Corporation (now Reed Tech) started keying in over 350,000,000 characters, their work checked by 55 proof-readers in England. Retyping the text alone was not sufficient; all the information represented by the complex typography of the original dictionary had to be retained, which was done by marking up the content in SGML. A specialized search engine and display software were also needed to access it. Under a 1985 agreement, some of this software work was done at the University of Waterloo, Canada, at the &quot;Centre for the New Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, led by Frank Tompa and Gaston Gonnet; this search technology went on to become the basis for the Open Text Corporation. Computer hardware, database and other software, development managers, and programmers for the project were donated by the British subsidiary of IBM; the colour syntax-directed editor for the project, LEXX, was written by Mike Cowlishaw of IBM. The University of Waterloo, in Canada, volunteered to design the database. A. Walton Litz, an English professor at Princeton University who served on the Oxford University Press advisory council, was quoted in &quot;Time&quot; as saying &quot;I&#x27;ve never been associated with a project, I&#x27;ve never even heard of a project, that was so incredibly complicated and that met every deadline.&quot;

By 1989, the &quot;NOED&quot; project had achieved its primary goals, and the editors, working online, had successfully combined the original text, Burchfield&#x27;s supplement, and a small amount of newer material, into a single unified dictionary. The word &quot;new&quot; was again dropped from the name, and the second edition of the &quot;OED&quot;, or the &quot;OED2&quot;, was published. The first edition retronymically became the &quot;OED1&quot;.

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary 2&quot; was printed in 20 volumes. Up to a very late stage, all the volumes of the first edition were started on letter boundaries. For the second edition, there was no attempt to start them on letter boundaries, and they were made roughly equal in size. The 20 volumes started with &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B.B.C.&quot;, &quot;Cham&quot;, &quot;Creel&quot;, &quot;Dvandva&quot;, &quot;Follow&quot;, &quot;Hat&quot;, &quot;Interval&quot;, &quot;Look&quot;, &quot;Moul&quot;, &quot;Ow&quot;, &quot;Poise&quot;, &quot;Quemadero&quot;, &quot;Rob&quot;, &quot;Ser&quot;, &quot;Soot&quot;, &quot;Su&quot;, &quot;Thru&quot;, &quot;Unemancipated&quot;, and &quot;Wave&quot;.

The content of the &quot;OED2&quot; is mostly just a reorganization of the earlier corpus, but the retypesetting provided an opportunity for two long-needed format changes. The headword of each entry was no longer capitalized, allowing the user to readily see those words that actually require a capital letter. Murray had devised his own notation for pronunciation, there being no standard available at the time, whereas the &quot;OED2&quot; adopted the modern International Phonetic Alphabet. Unlike the earlier edition, all foreign alphabets except Greek were transliterated.

Following page 832 of Volume XX &quot;Wave-Zyxt&quot; there&#x27;s a 143-page separately paginated bibliography, a conflation of the OED 1st edition&#x27;s published with the 1933 Supplement and that in Volume IV of the Supplement published in 1986.

The British quiz show &quot;Countdown&quot; awarded the leather-bound complete version to the champions of each series between its inception in 1982 and Series 63 in 2010. The prize was axed after Series 83, completed in June 2021, due to being considered out of date.

When the print version of the second edition was published in 1989, the response was enthusiastic. Author Anthony Burgess declared it &quot;the greatest publishing event of the century&quot;, as quoted by the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; dubbed the book &quot;a scholarly Everest&quot;, and Richard Boston, writing for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, called it &quot;one of the wonders of the world&quot;.

=== Additions series ===
The supplements and their integration into the second edition were a great improvement to the &quot;OED&quot; as a whole, but it was recognized that most of the entries were still fundamentally unaltered from the first edition. Much of the information in the dictionary published in 1989 was already decades out of date, though the supplements had made good progress towards incorporating new vocabulary. Yet many definitions contained disproven scientific theories, outdated historical information, and moral values that were no longer widely accepted. Furthermore, the supplements had failed to recognize many words in the existing volumes as obsolete by the time of the second edition&#x27;s publication, meaning that thousands of words were marked as current despite no recent evidence of their use.

Accordingly, it was recognized that work on a third edition would have to begin to rectify these problems. The first attempt to produce a new edition came with the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series,&quot; a new set of supplements to complement the &quot;OED2&quot; with the intention of producing a third edition from them. The previous supplements appeared in alphabetical instalments, whereas the new series had a full A–Z range of entries within each individual volume, with a complete alphabetical index at the end of all words revised so far, each listed with the volume number which contained the revised entry.

However, in the end only three &quot;Additions&quot; volumes were published this way, two in 1993 and one in 1997, each containing about 3,000 new definitions. The possibilities of the World Wide Web and new computer technology in general meant that the processes of researching the dictionary and of publishing new and revised entries could be vastly improved. New text search databases offered vastly more material for the editors of the dictionary to work with, and with publication on the Web as a possibility, the editors could publish revised entries much more quickly and easily than ever before. A new approach was called for, and for this reason it was decided to embark on a new, complete revision of the dictionary.
* &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series&quot; Volume 1 (): Includes over 20,000 illustrative quotations showing the evolution of each word or meaning.
:*?th impression (1994-02-10)
* &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series&quot; Volume 2 ()
:*?th impression (1994-02-10)
* &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series&quot; Volume 3 (): Contains 3,000 new words and meanings from around the English-speaking world. Published by Clarendon Press.
:*?th impression (1997-10-09)

=== Third edition ===
Beginning with the launch of the first &quot;OED Online&quot; site in 2000, the editors of the dictionary began a major revision project to create a completely revised third edition of the dictionary (&quot;OED3&quot;), expected to be completed in 2037 at a projected cost of about £34 million.

Revisions were started at the letter &quot;M&quot;, with new material appearing every three months on the &quot;OED Online&quot; website. The editors chose to start the revision project from the middle of the dictionary in order that the overall quality of entries be made more even, since the later entries in the &quot;OED1&quot; generally tended to be better than the earlier ones. However, in March 2008, the editors announced that they would alternate each quarter between moving forward in the alphabet as before and updating &quot;key English words from across the alphabet, along with the other words which make up the alphabetical cluster surrounding them&quot;. With the relaunch of the &quot;OED Online&quot; website in December 2010, alphabetical revision was abandoned altogether.

The revision is expected roughly to double the dictionary in size. Apart from general updates to include information on new words and other changes in the language, the third edition brings many other improvements, including changes in formatting and stylistic conventions for easier reading and computerized searching, more etymological information, and a general change of focus away from individual words towards more general coverage of the language as a whole. While the original text drew its quotations mainly from literary sources such as novels, plays, and poetry, with additional material from newspapers and academic journals, the new edition will reference more kinds of material that were unavailable to the editors of previous editions, such as wills, inventories, account books, diaries, journals, and letters.

John Simpson was the first chief editor of the &quot;OED3&quot;. He retired in 2013 and was replaced by Michael Proffitt, who is the eighth chief editor of the dictionary.

The production of the new edition exploits computer technology, particularly since the inauguration in June 2005 of the &quot;Perfect All-Singing All-Dancing Editorial and Notation Application&quot;, or &quot;Pasadena&quot;. With this XML-based system, lexicographers can spend less effort on presentation issues such as the numbering of definitions. This system has also simplified the use of the quotations database, and enabled staff in New York to work directly on the dictionary in the same way as their Oxford-based counterparts.

Other important computer uses include internet searches for evidence of current usage and email submissions of quotations by readers and the general public.

==== New entries and words ====
&quot;Wordhunt&quot; was a 2005 appeal to the general public for help in providing citations for 50 selected recent words, and produced antedatings for many. The results were reported in a BBC TV series, &quot;Balderdash and Piffle&quot;. The &quot;OED&quot;″s readers contribute quotations: the department currently receives about 200,000 a year.

&quot;OED&quot; currently contains over 500,000 entries. The online &quot;OED&quot; is updated on a quarterly basis, with the addition of new words and senses, and the revision of existing entries.

== Formats ==

=== Compact editions ===
In 1971, the 13-volume &quot;OED1&quot; (1933) was reprinted as a two-volume &quot;Compact Edition&quot;, by photographically reducing each page to one-half its linear dimensions; each compact edition page held four &quot;OED1&quot; pages in a four-up (&quot;4-up&quot;) format. The two-volume letters were &quot;A&quot; and &quot;P&quot;; the first supplement was at the second volume&#x27;s end. The &quot;Compact Edition&quot; included, in a small slip-case drawer, a Bausch &amp; Lomb magnifying glass to help in reading reduced type. Many copies were inexpensively distributed through book clubs. In 1987, the second supplement was published as a third volume to the &quot;Compact Edition&quot;.

The 20-volume &quot;OED2&quot; (1989) was republished in 1991 as a compact edition (). The format was re-sized to one-third of original linear dimensions, a nine-up (&quot;9-up&quot;) format requiring a stronger magnifying glass (included), but allowing publication of a single-volume dictionary. This version include definitions of 500,000 words, in 290,000 main entries, with 137,000 pronunciations, 249,300 etymologies, 577,000 cross-references, and 2,412,000 illustrative quotations. It is accompanied &quot;A User&#x27;s Guide to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;&quot; by Donna Lee Berg. After this version was published, however, book club offers commonly continued to sell the two-volume 1971 &quot;Compact Edition&quot;.

=== Electronic versions ===

Once the dictionary was digitized and online, it was also available to be published on CD-ROM. The text of the first edition was made available in 1987. Afterward, three versions of the second edition were issued. Version 1 (1992) was identical in content to the printed second edition, and the CD itself was not copy-protected. Version 2 (1999) included the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Additions&quot; of 1993 and 1997. These CD-ROM editions are for Microsoft Windows only.

Version 3.0 was released in 2002 with additional words from the &quot;OED3&quot; and software improvements. Version 3.1.1 (2007) added support for hard disk installation, so that the user does not have to insert the CD to use the dictionary. It has been reported that this version will work on operating systems other than Windows, using emulation programs. Version 4.0 of the CD was released in June 2009 and has applications for both Windows (7 and later) and MacOS X (10.4 and later). This version uses the CD drive for installation, running only from the hard drive.

On 14 March 2000, the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Online&quot; (&quot;OED Online&quot;) became available to subscribers. The online database containing the &quot;OED2&quot; is updated quarterly with revisions that will be included in the &quot;OED3&quot; (see above). The online edition is the most up-to-date version of the dictionary available. The &quot;OED&quot; website is not optimized for mobile devices, but the developers have stated that there are plans to provide an API to facilitate the development of interfaces for querying the &quot;OED&quot;.

The price for an individual to use this edition is £100 or US$100 a year; consequently, most subscribers are large organizations such as universities. Some public libraries and companies have also subscribed, including public libraries in the United Kingdom, where access is funded by the Arts Council, and public libraries in New Zealand. Individuals who belong to a library which subscribes to the service are able to use the service from their own homes without charge.

* &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; Second edition on CD-ROM Version 3.1:
:*Upgrade version for 3.0 ():
::*?th impression (2005-08-18)
* &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; Second edition on CD-ROM Version 4.0: Includes 500,000 words with 2.5 million source quotations, 7,000 new words and meanings. Includes Vocabulary from OED 2nd Edition and all 3 Additions volumes. Supports Windows 2000-7 and Mac OS X 10.4–10.5). Flash-based dictionary.
:*Full version (/)
::*?th impression (2009-06-04)
:*Upgrade version for 2.0 and above (/): Supports Windows only.
::*?th impression (2009-07-15)
:*Print+CD-ROM version (): Supports Windows Vista and Mac OS).
::*?th impression (2009-11-16)

== Relationship to other Oxford dictionaries ==
The &quot;OED&quot;″s utility and renown as a historical dictionary have led to numerous offspring projects and other dictionaries bearing the Oxford name, though not all are directly related to the &quot;OED&quot; itself.

The &quot;Shorter Oxford English Dictionary,&quot; originally started in 1902 and completed in 1933, is an abridgement of the full work that retains the historical focus, but does not include any words which were obsolete before 1700 except those used by Shakespeare, Milton, Spenser, and the King James Bible. A completely new edition was produced from the &quot;OED2&quot; and published in 1993, with revisions in 2002 and 2007.

The &quot;Concise Oxford Dictionary&quot; is a different work, which aims to cover current English only, without the historical focus. The original edition, mostly based on the &quot;OED1&quot;, was edited by Francis George Fowler and Henry Watson Fowler and published in 1911, before the main work was completed. Revised editions appeared throughout the twentieth century to keep it up to date with changes in English usage.

&quot;The Pocket Oxford Dictionary of Current English&quot; was originally conceived by F. G. Fowler and H. W. Fowler to be compressed, compact, and concise. Its primary source is the Oxford English Dictionary, and it is nominally an abridgement of the Concise Oxford Dictionary. It was first published in 1924.

In 1998 the &quot;New Oxford Dictionary of English&quot; (&quot;NODE&quot;) was published. While also aiming to cover current English, &quot;NODE&quot; was not based on the &quot;OED&quot;. Instead, it was an entirely new dictionary produced with the aid of corpus linguistics. Once &quot;NODE&quot; was published, a similarly brand-new edition of the &quot;Concise Oxford Dictionary&quot; followed, this time based on an abridgement of &quot;NODE&quot; rather than the &quot;OED&quot;; &quot;NODE&quot; (under the new title of the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of English&quot;, or &quot;ODE&quot;) continues to be principal source for Oxford&#x27;s product line of current-English dictionaries, including the &quot;New Oxford American Dictionary&quot;, with the &quot;OED&quot; now only serving as the basis for scholarly historical dictionaries.

== Spelling ==
The &quot;OED&quot; lists British headword spellings (e.g., &quot;labour&quot;, &quot;centre&quot;) with variants following (&quot;labor&quot;, &quot;center&quot;, etc.). For the suffix more commonly spelt &quot;-ise&quot; in British English, OUP policy dictates a preference for the spelling &quot;-ize&quot;, e.g., &quot;realize&quot; vs. &quot;realise&quot; and &quot;globalization&quot; vs. &quot;globalisation&quot;. The rationale is etymological, in that the English suffix is mainly derived from the Greek suffix &quot;-ιζειν&quot;, (&quot;-izein&quot;), or the Latin &quot;-izāre&quot;. However, &quot;-ze&quot; is also sometimes treated as an Americanism insofar as the &quot;-ze&quot; suffix has crept into words where it did not originally belong, as with &quot;analyse&quot; (British English), which is spelt &quot;analyze&quot; in American English.

== Reception and criticism ==
British prime minister Stanley Baldwin described the &quot;OED&quot; as a &quot;national treasure&quot;. Author Anu Garg, founder of Wordsmith.org, has called it a &quot;lex icon&quot;. Tim Bray, co-creator of Extensible Markup Language (XML), credits the &quot;OED&quot; as the developing inspiration of that markup language.

However, despite its claims of authority, the dictionary has been criticized since the 1960s because of its scope, its claims to authority, its British-centredness and relative neglect of World Englishes, its implied but unacknowledged focus on literary language and, above all, its influence. The &quot;OED&quot;, as a commercial product, has always had to steer a line between scholarship and marketing. In his review of the 1982 supplement, University of Oxford linguist Roy Harris writes that criticizing the &quot;OED&quot; is extremely difficult because &quot;one is dealing not just with a dictionary but with a national institution&quot;, one that &quot;has become, like the English monarchy, virtually immune from criticism in principle&quot;. He further notes that neologisms from respected &quot;literary&quot; authors such as Samuel Beckett and Virginia Woolf are included, whereas usage of words in newspapers or other less &quot;respectable&quot; sources hold less sway, even though they may be commonly used. He writes that the &quot;OED&quot;″s &quot;[b]lack-and-white lexicography is also black-and-white in that it takes upon itself to pronounce authoritatively on the rights and wrongs of usage&quot;, faulting the dictionary&#x27;s prescriptive rather than descriptive usage.

To Harris, this prescriptive classification of certain usages as &quot;erroneous&quot; and the complete omission of various forms and usages cumulatively represent the &quot;social bias[es]&quot; of the (presumably well-educated and wealthy) compilers. However, the &quot;Guide to the Third Edition of the OED&quot; has stated that &quot;&quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; is not an arbiter of proper usage, despite its widespread reputation to the contrary&quot; and that the dictionary &quot;is intended to be descriptive, not prescriptive&quot;. The identification of &quot;erroneous and catachrestic&quot; usages is being removed from third edition entries, sometimes in favour of usage notes describing the attitudes to language which have previously led to these classifications. Another avenue of criticism is the dictionary&#x27;s non-inclusion of etymologies for words of AAVE or African language origin such as &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot; or &quot;&quot; (the latter two are possibly of Wolof and Mandinka languages, respectively). As of 2022, OUP is preparing a specialized &quot;Oxford Dictionary of African American English&quot; in collaboration with Harvard University&#x27;s Hutchins Center for African and African American Research, with literary critic Henry Louis Gates Jr. being the project&#x27;s editor-in-chief.

Harris also faults the editors&#x27; &quot;donnish conservatism&quot; and their adherence to prudish Victorian morals, citing as an example the non-inclusion of &quot;various centuries-old &#x27;four-letter words until 1972. However, no English dictionary included such profanity, for fear of possible prosecution under British obscenity laws, until after the conclusion of the &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; obscenity trial in 1960. The &quot;Penguin English Dictionary&quot; of 1965 was the first dictionary that included the word &quot;fuck&quot;. Joseph Wright&#x27;s &quot;English Dialect Dictionary&quot; had included &quot;shit&quot; in 1905.

The &quot;OED&quot;″s claims of authority have also been questioned by linguists such as Pius ten Hacken, who notes that the dictionary actively strives toward definitiveness and authority but can only achieve those goals in a limited sense, given the difficulties of defining the scope of what it includes.

Founding editor James Murray was also reluctant to include scientific terms, despite their documentation, unless he felt that they were widely enough used. In 1902, he declined to add the word &quot;radium&quot; to the dictionary.

== Research using the OED ==
The &quot;OED&quot; has been used to support research in fields such as linguistics, psycholinguistics, and psychology. Examples include the extension of word meanings via metaphor, the evolution of measurement terms like &quot;foot&quot; from concrete to abstract meanings, and the identification of systematic patterns in word blends (e.g., &quot;brunch&quot; from a blend of &quot;breakfast&quot; and &quot;lunch&quot;).

== See also ==

* &quot;Australian Oxford Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;Canadian Oxford Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;Compact Oxford English Dictionary of Current English&quot;
* &quot;Concise Oxford English Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;New Oxford American Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;Oxford Advanced Learner&#x27;s Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;Shorter Oxford English Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;A Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles&quot;
* &quot;The Australian National Dictionary&quot;
* &quot;Dictionary of American Regional English&quot;

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (McPherson is Senior Editor of OED)
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
** Archive of documents, including
*** Trench&#x27;s original &quot;On some deficiencies in our English Dictionaries&quot; paper
*** Murray&#x27;s original appeal for readers 
** Their page of &quot;OED&quot; statistics , and another such page.
** Two   from the OED.
* Oxford University Press pages: Second Edition, Additions Series Volume 1, Additions Series Volume 2, Additions Series Volume 3, &quot;The Compact Oxford English Dictionary&quot; New Edition, 20-volume printed set+CD-ROM, CD 3.1 upgrade, CD 4.0 full, CD 4.0 upgrade

=== 1st edition ===
; Internet Archive

:1888–1933 Issue
:Full title of each volume: &quot;A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles: Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by the Philological Society&quot;

:1933 Corrected re-issue

:Full title of each volume: &quot;The Oxford English Dictionary: Being a Corrected Re-issue with an Introduction, Supplement and Bibliography, of A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles: Founded Mainly on the Materials Collected by the Philological Society&quot;

; HathiTrust
* Some volumes (only available from within the US):
** University of Virginia copy
** Princeton University copy
** University of Michigan copy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45740849" start="53" end="74" title="historical dictionary" label="historical dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="82" end="98" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="113" end="136" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="146" end="166" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="612" end="621" title="Serial (literature)" label="fascicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="2559" end="2571" title="lexicography" label="lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q96321" start="2661" end="2681" title="Deutsches Wörterbuch" label="Deutsches Wörterbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="3189" end="3197" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="3365" end="3373" title="headword" label="headword"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="3531" end="3544" title="pronunciation" label="pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="3555" end="3566" title="etymology" label="etymologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q206287" start="3614" end="3623" title="quotation" label="quotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527589" start="3941" end="3953" title="phrasal verb" label="phrasal verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="4386" end="4400" title="Grimm brothers" label="Grimm brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q96321" start="4407" end="4440" title="Deutsches Wörterbuch" label="dictionary of the German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="4729" end="4750" title="Royal Spanish Academy" label="Royal Spanish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850590" start="4808" end="4825" title="Kangxi Dictionary" label="Kangxi Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246580" start="4995" end="5015" title="Philological Society" label="Philological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="5088" end="5105" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703211" start="5108" end="5131" title="Richard Chenevix Trench" label="Richard Chenevix Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733811" start="5133" end="5150" title="Herbert Coleridge" label="Herbert Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q591177" start="5156" end="5175" title="Frederick James Furnivall" label="Frederick Furnivall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="5957" end="5965" title="synonyms" label="synonyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703211" start="6827" end="6850" title="Richard Chenevix Trench" label="Richard Chenevix Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q820595" start="6942" end="6961" title="List of Deans of Westminster" label="Dean of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733811" start="7057" end="7074" title="Herbert Coleridge" label="Herbert Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="7388" end="7400" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242696" start="7919" end="7945" title="Early English Text Society" label="Early English Text Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q636326" start="8621" end="8632" title="Henry Sweet" label="Henry Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726348" start="8637" end="8648" title="Henry Nicol" label="Henry Nicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q960207" start="8684" end="8696" title="James Murray (lexicographer)" label="James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q723547" start="9169" end="9180" title="William Chester Minor" label="W. C. Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="9244" end="9257" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9333" end="9351" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972265" start="9377" end="9419" title="Broadmoor Hospital" label="Broadmoor Asylum for the Criminally Insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818805" start="9699" end="9724" title="The Surgeon of Crowthorne" label="The Surgeon of Crowthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961908" start="9828" end="9856" title="The Professor and the Madman (film)" label="The Professor and the Madman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="9873" end="9883" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="9888" end="9897" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246580" start="9946" end="9966" title="Philological Society" label="Philological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="10142" end="10168" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="10177" end="10200" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246580" start="10391" end="10411" title="Philological Society" label="Philological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432769" start="10629" end="10644" title="corrugated iron" label="corrugated iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q655185" start="10674" end="10685" title="Scriptorium" label="Scriptorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="11359" end="11379" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441364" start="11390" end="11403" title="Francis March" label="Francis March"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="11881" end="11882" title="shilling" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="11884" end="11885" title="Penny (British pre-decimal coin)" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q149688" start="12143" end="12152" title="Mill Hill" label="Mill Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="12156" end="12162" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912698" start="12636" end="12647" title="Philip Lyttelton Gell" label="Philip Gell"/>
<link wikidata="Q522388" start="12707" end="12720" title="Henry Bradley" label="Henry Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="12780" end="12794" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426743" start="13107" end="13122" title="Saturday Review (London)" label="Saturday Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005797" start="13858" end="13873" title="William Craigie" label="William Craigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960292" start="14173" end="14194" title="Charles Talbut Onions" label="Charles Talbut Onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="14322" end="14338" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q471398" start="14563" end="14582" title="Farmer Giles of Ham" label="Farmer Giles of Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="15828" end="15847" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="15914" end="15920" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="15949" end="15961" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="16031" end="16036" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195330" start="16122" end="16134" title="Cursor Mundi" label="Cursor Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="16651" end="16663" title="appendicitis" label="appendicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="16752" end="16762" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732645" start="16798" end="16812" title="Coronation of Edward VII and Alexandra" label="his coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="16878" end="16884" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="16939" end="16945" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="16950" end="16961" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="16970" end="16992" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="17899" end="17908" title="typesetting" label="retypeset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342501" start="18202" end="18219" title="Robert Burchfield" label="Robert Burchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960292" start="18269" end="18290" title="Charles Talbut Onions" label="Charles Talbut Onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="19109" end="19159" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking regions beyond the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="19636" end="19645" title="loan word" label="loan word"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257950" start="20524" end="20539" title="John Simpson (lexicographer)" label="John A. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339911" start="20544" end="20563" title="Edmund Weiner" label="Edmund S. C. Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077856" start="20957" end="20966" title="Reed Tech" label="Reed Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="21157" end="21167" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="21233" end="21243" title="markup (computer programming)" label="marking up"/>
<link wikidata="Q207819" start="21259" end="21263" title="SGML" label="SGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q19541" start="21279" end="21292" title="Search engine (computing)" label="search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="21412" end="21434" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16886157" start="21516" end="21527" title="Frank Tompa" label="Frank Tompa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526736" start="21532" end="21545" title="Gaston Gonnet" label="Gaston Gonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025791" start="21606" end="21627" title="Open Text Corporation" label="Open Text Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="21773" end="21776" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457702" start="21829" end="21833" title="LEXX (text editor)" label="LEXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q52254" start="21850" end="21864" title="Mike Cowlishaw" label="Mike Cowlishaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="21877" end="21899" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648532" start="21948" end="21962" title="A. Walton Litz" label="A. Walton Litz"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="21988" end="22008" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="22083" end="22099" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="22689" end="22697" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q18514" start="23612" end="23620" title="headword" label="headword"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="23897" end="23928" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="23998" end="24012" title="Transliteration" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657456" start="24294" end="24303" title="Countdown (game show)" label="Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567967" start="24360" end="24384" title="List of Countdown champions" label="champions of each series"/>
<link wikidata="Q217619" start="24642" end="24657" title="Anthony Burgess" label="Anthony Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="24751" end="24768" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="24827" end="24834" title="Everest" label="Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324266" start="24846" end="24860" title="Richard Boston" label="Richard Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="24880" end="24892" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209287" start="24927" end="24947" title="wonders of the world" label="wonders of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="26605" end="26619" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="27951" end="27952" title="Pounds sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257950" start="29587" end="29599" title="John Simpson (lexicographer)" label="John Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734753" start="29691" end="29707" title="Michael Proffitt" label="Michael Proffitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730091" start="29894" end="29917" title="all singing, all dancing (idiom)" label="All-Singing All-Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="29918" end="29927" title="text editor" label="Editorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q857525" start="29932" end="29940" title="annotation" label="Notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="29941" end="29952" title="application software" label="Application"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="29995" end="29998" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012656" start="30623" end="30634" title="antedating (lexicography)" label="antedatings"/>
<link wikidata="Q84087834" start="30697" end="30718" title="Balderdash and Piffle" label="Balderdash and Piffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19767463" start="31319" end="31326" title="N-up" label="four-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q811857" start="31546" end="31563" title="Bausch &amp;amp; Lomb" label="Bausch &amp;amp; Lomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q998421" start="31665" end="31675" title="Book sales club" label="book clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="32632" end="32638" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="33000" end="33017" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="33363" end="33381" title="Emulator" label="emulation programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q59746" start="34451" end="34463" title="Arts Council of Great Britain" label="Arts Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145790" start="35607" end="35640" title="Shorter Oxford English Dictionary" label="Shorter Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="35852" end="35863" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="35865" end="35871" title="John Milton" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="35873" end="35880" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="35890" end="35906" title="King James Bible" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992058" start="36033" end="36070" title="Concise Oxford English Dictionary" label="&amp;quot;Concise Oxford Dictionary&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481054" start="36238" end="36259" title="Francis George Fowler" label="Francis George Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q640096" start="36264" end="36283" title="Henry Watson Fowler" label="Henry Watson Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115311" start="36787" end="36819" title="New Oxford Dictionary of English" label="New Oxford Dictionary of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="37027" end="37045" title="corpus linguistics" label="corpus linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875349" start="37480" end="37510" title="New Oxford American Dictionary" label="New Oxford American Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="37871" end="37874" title="OUP" label="OUP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38280" end="38291" title="American English#Morphology" label="Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="38544" end="38559" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q330809" start="38633" end="38641" title="Anu Garg" label="Anu Garg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502402" start="38707" end="38715" title="Tim Bray" label="Tim Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="38759" end="38762" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="38831" end="38846" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372902" start="39323" end="39333" title="Roy Harris (linguist)" label="Roy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="39687" end="39701" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="39706" end="39720" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="40101" end="40113" title="prescriptive grammar" label="prescriptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="40126" end="40137" title="descriptive grammar" label="descriptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="41005" end="41016" title="etymology" label="etymologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002" start="41030" end="41034" title="AAVE" label="AAVE"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="41145" end="41150" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q33678" start="41155" end="41163" title="Mandinka language" label="Mandinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="41313" end="41331" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q97165891" start="41339" end="41396" title="Hutchins Center for African and African American Research" label="Hutchins Center for African and African American Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q561458" start="41419" end="41440" title="Henry Louis Gates Jr." label="Henry Louis Gates Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2900116" start="41585" end="41601" title="Victorian morals" label="Victorian morals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910564" start="41679" end="41696" title="four-letter words" label="four-letter words"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="41754" end="41763" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278301" start="41862" end="41918" title="R v Penguin Books Ltd." label="&amp;quot;Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover&amp;quot; obscenity trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919731" start="41938" end="41964" title="Penguin English Dictionary" label="Penguin English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="42033" end="42037" title="fuck" label="fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q329817" start="42045" end="42058" title="Joseph Wright (linguist)" label="Joseph Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q519" start="42124" end="42128" title="shit" label="shit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="42653" end="42659" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="43039" end="43050" title="Blend word" label="word blends"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824523" start="43164" end="43192" title="Australian Oxford Dictionary" label="Australian Oxford Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030413" start="43207" end="43233" title="Canadian Oxford Dictionary" label="Canadian Oxford Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155291" start="43248" end="43300" title="Compact Oxford English Dictionary of Current English" label="Compact Oxford English Dictionary of Current English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992058" start="43315" end="43348" title="Concise Oxford English Dictionary" label="Concise Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875349" start="43363" end="43393" title="New Oxford American Dictionary" label="New Oxford American Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399559" start="43408" end="43449" title="Oxford Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Oxford Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145790" start="43464" end="43497" title="Shorter Oxford English Dictionary" label="Shorter Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273963" start="43512" end="43565" title="A Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles" label="A Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714932" start="43580" end="43614" title="The Australian National Dictionary" label="The Australian National Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026697" start="43629" end="43668" title="Dictionary of American Regional English" label="Dictionary of American Regional English"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703211" start="43835" end="43841" title="Richard Chenevix Trench" label="Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q960207" start="43929" end="43935" title="James Murray (lexicographer)" label="Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="44354" end="44370" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128305" start="44853" end="44863" title="HathiTrust" label="HathiTrust"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22644" wikidata="Q157106" url="?curid=22644" title="Ottonian dynasty">
<text>The Ottonian dynasty () was a Saxon dynasty of German monarchs (919–1024), named after three of its kings and Holy Roman emperors, especially Otto the Great. It is also known as the Saxon dynasty after the family&#x27;s origin in the German stem duchy of Saxony. The family itself is also sometimes known as the Liudolfings (), after its earliest known member Count Liudolf (d. 866) and one of its most common given names. The Ottonian rulers were successors of Conrad I, who was the only German king to rule in East Francia after the Carolingian dynasty.

The Ottonians are associated with the notable military success that transformed the political situation in contemporary Western Europe: &quot;It was the success of the Ottonians in molding the raw materials bequeathed to them into a formidable military machine that made possible the establishment of Germany as the preeminent kingdom in Europe from the tenth through the mid-thirteenth century.&quot; They are also associated with a notable cultural movement (especially new literary traditions) known as the Ottonian Renaissance.

After the end of Ottonian rule in 1024, the Salian dynasty went on to occupy the Imperial throne for just over a century, until 1125.

==Origins==

In the 9th century, the Saxon count Liudolf held large estates on the Leine river west of the Harz mountain range and in the adjacent Eichsfeld territory of Thuringia. His ancestors probably acted as &quot;ministeriales&quot; in the Saxon stem duchy, which had been incorporated into the Carolingian Empire after the Saxon Wars of Charlemagne. The family&#x27;s substantial holdings in Thuringia suggest that they originated from that region, and their Saxon lands may have been granted as a reward for their service to the Carolingians. Liudolf married Oda, a member of the Frankish House of Billung. About 852 the couple together with Bishop Altfrid of Hildesheim founded Brunshausen Abbey, which, once relocated to Gandersheim, rose to a family monastery and burial ground.

Liudolf already held the high social position of a Saxon &quot;dux&quot;, documented by the marriage of his daughter Liutgard with Louis the Younger, son of the Carolingian king Louis the German in 869. Liudolf&#x27;s sons Bruno and Otto the Illustrious ruled over large parts of Saxon Eastphalia, moreover, Otto acted as lay abbot of the Imperial abbey of Hersfeld with large estates in Thuringia. He married Hedwiga, a daughter of the Popponid (Elder Babenberg) duke Henry of Franconia. Otto possibly accompanied King Arnulf on his 894 campaign to Italy; the marriage of his daughter Oda with Zwentibold, Arnulf&#x27;s illegitimate son, documents the efforts of the Carolingian ruler to win the mighty Saxon dynasty over as an ally. According to the Saxon chronicler Widukind of Corvey, Otto upon the death of the last Carolingian king Louis the Child in 911 was already a candidate for the East Frankish crown, which however passed to the Franconian duke Conrad I.

Upon Otto&#x27;s death in 912, his son Henry the Fowler succeeded him as Duke of Saxony. Henry had married Matilda of Ringelheim, a descendant of the legendary Saxon ruler Widukind and heiress to extended estates in Westphalia.

==Reign==
The Ottonian kings Holy Roman emperors were:
* Henry the Fowler, duke of Saxony from 912, king of East Francia from 919 until 936
* Otto the Great, duke of Saxony and king of East Francia from 936, king of Italy from 951, emperor from 962 until 973
* Otto II, co-ruler from 961, emperor from 967, sole ruler from 973 until 983
* Otto III, king of Germany from 983, emperor from 996 until 1002
* Henry II, the Saint, duke of Bavaria from 995, king of Germany from 1002, king of Italy from 1004, emperor from 1002 until 1024

===Henry I===
Although never emperor, Henry the Fowler was arguably the founder of the imperial dynasty. While East Francia under the rule of the last Carolingian kings was ravaged by Hungarian invasions, he was chosen to be among the German dukes. Elected &quot;Rex Francorum&quot; in May 919, Henry abandoned the claim to dominate the whole disintegrating Carolingian Empire and, unlike his predecessor Conrad I, succeeded in gaining the support of the Franconian, Bavarian, Swabian and Lotharingian dukes. In 933 he led a German army to victory over the Hungarian forces at the Battle of Riade and campaigned both the land of the Polabian Slavs and the Duchy of Bohemia. Because he had assimilated so much power through his conquest, he was able to transfer power to his son Otto I.

===Otto I===

Otto I, duke of Saxony upon the death of his father in 936, was elected king within a few weeks. He continued the work of unifying all of the German tribes into a single kingdom, greatly expanding the powers of the king at the expense of the aristocracy. Through strategic marriages and personal appointments, he installed members of his own family in the kingdom&#x27;s most important duchies. This, however, did not prevent his relatives from entering into civil war: both Otto&#x27;s brother Duke Henry I of Bavaria and his son Duke Liudolf of Swabia revolted against his rule. Otto was able to suppress their uprisings, in consequence, the various dukes, who had previously been co-equals with the king, were reduced to royal subjects under the king&#x27;s authority. Otto&#x27;s decisive victory over the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 ended the threat of Hungarian invasions and secured his hold over his kingdom.

The defeat of the pagan Magyars earned King Otto the reputation as the savior of Christendom and the epithet &quot;the Great&quot;. He transformed the Church in Germany into a kind of proprietary church and major royal power base to which he donated charity and for the creation of which his family was responsible. By 961, Otto had conquered the Kingdom of Italy, which was a troublesome inheritance that none wanted, and extended his kingdom&#x27;s borders to the north, east, and south. In control of much of central and southern Europe, the patronage of Otto and his immediate successors caused a limited cultural renaissance of the arts and architecture. He confirmed the 754 Donation of Pepin and, with recourse to the concept of &quot;translatio imperii&quot; in the succession of Charlemagne, proceeded to Rome to have himself crowned Holy Roman emperor by Pope John XII in 962. He even reached a settlement with the Byzantine emperor John I Tzimiskes by marrying his son and heir Otto II to John&#x27;s niece Theophanu. In 968 he established the Archbishopric of Magdeburg at his long-time residence.

===Otto II===
Co-ruler with his father since 961 and crowned emperor in 967, Otto II ascended the throne at the age of 18. By excluding the Bavarian line of Ottonians from the line of succession, he strengthened Imperial authority and secured his own son&#x27;s succession to the Imperial throne. During his reign, Otto II attempted to annex the whole of Italy into the Empire, bringing him into conflict with the Byzantine emperor and with the Saracens of the Fatimid Caliphate. His campaign against the Saracens ended in 982 with a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Stilo. Moreover, in 983 Otto II experienced a Great Slav Rising against his rule.

Otto II died in 983 at the age of 28 after a ten-year reign. Succeeded by his three-year-old son Otto III as king, his sudden death plunged the Ottonian dynasty into crisis. During her regency for Otto III, Empress Theophanu abandoned her late husband&#x27;s imperialistic policy and devoted herself entirely to furthering her own agenda in Italy.

===Otto III===
When Otto III came of age, he concentrated on securing the rule in the Italian domains, installing his confidants Bruno of Carinthia and Gerbert of Aurillac as popes. In 1000 he made a pilgrimage to the Congress of Gniezno in Poland, establishing the Archdiocese of Gniezno and confirming the royal status of the Piast ruler Bolesław I the Brave. Expelled from Rome in 1001, Otto III died at age 21 the next year, without an opportunity to reconquer the city.

===Henry II===

The childless Otto III was succeeded by Henry II, a son of Duke Henry II of Bavaria and thereby a member of the Bavarian line of the Ottonians. Duke of Bavaria since 995, he was crowned king on 7 June 1002. Henry II spent the first years of his rule consolidating his political power on the borders of the German kingdom. He waged several campaigns against Bolesław I of Poland and then moved successfully to Italy where he was crowned emperor by Pope Benedict VIII on 14 February 1014. He reinforced his rule by endowing and founding numerous dioceses, such as the Bishopric of Bamberg in 1007, intertwining the secular and ecclesiastical authority over the Empire. Henry II was canonized by Pope Eugene III in 1146.

As his marriage with Cunigunde of Luxembourg remained childless, the Ottonian dynasty became extinct with the death of Henry II in 1024. The crown passed to Conrad II of the Salian dynasty, great-grandson of Liutgarde, a daughter of Otto I. When King Rudolph III of Burgundy died without heirs on 2 February 1032, Conrad II successfully claimed also this kingship on the basis of an inheritance Emperor Henry II had extorted from the former in 1006, having invaded Burgundy to enforce his claim after Rudolph attempted to renounce it in 1016.

== Ottonian rulership ==
Historians have written extensively about how the Ottonian kings and emperors ruled their lands. For some historians, following in the wake of Karl Leyser, Ottonian government was primarily conducted through oral and ritual means, in which the written word took a back seat. Other historians, such as David Bachrach, have argued strongly for the continuing use of writing in administering the Ottonians&#x27; far-flung lands. Attention has recently focused on how the rulers took advantage of their royal estates, known as the fisc.

==Genealogy==







==See also==
*Ottonian Renaissance
*Ottonian art
*Ottonian architecture
*Concordat of Worms

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157106" start="4" end="20" title="Ottonian dynasty" label="Ottonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="30" end="35" title="Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="47" end="62" title="German monarchs" label="German monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="110" end="128" title="Holy Roman emperor" label="Holy Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="142" end="156" title="Otto the Great" label="Otto the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q157106" start="182" end="195" title="Ottonian dynasty" label="Saxon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q617347" start="241" end="251" title="stem duchy" label="stem duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="255" end="261" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q157106" start="312" end="323" title="Ottonian dynasty" label="Liudolfings"/>
<link wikidata="Q437974" start="366" end="373" title="Liudolf, Duke of Saxony" label="Liudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q157121" start="462" end="470" title="Conrad I of Germany" label="Conrad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="512" end="524" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="535" end="554" title="Carolingian dynasty" label="Carolingian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399604" start="1067" end="1087" title="Ottonian Renaissance" label="Ottonian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161204" start="1134" end="1148" title="Salian dynasty" label="Salian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q437974" start="1274" end="1281" title="Liudolf of Saxony" label="Liudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="1308" end="1313" title="Leine" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="1332" end="1336" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153866" start="1372" end="1381" title="Eichsfeld" label="Eichsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311389" start="1395" end="1404" title="Duchy of Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700101" start="1444" end="1457" title="ministerialis" label="ministeriales"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="1526" end="1544" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q499909" start="1555" end="1565" title="Saxon Wars" label="Saxon Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1569" end="1580" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993048" start="1792" end="1795" title="Oda of Gandersheim" label="Oda"/>
<link wikidata="Q689402" start="1831" end="1838" title="Billung" label="Billung"/>
<link wikidata="Q440193" start="1882" end="1903" title="Altfrid" label="Altfrid of Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q315067" start="1956" end="1967" title="Gandersheim Abbey" label="Gandersheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q829120" start="2079" end="2082" title="dux" label="dux"/>
<link wikidata="Q265921" start="2133" end="2141" title="Liutgard of Saxony (died 885)" label="Liutgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160190" start="2147" end="2164" title="Louis the Younger" label="Louis the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q152463" start="2194" end="2210" title="Louis the German" label="Louis the German"/>
<link wikidata="Q590568" start="2239" end="2244" title="Bruno, Duke of Saxony" label="Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q324116" start="2249" end="2269" title="Otto I, Duke of Saxony" label="Otto the Illustrious"/>
<link wikidata="Q616286" start="2302" end="2312" title="Eastphalia" label="Eastphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q314666" start="2355" end="2381" title="Hersfeld Abbey" label="Imperial abbey of Hersfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624235" start="2426" end="2433" title="Hedwiga" label="Hedwiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q451165" start="2453" end="2461" title="Popponids" label="Popponid"/>
<link wikidata="Q522698" start="2463" end="2478" title="Babenberg" label="Elder Babenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q697391" start="2485" end="2503" title="Henry of Franconia" label="Henry of Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154936" start="2536" end="2542" title="Arnulf of Carinthia" label="Arnulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="2566" end="2571" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q243872" start="2611" end="2621" title="Zwentibold" label="Zwentibold"/>
<link wikidata="Q312386" start="2785" end="2803" title="Widukind of Corvey" label="Widukind of Corvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q157099" start="2854" end="2869" title="Louis the Child" label="Louis the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="2958" end="2968" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q157121" start="2974" end="2982" title="Conrad I of Germany" label="Conrad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="3024" end="3040" title="Henry the Fowler" label="Henry the Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q166759" start="3058" end="3072" title="List of rulers of Saxony" label="Duke of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q234246" start="3092" end="3113" title="Matilda of Ringelheim" label="Matilda of Ringelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q320348" start="3157" end="3165" title="Widukind" label="Widukind"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="3201" end="3211" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150620" start="3271" end="3287" title="Henry the Fowler" label="Henry the Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="3356" end="3370" title="Otto the Great" label="Otto the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="3475" end="3482" title="Otto II" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="3553" end="3561" title="Otto III" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q103556" start="3619" end="3627" title="Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q282226" start="3932" end="3951" title="Hungarian invasions of Europe" label="Hungarian invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q703265" start="4203" end="4213" title="Duchy of Franconia" label="Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="4215" end="4223" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="4225" end="4232" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="4237" end="4248" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164697" start="4329" end="4344" title="Battle of Riade" label="Battle of Riade"/>
<link wikidata="Q149234" start="4381" end="4395" title="Polabian Slavs" label="Polabian Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="4404" end="4420" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Duchy of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="4526" end="4532" title="Otto I" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q367571" start="5049" end="5067" title="Henry I of Bavaria" label="Henry I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q504535" start="5085" end="5102" title="Liudolf of Swabia" label="Liudolf of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273069" start="5374" end="5392" title="Battle of Lechfeld (955)" label="Battle of Lechfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="5498" end="5503" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="5561" end="5572" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="5581" end="5588" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q570555" start="5631" end="5648" title="Catholic Church in Germany" label="Church in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303187" start="5664" end="5682" title="proprietary church" label="proprietary church"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="5827" end="5843" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399604" start="6081" end="6109" title="Ottonian Renaissance" label="limited cultural renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q973573" start="6161" end="6178" title="Donation of Pepin" label="Donation of Pepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q693981" start="6222" end="6240" title="translatio imperii" label="translatio imperii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="6268" end="6279" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6294" end="6298" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172933" start="6345" end="6358" title="Pope John XII" label="Pope John XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6405" end="6414" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41603" start="6423" end="6439" title="John I Tzimiskes" label="John I Tzimiskes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="6469" end="6476" title="Otto II" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q464081" start="6498" end="6507" title="Theophanu" label="Theophanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q636389" start="6535" end="6561" title="Archbishopric of Magdeburg" label="Archbishopric of Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="7036" end="7044" title="Saracens" label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="7052" end="7069" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q703523" start="7150" end="7165" title="Battle of Stilo" label="Battle of Stilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q459325" start="7206" end="7223" title="Great Slav Rising" label="Great Slav Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="7340" end="7348" title="Otto III" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q58571" start="7721" end="7739" title="Bruno of Carinthia" label="Bruno of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172383" start="7744" end="7763" title="Gerbert of Aurillac" label="Gerbert of Aurillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q421772" start="7810" end="7829" title="Congress of Gniezno" label="Congress of Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="7833" end="7839" title="History of Poland during the Piast dynasty" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364553" start="7858" end="7880" title="Archdiocese of Gniezno" label="Archdiocese of Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="7920" end="7925" title="Piast" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="7932" end="7952" title="Bolesław I the Brave" label="Bolesław I the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q454304" start="8148" end="8167" title="Henry II of Bavaria" label="Henry II of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q162102" start="8531" end="8549" title="Pope Benedict VIII" label="Pope Benedict VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q561334" start="8650" end="8670" title="Prince-Bishopric of Bamberg" label="Bishopric of Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="8764" end="8773" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q167610" start="8777" end="8792" title="Pope Eugene III" label="Pope Eugene III"/>
<link wikidata="Q61620" start="8824" end="8847" title="Cunigunde of Luxembourg" label="Cunigunde of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152256" start="8960" end="8969" title="Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Conrad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q161204" start="8977" end="8991" title="Salian dynasty" label="Salian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425833" start="9011" end="9020" title="Liutgard of Saxony (died 953)" label="Liutgarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q504792" start="9054" end="9077" title="Rudolph III of Burgundy" label="Rudolph III of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271735" start="9268" end="9276" title="Kingdom of Burgundy-Arles" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399604" start="9941" end="9961" title="Ottonian Renaissance" label="Ottonian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066218" start="9963" end="9975" title="Ottonian art" label="Ottonian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588393" start="9977" end="9998" title="Ottonian architecture" label="Ottonian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q154439" start="10000" end="10018" title="Concordat of Worms" label="Concordat of Worms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22645" wikidata="Q100166" url="?curid=22645" title="Orkney">
<text>Orkney (), also known as the Orkney Islands, is an archipelago off the north coast of mainland Scotland. The plural name the Orkneys is also sometimes used. Part of the Northern Isles along with Shetland, Orkney is 10 miles (16 km) north of Caithness and has about 70 islands, of which 20 are inhabited. The largest island, the Mainland, has an area of , making it the sixth-largest Scottish island and the tenth-largest island in the British Isles. Orkney&#x27;s largest settlement, and also its administrative centre, is Kirkwall.

Orkney is one of the 32 council areas of Scotland, as well as a constituency of the Scottish Parliament, a lieutenancy area, and an historic county. The local council is Orkney Islands Council.

The islands have been inhabited for at least years, originally occupied by Mesolithic and Neolithic tribes and then by the Picts. Orkney was colonised and later annexed by the Kingdom of Norway in 875 and settled by the Norsemen. In 1472, the Parliament of Scotland absorbed the Earldom of Orkney into the Kingdom of Scotland, following failure to pay a dowry promised to James III of Scotland by the family of his bride, Margaret of Denmark.

In addition to the Mainland, most of the remaining islands are divided into two groups: the North Isles and the South Isles. The local climate is relatively mild and the soils are extremely fertile; most of the land is farmed, and agriculture is the most important sector of the economy. The significant wind and marine energy resources are of growing importance; the amount of electricity that Orkney generates annually from renewable energy sources exceeds its demand. Temperatures average in winter and in summer.

The local people are known as Orcadians; they speak a distinctive dialect of the Scots language and have a rich body of folklore. Orkney contains some of the oldest and best-preserved Neolithic sites in Europe; the &quot;Heart of Neolithic Orkney&quot; is a designated UNESCO World Heritage Site. Orkney also has an abundance of marine and avian wildlife.

==Etymology==
Pytheas of Massalia visited Britain – probably sometime between 322 and 285 BC – and described it as triangular in shape, with a northern tip called &quot;Orcas&quot;.
This may have referred to Dunnet Head, from which Orkney is visible. Writing in the 1st century AD, the Roman geographers Ptolemy and Pomponius Mela called the islands (Ancient Greek: Όρκάδες), as did Tacitus in AD 98, claiming that his father-in-law Agricola had &quot;discovered and subjugated the Orcades hitherto unknown&quot; (although both Mela and Pliny had previously referred to the islands). The Byzantine John Tzetzes in his work &quot;Chiliades&quot; called the islands Orcades.

Etymologists usually interpret the element as a Pictish tribal name meaning &quot;young pig&quot; or &quot;young boar&quot;. Speakers of Old Irish referred to the islands as &quot;islands of the young pigs&quot;. The archipelago is known as in modern Welsh and in modern Scottish Gaelic, the representing a fossilized prepositional case ending. Some earlier sources alternatively hypothesise that Orkney comes from the Latin , whale. The Anglo-Saxon monk Bede refers to the islands as in &quot;Ecclesiastical History of the English People&quot;.

Norwegian settlers arriving from the late ninth century reinterpreted &quot;orc&quot; as the Old Norse &quot;seal&quot; and added &quot;islands&quot; to the end, so the name became &quot;Seal Islands&quot;. The plural suffix was later removed in English leaving the modern name &quot;Orkney&quot;. According to the , Orkney was named after an earl called Orkan.

The Norse knew Mainland, Orkney as &quot;Mainland&quot; or as &quot;Horse Island&quot;. The island is sometimes referred to as &quot;Pomona&quot; (or &quot;Pomonia&quot;), a name that stems from a 16th-century mistranslation by George Buchanan, which has rarely been used locally.

Usage of the plural &quot;Orkneys&quot; dates from the 18th century or earlier and was used by for example Sir Walter Scott. From the mid-19th century onwards this plural form has fallen out of use in the local area although it is still often used, particularly by publications based outside Scotland.

==History==
===Prehistory===


A charred hazelnut shell, recovered in 2007 during excavations in Tankerness on the Mainland, has been dated to 6820–6660 BC, indicating the presence of Mesolithic nomadic tribes. The earliest known permanent settlement is at Knap of Howar, a Neolithic farmstead on the island of Papa Westray, which dates from 3500 BC. The village of Skara Brae, Europe&#x27;s best-preserved Neolithic settlement, is believed to have been inhabited from around 3100 BC. Other remains from that era include the Standing Stones of Stenness, the Maeshowe passage grave, the Ring of Brodgar and other standing stones. Many of the Neolithic settlements were abandoned around 2500 BC, possibly due to changes in the climate.

In September 2021, archaeologists announced the discovery of two polished stone balls in a 5500-year-old Neolithic burial tomb in Sanday. According to Dr Hugo Anderson, the second object was as the &quot;size of a cricket ball, perfectly spherical and beautifully finished&quot;.

During the Bronze Age, fewer large stone structures were built (although the great ceremonial circles continued in use) as metalworking was slowly introduced to Britain from Europe over a lengthy period. There are relatively few Orcadian sites dating from this era although there is the impressive Plumcake Mound near the Ring of Brodgar, and various island sites such as Tofts Ness on Sanday and the remains of two houses on Holm of Faray.

===Iron Age===
Excavations at Quanterness on the Mainland have revealed an Atlantic roundhouse built about 700 BC and similar finds have been made at Bu on the Mainland and Pierowall Quarry on Westray. The most impressive Iron Age structures of Orkney are the ruins of later round towers called &quot;brochs&quot; and their associated settlements such as the Broch of Burroughston and Broch of Gurness. The nature and origin of these buildings is a subject of debate. Other structures from this period include underground storehouses and aisled roundhouses, the latter usually in association with earlier broch sites.

During the Roman invasion of Britain the &quot;King of Orkney&quot; was one of 11 British leaders who is said to have submitted to the Emperor Claudius in AD 43 at Camulodunum (modern Colchester). After the Agricolan fleet had come and gone, possibly anchoring at Shapinsay, direct Roman influence seems to have been limited to trade rather than conquest.
Polemius Silvius wrote a list of Late Roman provinces, which Seeck appended to his edition of the Notitia Dignitatum. The list names six provinces in Roman Britannia: the sixth is the dubious &quot;Orcades provincia&quot;, the possible existence of which recent researches re-evaluate.

By the late Iron Age, Orkney was part of the Pictish kingdom, and although the archaeological remains from this period are less impressive, the fertile soils and rich seas of Orkney probably provided the Picts with a comfortable living. The Dalriadic Gaels began to influence the islands towards the close of the Pictish era, perhaps principally through the role of Celtic missionaries, as evidenced by several islands bearing the epithet &quot;Papa&quot; in commemoration of these preachers. Before the Gaelic presence could establish itself the Picts were gradually dispossessed by the North Germanic peoples from the late 8th century onwards. The nature of this transition is controversial, and theories range from peaceful integration to enslavement and genocide. It has been suggested that an assault by forces from Fortriu in 681 in which Orkney was &quot;annihilated&quot; may have led to a weakening of the local power base and helped the Norse come to prominence.

===Norwegian rule===
Both Orkney and Shetland saw a significant influx of Norwegian settlers during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. Vikings made the islands the headquarters of their pirate expeditions carried out against Norway and the coasts of mainland Scotland. In response, Norwegian king Harald Fairhair (Harald Hårfagre) annexed the Northern Isles, comprising Orkney and Shetland, in 875 (it is clear that this story, which appears in the &quot;Orkneyinga Saga&quot;, is based on the later voyages of Magnus Barelegs and some scholars believe it to be apocryphal). Rognvald Eysteinsson received Orkney and Shetland from Harald as an earldom as reparation for the death of his son in battle in Scotland, and then passed the earldom on to his brother Sigurd the Mighty. Sigurd went on to conquer northern parts of mainland Britain in the late 9th century, including Caithness and Sutherland.

However, Sigurd&#x27;s line barely survived him and it was Torf-Einarr, Rognvald&#x27;s son by a slave, who founded a dynasty that controlled the islands for centuries after his death. He was succeeded by his son Thorfinn Skull-splitter and during this time the deposed Norwegian King Eric Bloodaxe often used Orkney as a raiding base before being killed in 954. Thorfinn&#x27;s death and presumed burial at the broch of Hoxa, on South Ronaldsay, led to a long period of dynastic strife.
Initially a pagan culture, detailed information about the turn to the Christian religion in the islands of Scotland during the Norse era is elusive. The &quot;Orkneyinga Saga&quot; suggests the islands were Christianised by Olaf Tryggvasson in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway. The King summoned the &quot;jarl&quot; Sigurd the Stout and said, &quot;I order you and all your subjects to be baptised. If you refuse, I&#x27;ll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel.&quot; Unsurprisingly, Sigurd agreed and the islands became Christian at a stroke, receiving their own bishop in the early 11th century.

Thorfinn the Mighty was a son of Sigurd and a grandson of King Malcolm II of Scotland (&quot;Máel Coluim mac Cináeda&quot;). Along with Sigurd&#x27;s other sons he ruled Orkney during the first half of the 11th century and extended his authority over a small maritime empire stretching from Dublin to Shetland. Thorfinn died around 1065 and his sons Paul and Erlend succeeded him, fighting at the Battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066. Paul and Erlend quarrelled as adults and this dispute carried on to the next generation. The martyrdom of Magnus Erlendsson, who was killed in April 1116 by his cousin Haakon Paulsson, resulted in the building of St Magnus Cathedral, still today a dominating feature of Kirkwall.

The Scottish crown claimed the overlordship of the Caithness and Sutherland area from Norway in 1098. The jarls thereafter owed allegiance to the Scottish crown for their territory on mainland Britain, which they held as the Mormaer of Caithness, but owed allegiance to the Norwegian crown for Orkney and Shetland. In 1195, the jarls lost control of Shetland when it became a separate lordship.

In 1231 the line of Norse earls, unbroken since Rognvald, ended with Jon Haraldsson&#x27;s murder in Thurso. The Earldom of Caithness was granted to Magnus, second son of the Earl of Angus, whom Haakon IV of Norway confirmed as Earl of Orkney in 1236. Around the same time, the earldom lost the southern part of its territory on mainland Britain when it was made the separate earldom of Sutherland.
In 1290, the death of the child princess Margaret, Maid of Norway in Orkney, en route to mainland Scotland, created a disputed succession that led to the Wars of Scottish Independence. In the 14th century the earls of Orkney also lost Caithness, after which the earldom just covered the islands of Orkney itself. In 1379 the earldom passed to the Sinclair family, who were also barons of Roslin near Edinburgh.

Evidence of the Viking presence is widespread and includes the settlement at the Brough of Birsay, the vast majority of place names, and the runic inscriptions at Maeshowe.

===Absorption by Scotland===
In 1468 Orkney and Shetland was pledged by Christian I, in his capacity as King of Norway, as security against the payment of the dowry of his daughter Margaret, betrothed to James III of Scotland. However, the money was never paid, and Orkney was absorbed by the Kingdom of Scotland in 1472.

The history of Orkney prior to this time is largely the history of the ruling aristocracy. From then on ordinary people emerge with greater clarity. An influx of Scottish entrepreneurs helped to create a diverse and independent community that included farmers, fishermen and merchants that called themselves &quot;comunitas Orcadie&quot; and who proved themselves increasingly able to defend their rights against their feudal overlords.

From at least the 16th century, boats from mainland Scotland and the Netherlands dominated the local herring fishery. There is little evidence of an Orcadian fleet until the 19th century, but it grew rapidly, and 700 boats were involved by the 1840s with Stronsay and later Stromness becoming leading centres of development. White fish never became as dominant as in other Scottish ports.

Agricultural improvements beginning in the 17th century resulted in the enclosure of the commons and ultimately in the Victorian era the emergence of large and well-managed farms using a five-shift rotation system and producing high-quality beef cattle.

In the 17th century, Orcadians formed the overwhelming majority of employees of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company in Canada. The harsh winter weather of Orkney and the Orcadian reputation for sobriety and their boat handling skills made them ideal candidates for the rigours of the Canadian north. During this period, burning kelp briefly became a mainstay of the islands&#x27; economy. For example, on Shapinsay over of burned seaweed were produced per annum to make soda ash, bringing in £20,000 to the local economy. The industry collapsed suddenly in 1830 after the removal of tariffs on imported alkali.

During the 18th century Jacobite risings, Orkney was largely Jacobite in its sympathies. At the end of the 1715 rebellion, a large number of Jacobites who had fled north from mainland Scotland sought refuge in Orkney and were helped on to safety in Sweden. In 1745, the Jacobite lairds on the islands ensured that Orkney remained pro-Jacobite in outlook and was a safe place to land supplies from Spain to aid their cause. Orkney was the last place in the British Isles that held out for the Jacobites and was not retaken by the British Government until 24 May 1746, over a month after the defeat of the main Jacobite army at Culloden.

===20th century===

Orkney was the site of a Royal Navy base at Scapa Flow, which played a major role in World War I and World War II. After the Armistice in 1918, the German High Seas Fleet was transferred in its entirety to Scapa Flow to await a decision on its future. The German sailors opened the seacocks and scuttled all the ships. Most ships were salvaged, but the remaining wrecks are now a favoured haunt of recreational divers. One month into World War II, a German U-boat sank the Royal Navy battleship in Scapa Flow. As a result, barriers were built to close most of the access channels; these had the additional advantage of creating causeways enabling travellers to go from island to island by road instead of being obliged to rely on ferries. The causeways were constructed by Italian prisoners of war, who also constructed the ornate Italian Chapel.

The navy base became run down after the war, eventually closing in 1957. The problem of a declining population was significant in the post-war years, though in the last decades of the 20th century, there was a recovery and life in Orkney focused on growing prosperity and the emergence of a relatively classless society. Orkney was rated as the best place to live in Scotland in both 2013 and 2014, and in 2019 the best place to live in the UK, according to the Halifax Quality of Life survey.

===Overview of population trends===

In the modern era, the population peaked in the mid-19th century at just over 32,000 and declined for a century thereafter to a low of fewer than 18,000 in the 1970s. Declines were particularly significant in the outlying islands, some of which remain vulnerable to ongoing losses. Although Orkney is in many ways very distinct from the other islands and archipelagos of Scotland these trends are very similar to those experienced elsewhere. The archipelago&#x27;s population grew by 11% in the decade to 2011 as recorded by the census. During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4% to 103,702.

==Geography==
Orkney is separated from the mainland of Scotland by the Pentland Firth, a seaway between Brough Ness on the island of South Ronaldsay and Duncansby Head in Caithness. Orkney lies between 58°41′ and 59°24′ north, and 2°22′ and 3°26′ west, measuring from northeast to southwest and from east to west, and covers .

Orkney is separated from the Shetland Islands, a group further out, by a body of water called the Fair Isle Channel.

The islands are mainly low-lying except for some sharply rising sandstone hills on Mainland, Rousay and Hoy (where the tallest point in Orkney, Ward Hill, can be found) and rugged cliffs on some western coasts. Nearly all of the islands have lochs, but the watercourses are merely streams draining the high land. The coastlines are indented, and the islands themselves are divided from each other by straits generally called &quot;sounds&quot; or &quot;firths&quot;.

The tidal currents, or &quot;roosts&quot; as some of them are called locally, off many of the isles are swift, with frequent whirlpools. The islands are notable for the absence of trees, which is partly accounted for by the strong winds.

===Settlements===
Only three settlements have a population of over 500; the towns of Kirkwall and Stromness and the village of Finstown.

Other villages include Balfour, Dounby, Houton, Longhope, Lyness, Pierowall, St Margaret&#x27;s Hope, and Whitehall.

===Geology===


The superficial rock of Orkney is almost entirely Old Red Sandstone, mostly of Middle Devonian age. As in the neighbouring mainland county of Caithness, this sandstone rests upon the metamorphic and igneous rocks of the Moine series, as may be seen on the Mainland, where a narrow strip is exposed between Stromness and Inganess, and again in the small island of Graemsay; they are represented by grey gneiss and granite.

The Middle Devonian is divided into three main groups. The lower part of the sequence, mostly Eifelian in age, is dominated by lacustrine beds of the lower and upper Stromness Flagstones that were deposited in Lake Orcadie. The later Rousay flagstone formation is found throughout much of the North and South Isles and East Mainland.

The Old Man of Hoy is formed from sandstone of the uppermost Eday Group that is up to thick in places. It lies unconformably upon steeply inclined flagstones, the interpretation of which is a matter of continuing debate.

The Devonian and older rocks of Orkney are cut by a series of WSW–ENE to N–S trending faults, many of which were active during deposition of the Devonian sequences. A strong synclinal fold traverses Eday and Shapinsay, the axis trending north-south.

Middle Devonian basaltic volcanic rocks are found on western Hoy, on Deerness in eastern Mainland and on Shapinsay. Correlation between the Hoy volcanics and the other two exposures has been proposed, but differences in chemistry mean this remains uncertain. Lamprophyre dykes of Late Permian age are found throughout Orkney.

Glacial striation and the presence of chalk and flint erratics that originated from the bed of the North Sea demonstrate the influence of ice action on the geomorphology of the islands. Boulder clay is also abundant and moraines cover substantial areas.

===Climate===

Orkney has a cool temperate climate that is remarkably mild and steady for such a northerly latitude, due to the influence of the warm waters of the Norwegian Current, a north-easterly extension of the North Atlantic Drift which is itself an extension of the Gulf Stream. The average temperature for the year is ; for winter and for summer .

The average annual rainfall varies from to . Winds are a key feature of the climate and even in summer there are almost constant breezes. In winter, there are frequent strong winds, with an average of 52 hours of gales being recorded annually.

To tourists, one of the fascinations of the islands is their &quot;nightless&quot; summers. On the longest day, the sun rises at 04:00 and sets at 22:29 BST and complete darkness is unknown. This long twilight is known in the Northern Isles as the &quot;simmer dim&quot;. Winter nights are long. On the shortest day the sun rises at 09:05 and sets at 15:16. At this time of year the aurora borealis can occasionally be seen on the northern horizon during moderate auroral activity.

The first averages table below is for the largest settlement Kirkwall&#x27;s weather station, the second is for the Loch of Hundland, a rural location to the northwest of Mainland.


==Governance==

The local authority is the Orkney Islands Council, based at the Council Offices on School Place in Kirkwall.

===Administrative history===
On its absorption into Scotland in 1472, the landholdings and jurisdictions of the old earldom of Orkney passed to the Scottish crown. The separate lordship of Shetland was absorbed into Scotland at the same time. More typically Scottish forms of administration were gradually introduced to the Northern Isles. The position of Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland was created in 1541. Orkney and Shetland retained their own legal systems until 1612, when the general laws of Scotland were applied.

Commissioners of Supply were established in 1667 for each shire across Scotland. Unusually, despite being one shire, Orkney and Shetland were given separate bodies of commissioners. More local government functions were gradually given to the commissioners over time. At a court case in 1829, the Court of Session declined to rule on whether Orkney and Shetland were one county or two. They operated as one county for the purposes of the administration of justice, lieutenancy, and parliamentary constituencies, but operated as two counties for local government functions. Elected county councils were created in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). The 1889 Act also directed that Orkney and Shetland were to be separate counties.
Orkney County Council held its first meeting on 22 May 1890 at Kirkwall Sheriff Court, also known as County Buildings, on Watergate in Kirkwall, which had been completed in 1877 and also served as the meeting place of the commissioners of supply.

Local government was reformed in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts. In most of Scotland a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts was used, but a single-tier structure of island areas was used for Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles. Further local government reform in 1996 introduced single-tier council areas across all of Scotland. The councils of the three island areas created in 1975 continued to provide the same services after 1996, but their areas were re-designated as council areas.

==Parishes and communities==

Parishes existed from medieval times. From 1845 to 1894 they had parish boards and from 1894 to 1930 they had parish councils. They have had no administrative functions since 1930, but continue to be used for the presentation of statistics.

Orkney&#x27;s civil parishes are:

*Birsay and Harray
*Cross and Burness
*Eday
*Evie and Rendall
*Firth
*Holm
*Hoy and Graemsay
*Kirkwall and St Ola (included burgh of Kirkwall)
*Lady
*Orphir
*Papa Westray
*Rousay
*St Andrews and Deerness
*Sandwick
*Shapinsay
*South Ronaldsay
*Stenness
*Stromness (included burgh of same name)
*Stronsay
*Walls and Flotta
*Westray
Evie and Rendall were formerly separate parishes, but were united in the 16th century.

===Community councils===
Community councils were created in 1975 as part of the wider reforms that year. They have no statutory powers, but serve as a representative body for their communities. Orkney Islands Council designates community council areas, but a community council is only formed if there is sufficient interest from the residents. Since a review in 2022, Orkney has comprised the following communities, all of which have community councils operating as at 2024:

*Birsay
*Eday
*Evie and Rendall
*Firth and Stenness
*Flotta
*Graemsay, Hoy and Walls
*Harray and Sandwick
*Holm
*Kirkwall and St Ola
*North Ronaldsay
*Orphir
*Papa Westray
*Rousay, Egilsay, Wyre and Gairsay
*St Andrews and Deerness
*Sanday
*Shapinsay
*South Ronaldsay and Burray
*Stromness
*Stronsay
*Westray
===Ecclesiastical parishes===
In 2024 the Church of Scotland united almost all the ecclesiastical parishes in Orkney to form a single Orkney Islands Church of Scotland, retaining most church buildings and staffed by a team ministry. As of late 2024 the parish churches of Evie &amp; Rendall linked with Firth are not yet part of this new structure.

==Demographics==
Genetic studies have shown that 25% of the gene pool of Orkney derives from Norwegian ancestors who occupied the islands in the 9th century.

==Islands==
===The Mainland===

The Mainland is the largest island of Orkney. Both of Orkney&#x27;s burghs, Kirkwall and Stromness, are on this island, which is also the heart of Orkney&#x27;s transport system, with ferry and air connections to the other islands and to the outside world. The island is more heavily populated (75% of Orkney&#x27;s population) than the other islands and has much fertile farmland. The Mainland is split into areas called East and West Mainland. These areas are determined by whether they lie east or west of Kirkwall. The bulk of the mainland lies west of Kirkwall, with comparatively little land east of Kirkwall.
West Mainland parishes are:
Stromness, Sandwick, Birsay, Harray, Stenness, Orphir, Evie, Rendall and Firth.
East Mainland Parishes are:
St Ola, Tankerness, St Andrews, Holm and Deerness.

The island is mostly low-lying (especially East Mainland) but with coastal cliffs to the north and west and two sizeable lochs: the Loch of Harray and the Loch of Stenness. The Mainland contains the remnants of numerous Neolithic, Pictish and Viking constructions. Four of the main Neolithic sites are included in the Heart of Neolithic Orkney World Heritage Site, inscribed in 1999.

The other islands in the group are classified as north or south of the Mainland. Exceptions are the remote islets of Sule Skerry and Sule Stack, which lie west of the archipelago, but form part of Orkney for local government purposes. In island names, the suffix &quot;a&quot; or &quot;ay&quot; represents the Norse &quot;ey&quot;, meaning &quot;island&quot;. Those described as &quot;holms&quot; are very small.

===The North Isles===
The northern group of islands is the most extensive and consists of a large number of moderately sized islands, linked to the Mainland by ferries and by air services. Farming, fishing and tourism are the main sources of income for most of the islands.

The most northerly is North Ronaldsay, which lies beyond its nearest neighbour, Sanday. To the west is Westray, which has a population of 550. It is connected by ferry and air to Papa Westray, also known as &quot;Papay&quot;. Eday is at the centre of the North Isles. The centre of the island is moorland and the island&#x27;s main industries have been peat extraction and limestone quarrying.

Rousay, Egilsay and Gairsay lie north of the west Mainland across the Eynhallow Sound. Rousay is well known for its ancient monuments, including the Quoyness chambered cairn and Egilsay has the ruins of the only round-towered church in Orkney. Wyre to the south-east contains the site of Cubbie Roo&#x27;s castle. Stronsay and Papa Stronsay lie much further to the east across the Stronsay Firth. Auskerry is south of Stronsay and has a population of only five. Shapinsay and its Balfour Castle are a short distance north of Kirkwall.

Other small uninhabited islands in the North Isles group include Calf of Eday, Damsay, Eynhallow, Faray, Helliar Holm, Holm of Faray, Holm of Huip, Holm of Papa, Holm of Scockness, Kili Holm, Linga Holm, Muckle Green Holm, Rusk Holm and Sweyn Holm.

===The South Isles===
The southern group of islands surrounds Scapa Flow. Hoy, to the west, is the second largest of the Orkney Isles and Ward Hill at its northern end is the highest elevation in the archipelago. The Old Man of Hoy is a well-known seastack. Graemsay and Flotta are both linked by ferry to the Mainland and Hoy, and the latter is known for its large oil terminal. South Walls has a 19th-century Martello tower and is connected to Hoy by the Ayre. 
Burray lies to the east of Scapa Flow and is linked by causeway to South Ronaldsay, which hosts cultural events such as the Festival of the Horse and the Boys&#x27; Ploughing Match on the third Saturday in August. It is also the location of the Neolithic Tomb of the Eagles. South Ronaldsay, Burray, Glimps Holm, and Lamb Holm are connected by road to the Mainland by the Churchill Barriers.

Uninhabited South Islands include Calf of Flotta, Cava, Copinsay, Corn Holm, Fara, Glimps Holm, Hunda, Lamb Holm, Rysa Little, Switha and Swona. The Pentland Skerries lie further south, closer to the Scottish mainland.

==Politics==
Orkney is represented in the House of Commons as part of the Orkney and Shetland constituency, which elects one Member of Parliament (MP), the current incumbent being Alistair Carmichael. This seat has been held by the Liberal Democrats or the former Liberal Party since 1950, longer than any other they represent in Great Britain.

In the Scottish Parliament the Orkney constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system. The current MSP is Liam McArthur of the Liberal Democrats. Before McArthur the MSP was Jim Wallace, who was previously Deputy First Minister. Orkney is within the Highlands and Islands electoral region.

The Orkney Movement, a political party that supported devolution for Orkney from the rest of Scotland, contested the 1987 general election as the Orkney and Shetland Movement (a coalition of the Orkney movement and its equivalent for Shetland). The Scottish National Party chose not to contest the seat to give the movement a &quot;free run&quot;. Their candidate, John Goodlad, came 4th with 3,095 votes, 14.5% of those cast, but the experiment has not been repeated.

In the 2014 Scottish independence referendum 67.2% of voters in Orkney voted no to the question &quot;Should Scotland be an independent country?&quot; This was the highest no vote by percentage in any council area in Scotland. Turnout for the referendum was at 83.7% in Orkney with 10,004 votes cast in the area against independence by comparison to 4,883 votes for independence.

In the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum 63.2% of voters in Orkney voted Remain.

In 2022, as part of the Levelling Up White Paper, an &quot;Island Forum&quot; was proposed, which would allow local policymakers and residents in Orkney to work alongside their counterparts in Shetland, the Western Isles, Anglesey and the Isle of Wight on common issues, such as broadband connectivity, and provide a platform for them to communicate directly with the government on the challenges island communities face in terms of levelling up.

In July 2023, Orkney Council were investigating proposals to change its status, looking at options that included becoming a British Crown Dependency, a self-governing territory within the Kingdom of Norway or just staying in the United Kingdom.

==Economy==
The soil of Orkney is generally very fertile and most of the land is taken up by farms, agriculture being by far the most important sector of the economy and providing employment for a quarter of the workforce according to a 2008 report. More than 90% of agricultural land is used for grazing for sheep and cattle, with cereal production utilising about 4% () and woodland occupying only .

Fishing has declined in importance, but still employed 345 individuals in 2001, about 3.5% of the islands&#x27; economically active population, the modern industry concentrating on herring, white fish, lobsters, crabs and other shellfish, and salmon fish farming.
A 2009 report indicated the traditional sectors of the economy export beef, cheese, whisky, beer, fish and other seafood. In recent years there has been growth in other areas including tourism, food and beverage manufacture, jewellery, knitwear, and other crafts production, construction and oil transportation through the Flotta oil terminal. Retailing accounts for 17.5% of total employment, and public services also play a significant role, employing a third of the islands&#x27; workforce. There are two Scotch whisky distilleries in Orkney (Scapa distillery and the Highland Park distillery). With the Deerness Distillery, a third whisky distillery is to be added in the summer of 2023.

In 2007, of the 1,420 VAT registered enterprises 55% were in agriculture, forestry and fishing, 12% in manufacturing and construction, 12% in wholesale, retail and repairs, and 5% in hotels and restaurants. A further 5% were public service related. 55% of these businesses employ between 5 and 49 people.

A new report, published in September 2020, provided updates about several significant aspects of the economy: there are around 1,500 businesses on the island. More than 90% have fewer than 10 employees. [Estimates indicate] 11,000 jobs, of which around 5,000 are part-time ... There&#x27;s not much manufacturing, beyond food and drink processing (think cheese and whisky), and apart from the Flotta oil terminal, it lacks big private employers ... Fisheries off Orkney are only half as important to employment as in Shetland, and farming is roughly twice as important.

The report expressed concern about the loss of business caused by the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic: &quot;blighting business activity, travel and tourism&quot;. On 1 February 2021, a new plan (subsequent to previous funding schemes) from the Scottish government was announced. The Island Equivalent Payment Fund was designed to &quot;provide the equivalent of Level 4 support to eligible businesses in Orkney and other island areas&quot;.

===Tourism===

A report published in February 2020 stated that spending by visitors increased from £49.5 million in 2017 to £67.1 million in 2019, making this a significant sector of the economy. The primary attractions that encourage tourism include the &quot;Heart of Neolithic Orkney&quot; on the main island, defined as &quot;a group of 5,000-year-old sites that include the preserved village of Skara Brae and the Ring of Brodgar stone circle&quot;. The Hoy area&#x27;s landscape is also attractive to visitors, &quot;with its scattered woodland, steep valleys, high cliffs and the famous Old Man, a withered red sandstone sea stack&quot;. In 2017, 62% of tourists to Orkney visited for its heritage. The UHI Archaeology Institute have led excavations at the Ness of Brodgar, contributing to tourism to the area and driving interest in archaeology.

During most years, the islands are the home of several international festivals, including the Orkney International Science Festival in September, a folk festival in May, and the St Magnus International Arts Festival in June.
The volume of visitors arriving on ferries declined substantially in 2020, by 71%, 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic. A news report added that cruise ships also did not arrive and there were &quot;no day trippers and no holiday lets&quot; as of 25 April 2020. Several major events were cancelled: St Magnus Festival, Orkney Folk Festival, Stromness Shopping Week and the Agricultural Shows.

===Power===

Orkney has significant wind and marine energy resources, and renewable energy has recently come into prominence. Although Orkney is connected to the mainland, it generates over 100% of its net power from renewables according to a 2015 report. This comes mainly from wind turbines situated across Orkney.

The European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC) is a research facility operating a grid-connected wave test site at Billia Croo, off the west coast of the Orkney Mainland, and a tidal power test site in the Fall of Warness, off the northern island of Eday. At the official opening of the Eday project the site was described as &quot;the first of its kind in the world set up to provide developers of wave and tidal energy devices with a purpose-built performance testing facility.&quot;

During 2007 Scottish and Southern Energy plc in conjunction with the University of Strathclyde began the implementation of a Regional Power Zone in the Orkney archipelago, involving &quot;active network management&quot; that will make better use of existing infrastructure and allow a further 15 MW of new &quot;non-firm generation&quot; output from renewables onto the network. 1.5 MW of polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis form a partial hydrogen economy for hydrogen vehicles and district heating, and grid batteries and electric vehicles also use local energy.

Orkney has one of the highest uptakes of electric vehicles in the UK with more than 2% of the vehicles on the road being electric, as of 2019.

====Hydrogen manufacturing====
A March 2019 report by the BBC stated that &quot;Orkney creates more clean electricity than its inhabitants need. Even after exporting to the UK national grid, the islands&#x27; winds, waves and tides generate about 130% of the electricity its population needs – all of it from clean sources&quot;. A report about sustainable energy in the islands listed two options. A new cable could be laid for exporting of energy to the mainland but another proposal has progressed rapidly since that time: making &quot;excess renewable power into another fuel – such as hydrogen – and then [storing] it&quot;.

In May 2020, CNN published more specific information about the hydrogen plan:Orkney&#x27;s success in creating hydrogen using clean energy demonstrates that it can be done at scale. The islands are already using hydrogen to power vehicles, and it will soon be used to heat a local primary school. Now, Orkney is hoping to use hydrogen fuel cells to power a seagoing vessel able to transport both goods and passengers.

Additional specific information about the status of the hydrogen scheme was published in late November 2020 by Orkney Islands Council. A few weeks earlier, another report indicated that the world&#x27;s first hydrogen-fueled ferry was to be tested on the Orkney Islands, using &quot;a hydrogen/diesel dual fuel conversion system&quot;, developed by a consortium known as the HyDIME project. Initially hydrogen was to power only the auxiliary engine but the plan calls for later using this fuel for the primary engine. The report suggested that &quot;if all goes well, hydrogen ferries could be sailing between Orkney&#x27;s islands within six months&quot;.

Kirkwall Airport in Orkney was scheduled &quot;to have its heat and power decarbonised through green hydrogen as part of a new project&quot; starting in 2021. A hydrogen combustion engine system was to be connected to the airport&#x27;s heating system. The scheme planned to reduce the significant emissions that were created with older technology that heated buildings and water. This was part of the plan formulated by the Scottish government for the Highlands and Islands &quot;to become the world&#x27;s first net zero aviation region by 2040&quot;.

Hydrogen manufacturing is also planned for Shetland and will spread to other areas of Scotland that have access to clean electricity. To achieve that goal, the government announced an investment of £100 million in the hydrogen sector &quot;for the £180 million Emerging Energy Technologies Fund&quot;.

===Transport===
====Air====
Highland and Islands Airports operates the main airport in Orkney, Kirkwall Airport. Loganair provides services to the Scottish mainland (Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Inverness), as well as to Sumburgh Airport in Shetland.

Within Orkney, the council operates airports on most of the larger islands including Stronsay, Eday, North Ronaldsay, Westray, Papa Westray, Sanday, and Flotta. The shortest scheduled air service in the world, between the islands of Westray and Papa Westray, is scheduled at two minutes&#x27; duration but can take less than one minute if the wind is in the right direction.

====Ferry====
Ferries serve both to link Orkney to the rest of Scotland, and also to link together the various islands of the Orkney archipelago. Ferry services operate between Orkney and the Scottish mainland and Shetland on the following routes:
* Gills Bay to St Margaret&#x27;s Hope (operated by Pentland Ferries)
* John o&#x27; Groats to Burwick on South Ronaldsay (seasonal passenger only service, operated by John o&#x27; Groats Ferries)
* Lerwick to Kirkwall (operated by NorthLink Ferries)
* Aberdeen to Kirkwall (operated by NorthLink Ferries)
* Scrabster Harbour, Thurso to Stromness (operated by NorthLink Ferries)

Inter-island ferry services connect all the inhabited islands to Orkney Mainland and are operated by Orkney Ferries, a company owned by Orkney Islands Council. The isles of Westray, Papa Westray (or Papay), North Ronaldsay, Sanday, Eday, Stronsay, and Shapinsay are served from Kirkwall harbour, while the northern end of Hoy and Graemsay are served from Stromness harbour, the Lyness end of Hoy, as well as Longhope on South Walls, and Flotta are served from Houton on the south of the mainland, and Rousay, Egilsay and Wyre are served from Tingwall, in the Rendall area of the Orkney mainland. As well as this, the connects the village of Pierowall on Westray with Papa Westray - this provides a vital local service for schoolchildren on Papay as well as supplementing existing through sailings from Kirkwall.

====Bus====
Local buses around the Orkney Mainland, as well as across the Churchill Barriers to Burray and South Ronaldsay, are operated by Stagecoach Highlands. The main route is the X1, connecting Stromness, Stenness for Maeshowe, Finstown, Kirkwall, St Mary&#x27;s, Burray, and St Margaret&#x27;s Hope. There are also buses from Kirkwall via Orphir (2), and from Stromness (5) to the ferry terminal at Houton (from which inter-island ferries operate to Hoy and Flotta, from Kirkwall to Kirkwall Airport (3 &amp; 4), Tankerness and Deerness (3), from Kirkwall and Finstown to Tingwall (from which there are ferries to Rousay, Egilsay and Wyre), Evie and Birsay, from Stromness to Kirkwall via Skara Brae, Dounby, Harray and Finstown (7), the 8 (which does a circular route to and from Kirkwall and Finstown via Stromness and the West Mainland villages, such as Marwick, Quoyloo, Dounby and Stenness), and the X10, which connects the late-night call of the NorthLink ferry to and from Aberdeen and Lerwick, at Hatston Ferry Terminal, to Kirkwall, Finstown and Stromness.

In 2021, the island&#x27;s three-vehicle minibus service for disabled people was a target for hackers seeking a £1,000 ransom in cryptocurrency.

===Media===
Orkney is served by a weekly local newspaper, &quot;The Orcadian&quot;, published on Thursdays. It is first published in 1854 and part of the Orkney Media Group, formed out of a partnership with a competing newspaper, &quot;Orkney Today&quot;, in 2007.

A local BBC radio station, BBC Radio Orkney, the local opt-out of BBC Radio Scotland, broadcasts twice daily, with local news and entertainment. Orkney also had a commercial radio station, The Superstation Orkney, which broadcast to Kirkwall and parts of the mainland and also to most of Caithness until its closure in November 2014. MFR broadcasts throughout Orkney on an FM transmitter just outside Thurso. The community radio station Caithness FM also broadcasts to Orkney.

Orkney is home to the Orkney Library and Archive, based in Kirkwall. The library service provides access to over 145,000 items. They have a wide range of fiction and non-fiction titles available for loan as well as audiobooks, maps, eBooks, music CDs, and DVDs. Orkney Library and Archive operates a Mobile Library Service that serves the rural parishes and islands of Orkney. The Mobile Library carries a wide range of books and audiobooks suitable for all ages and is completely free to use.

==Language, literature, and folklore==

At the beginning of recorded history, the islands were inhabited by the Picts, whose language was Brythonic. The Ogham script on the Buckquoy spindle-whorl is cited as evidence for the pre-Norse existence of Old Irish in Orkney.

After the Norse occupation, the toponymy of Orkney became almost wholly West Norse. The Norse language changed into the local Norn, which lingered until the end of the 18th century, when it eventually died out. Norn was replaced by the Orcadian dialect of Insular Scots. This dialect is at a low ebb due to the pervasive influences of television, education, and the large number of incomers. However, attempts are being made by some writers and radio presenters to revitalise its use and the distinctive sing-song accent and many dialect words of Norse origin remain in use. The Orcadian word most frequently encountered by visitors is , meaning &#x27;small&#x27;, which may be derived from the French .

Orkney has a rich folklore, and many of the former tales concern trows, an Orcadian form of troll that draws on the islands&#x27; Scandinavian connections. Local customs in the past included marriage ceremonies at the Odin Stone that formed part of the Stones of Stenness.

King Lot in certain versions of the Arthurian legend (e.g., Malory) is ruler of Orkney. His sons Gawaine, Agravaine, Gareth, and Gaheris are major characters in the Matter of Britain. In earlier versions of Arthuriana such as Geoffrey of Monmouth&#x27;s History of the Kings of Britain the King of Orkney is named Gunfasius.

The best known literary figures from modern Orkney are the poet Edwin Muir, the poet and novelist George Mackay Brown, and the novelist Eric Linklater.

==Orcadians==


An Orcadian is a native of Orkney, a term that reflects a strongly held identity with a tradition of understatement. Although the annexation of the earldom by Scotland took place over five centuries ago in 1472, some Orcadians regard themselves as Orcadians first and Scots second. However in response to the national identity question in the 2011 Scotland Census, self-reported levels of Scottish identity in Orkney were in line with the national average.

The Scottish mainland is often referred to as &quot;Scotland&quot; in Orkney, with &quot;the mainland&quot; referring to Mainland, Orkney. The archipelago also has a distinct culture, with traditions of the Scottish Highlands such as tartan, clans, bagpipes not indigenous to the culture of the islands. However, at least two tartans with Orkney connections have been registered and a tartan has been designed for Sanday by one of the island&#x27;s residents, and there are pipe bands in Orkney.

Native Orcadians refer to the non-native residents of the islands as &quot;ferry loupers&quot; (&quot;loup&quot; meaning &quot;jump&quot; in the Scots language), a term that has been in use for nearly two centuries at least.

==Natural history==

Orkney has an abundance of wildlife, especially of grey and common seals and seabirds such as puffins, kittiwakes, black guillemots (tysties), ravens, and great skuas (bonxies). Whales, dolphins, and otters are also seen around the coasts. Inland the Orkney vole, a distinct subspecies of the common vole introduced by Neolithic humans, is an endemic. There are five distinct varieties, found on the islands of Sanday, Westray, Rousay, South Ronaldsay, and the Mainland, all the more remarkable as the species is absent on mainland Britain.

The coastline is well known for its colourful flowers including sea aster, sea squill, sea thrift, common sea-lavender, bell and common heather. The Scottish primrose is found only on the coasts of Orkney and nearby Caithness and Sutherland. Although stands of trees are generally rare, a small forest named Happy Valley with 700 trees and lush gardens was created from a boggy hillside near Stenness during the second half of the 20th century.

The North Ronaldsay sheep is an unusual breed of domesticated animal, subsisting largely on a diet of seaweed, since they are confined to the foreshore for most of the year to conserve the limited grazing inland. The island was also a habitat for the Atlantic walrus until the mid-16th century.

The Orkney char (&quot;Salvelinus inframundus&quot;) used to live in Heldale Water on Hoy and has not been observed since 1908, so is now considered to be extinct.

===Stoat problem and solution===
The introduction of non-native stoats since 2010, a natural predator of the common vole and thus of the Orkney vole, was also harming native bird populations. NatureScot, Scotland&#x27;s nature agency, provided these additional specifics:The introduction of a ground predator like the stoat to islands such as Orkney, where there are no native ground predators, is very bad news for Orkney&#x27;s native species. Stoats are accomplished predators and pose a very serious threat to Orkney&#x27;s wildlife, including: the native Orkney vole, hen harrier, short-eared owl and many ground nesting birds.

In 2018, a stoat eradication project was presented by NatureScot to be applied &quot;across Orkney Mainland, South Ronaldsay, Burray, Glimps Holm, Lamb Holm and Hunda, and the biosecurity activities delivered on the non-linked islands of the archipelago&quot;. The Orkney Native Wildlife Project planned to use &quot;humane DOC150 and DOC200 traps&quot;. The partners in the five-year project include RSPB Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage and Orkney Islands Council. A report issued in October 2020 stated that over 5,000 traps had been deployed. Specifics were provided as to the locations.

Not all was going well as of 15 January 2021, according to &quot;The Times&quot;, which stated that the project &quot;has been hit by alleged sabotage after the destruction and theft of traps that have also killed and injured household pets and other animals&quot; but added that the £6 million programme was supported by most islanders. Another news item stated that some of the traps had &quot;caught and killed family pets as well as hundreds of other animals&quot;. A subsequent report confirmed that &quot;Police Scotland is investigating a number of incidents involving damage to and the theft of stoat traps in Orkney&quot;.

===Protected areas===
There are 13 Special Protection Areas and 6 Special Areas of Conservation in Orkney. One of Scotland&#x27;s 40 national scenic areas, the Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area, is also located in the islands. The seas to the northwest of Orkney are important for sand eels that provides a food source for many species of fish, seabirds, seals, whales and dolphins, and are now protected as Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area (NCMPA) that covers .

==Flag==

A new flag for Orkney was adopted in 2007 following a public competition. It comprises a Nordic cross of blue and yellow on a red background. Previously the traditional flag of St Magnus (a red cross on a yellow background) had sometimes been used, but in 2001 it was ruled too similar to other flags to allow it to be formally registered as the area&#x27;s flag.

==Freedom of the Island==
Orkney as a whole, since 1887, has been associated specifically with and as a recruiting area of the following military units that have received the Freedom of the Island of Orkney:

* The Seaforth Highlanders, Queens Own Highlanders, The Highlanders Regiment and 4th Battalion Royal Regiment of Scotland.
* The Northern Diving Group Royal Navy: 9 July 2021.

==See also==
* Timeline of prehistoric Scotland
* Prehistoric Scotland
* Battle of Florvåg
* List of places in Orkney
* Orkney Club
* Orkney College
* Rögnvald Kali Kolsson
* Udal Law
* Orkney Islands Church of Scotland
* Parishes of Orkney
* Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles
* Solar eclipse of 1 May 1185
* Baha&#x27;i Faith in Orkney
==References==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
===General references===

* Armit, Ian (2006) &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Hidden History&quot;. Stroud. Tempus. 
* Beuermann, Ian &quot;Jarla Sǫgur Orkneyja. Status and power of the earls of Orkney according to their sagas&quot; in Steinsland, Gro; Sigurðsson, Jón Viðar; Rekda, Jan Erik and Beuermann, Ian (eds) (2011) &quot;Ideology and power in the Viking and Middle Ages: Scandinavia, Iceland, Ireland, Orkney and the Faeroes &quot;. The Northern World: North Europe and the Baltic c. 400–1700 A.D. Peoples, Economics and Cultures. 52. Leiden. Brill. 
* Baynes, John (1970) &quot;The Jacobite Rising of 1715&quot;. London. Cassell. 
* Benvie, Neil (2004) &quot;Scotland&#x27;s Wildlife&quot;. London. Aurum Press. 
* Ballin Smith, B. and Banks, I. (eds) (2002) &quot;In the Shadow of the Brochs, the Iron Age in Scotland&quot;. Stroud. Tempus. 
* Ballin Smith, Beverley; Taylor, Simon; and Williams, Gareth (eds) (2007) &quot;West Over Sea: Studies in Scandinavian Sea-borne Expansion and Settlement Before 1300&quot;. Brill. 
* Clarkson, Tim (2008) &quot;The Picts: A History&quot;. Stroud. The History Press. 
* Duffy, Christopher (2003) &quot;The 45: Bonnie Prince Charlie and the Untold Story of the Jacobite Rising&quot;. London. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. 
* Fraser, James E. (2009) &quot;From Caledonia to Pictland: Scotland to 795&quot;. Edinburgh University Press. 
* Moffat, Alistair (2005) &quot;Before Scotland: The Story of Scotland Before History&quot;. London. Thames &amp; Hudson. 
* Omand, Donald (ed.) (2003) &quot;The Orkney Book&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn. 
* Thompson, William P.L. (2008) &quot;The New History of Orkney&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn. 
* &quot;Whitaker&#x27;s Almanack 1991&quot; (1990). London. J. Whitaker &amp; Sons. 
* Wickham-Jones, Caroline (2007) &quot;Orkney: A Historical Guide&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn. 


==Further reading==

* Batey, C.E. &quot;et al&quot; (eds.) (1995) &quot;The Viking Age in Caithness, Orkney and the North Atlantic&quot;. Edinburgh University Press. 
* Fresson, Captain E.E. &quot;Air Road to the Isles&quot;. (2008) Kea Publishing. 
* Hutton, Guthrie (2009) &quot;Old Orkney&quot;. Catrine: Stenlake Publishing 
* Livesey, Margot, &quot;The Flight of Gemma Hardy&quot; (a novel). HarperCollins, 2012. 
* Lo Bao, Phil and Hutchison, Iain (2002) &quot;BEAline to the Islands&quot;. Kea Publishing. 
* Nicol, Christopher (2012) Eric Linklater&#x27;s Private Angelo and The Dark of Summer Glasgow: ASLS 
* Rendall, Jocelyn (2009) &quot;Steering the Stone Ships: The Story of Orkney Kirks and People&quot; Saint Andrew Press, Edinburgh. 
* Tait, Charles (2012) &quot;The Orkney Guide Book,&quot; Charles Tait, St. Ola, Orkney. 
* Warner, Guy (2005) &quot;Orkney by Air&quot;. Kea Publishing. 
* Dance, Gaia (2013) &quot;The Sea Before Breakfast.&quot; Amazon. 
* Marshall, Peter (2024) &quot;Storm’s Edge: Life, Death and Magic in the Islands of Orkney.&quot; William Collins. 
==External links==
* Orkney Islands Council, the local authority website
* Vision of Britain – Groome Gazetteer entry for Orkney
* Orkney Landscapes 
* Map of the community council areas
* Map of civil parishes
* A Checklist of the Flora of Orkney, 2013</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="0" end="6" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="29" end="43" title="Orkney" label="Orkney Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="51" end="62" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="95" end="103" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="121" end="132" title="Orkney" label="the Orkneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="169" end="183" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="195" end="203" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="241" end="250" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="328" end="336" title="Mainland, Orkney" label="Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="369" end="398" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="sixth-largest Scottish island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419391" start="407" end="448" title="List of islands of the British Isles" label="tenth-largest island in the British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="523" end="531" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="558" end="571" title="Subdivisions of Scotland" label="council areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248274" start="598" end="610" title="Orkney (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="618" end="637" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="641" end="657" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="666" end="681" title="counties of Scotland" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q11994103" start="704" end="726" title="Orkney Islands Council" label="Orkney Islands Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="804" end="814" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="819" end="828" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="852" end="857" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="905" end="922" title="Kingdom of Norway" label="Kingdom of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="949" end="957" title="Norsemen" label="Norsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="972" end="994" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148098" start="1008" end="1025" title="Earldom of Orkney" label="Earldom of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1035" end="1054" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="1083" end="1088" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="1101" end="1122" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233804" start="1151" end="1170" title="Margaret of Denmark, Queen of Scotland" label="Margaret of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1302" end="1315" title="Orkney#Climate" label="local climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336506" start="1757" end="1764" title="Orcadian dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919205" start="1772" end="1786" title="Insular Scots" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334966" start="1912" end="1937" title="Heart of Neolithic Orkney" label="Heart of Neolithic Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1960" end="1966" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1967" end="1986" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="2062" end="2069" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566850" start="2073" end="2081" title="Massalia" label="Massalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260729" start="2256" end="2267" title="Dunnet Head" label="Dunnet Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2352" end="2359" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q297515" start="2364" end="2378" title="Pomponius Mela" label="Pomponius Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="2431" end="2438" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="2481" end="2489" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="2585" end="2590" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2636" end="2645" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="2646" end="2658" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="2770" end="2777" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="2835" end="2839" title="wild boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="2859" end="2868" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="2939" end="2950" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2973" end="2978" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="2993" end="3008" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12388836" start="3029" end="3039" title="fossilization (linguistics)" label="fossilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q117226378" start="3040" end="3058" title="prepositional case" label="prepositional case"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="3177" end="3181" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="3216" end="3260" title="Ecclesiastical History of the English People" label="Ecclesiastical History of the English People"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="3269" end="3278" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3362" end="3371" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="3378" end="3382" title="pinniped" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="3612" end="3616" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="3647" end="3663" title="Mainland, Orkney" label="Mainland, Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q715169" start="3860" end="3875" title="George Buchanan" label="George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4021" end="4037" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q578307" start="4258" end="4266" title="hazelnut" label="hazelnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059278" start="4314" end="4324" title="Tankerness" label="Tankerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776885" start="4474" end="4487" title="Knap of Howar" label="Knap of Howar"/>
<link wikidata="Q931770" start="4528" end="4540" title="Papa Westray" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q816437" start="4583" end="4593" title="Skara Brae" label="Skara Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478558" start="4742" end="4769" title="Standing Stones of Stenness" label="Standing Stones of Stenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q507076" start="4775" end="4783" title="Maeshowe" label="Maeshowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426772" start="4784" end="4797" title="passage grave" label="passage grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q643631" start="4803" end="4818" title="Ring of Brodgar" label="Ring of Brodgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268170" start="5082" end="5088" title="Sanday, Orkney" label="Sanday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5244" end="5254" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268170" start="5619" end="5625" title="Sanday, Orkney" label="Sanday"/>
<link wikidata="Q666116" start="5659" end="5672" title="Holm of Faray" label="Holm of Faray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122220" start="5705" end="5716" title="Quanterness chambered cairn" label="Quanterness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982611" start="5750" end="5769" title="Atlantic roundhouse" label="Atlantic roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5897" end="5905" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q82137" start="5976" end="5981" title="broch" label="broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603178" start="6034" end="6055" title="Broch of Burroughston" label="Broch of Burroughston"/>
<link wikidata="Q923355" start="6060" end="6076" title="Broch of Gurness" label="Broch of Gurness"/>
<link wikidata="Q137937" start="6185" end="6208" title="Souterrain" label="underground storehouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q188014" start="6213" end="6231" title="Wheelhouse (archaeology)" label="aisled roundhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6305" end="6310" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="6437" end="6445" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q630604" start="6458" end="6469" title="Camulodunum" label="Camulodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434255" start="6558" end="6567" title="Shapinsay" label="Shapinsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q181983" start="6650" end="6666" title="Polemius Silvius" label="Polemius Silvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q65666" start="6711" end="6716" title="Seeck" label="Seeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q641178" start="6748" end="6766" title="Notitia Dignitatum" label="Notitia Dignitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="6982" end="6989" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="7016" end="7030" title="archaeological" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="7178" end="7187" title="Dál Riata" label="Dalriadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="7188" end="7193" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="7303" end="7309" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="7310" end="7322" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="7525" end="7547" title="North Germanic peoples" label="North Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="7679" end="7690" title="enslavement" label="enslavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="7695" end="7703" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q567986" start="7758" end="7765" title="Fortriu" label="Fortriu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="7948" end="7956" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="8049" end="8055" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="8100" end="8106" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="8211" end="8226" title="Harald I of Norway" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="8257" end="8271" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642345" start="8369" end="8384" title="Orkneyinga saga" label="Orkneyinga Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q311996" start="8425" end="8440" title="Magnus III of Norway" label="Magnus Barelegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="8476" end="8486" title="apocryphal" label="apocryphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367604" start="8489" end="8509" title="Rognvald Eysteinsson" label="Rognvald Eysteinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772419" start="8673" end="8690" title="Sigurd Eysteinsson" label="Sigurd the Mighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="8788" end="8797" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061313" start="8802" end="8812" title="Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049451" start="8874" end="8885" title="Torf-Einarr" label="Torf-Einarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525824" start="9028" end="9051" title="Thorfinn Turf-Einarsson, Earl of Orkney" label="Thorfinn Skull-splitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213791" start="9100" end="9113" title="Eric Bloodaxe" label="Eric Bloodaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845281" start="9227" end="9240" title="Hoxa, Orkney" label="broch of Hoxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q584681" start="9245" end="9260" title="South Ronaldsay" label="South Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="9527" end="9543" title="Olaf I of Norway" label="Olaf Tryggvasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555977" start="9570" end="9581" title="South Walls" label="South Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="9645" end="9649" title="earl" label="jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q614802" start="9656" end="9672" title="Sigurd the Stout" label="Sigurd the Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502743" start="9954" end="9960" title="Bishop of Orkney" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q719528" start="9989" end="10008" title="Thorfinn Sigurdsson" label="Thorfinn the Mighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q332136" start="10047" end="10074" title="Malcolm II of Scotland" label="King Malcolm II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="10280" end="10286" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="10290" end="10298" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372291" start="10339" end="10354" title="Paul and Erlend Thorfinnsson" label="Paul and Erlend"/>
<link wikidata="Q203225" start="10386" end="10411" title="Battle of Stamford Bridge" label="Battle of Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="10514" end="10520" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q522317" start="10527" end="10544" title="Magnus Erlendsson, Earl of Orkney" label="Magnus Erlendsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125245" start="10589" end="10604" title="Haakon Paulsson" label="Haakon Paulsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q732112" start="10634" end="10653" title="St Magnus Cathedral" label="St Magnus Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="10706" end="10720" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scottish crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912585" start="10927" end="10947" title="Mormaer of Caithness" label="Mormaer of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062304" start="11167" end="11181" title="Jon Haraldsson" label="Jon Haraldsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q526576" start="11199" end="11205" title="Thurso" label="Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991006" start="11211" end="11231" title="Earldom of Caithness" label="Earldom of Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277252" start="11247" end="11253" title="Magnus II, Earl of Orkney" label="Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="11273" end="11286" title="Earl of Angus" label="Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="11293" end="11312" title="Haakon IV of Norway" label="Haakon IV of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q229159" start="11538" end="11562" title="Margaret, Maid of Norway" label="Margaret, Maid of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="11651" end="11680" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975370" start="11844" end="11852" title="Clan Sinclair" label="Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761393" start="11885" end="11891" title="Roslin Castle" label="Roslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="11897" end="11906" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q594381" start="11990" end="12006" title="Brough of Birsay" label="Brough of Birsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="12029" end="12040" title="Toponymy" label="place names"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="12050" end="12055" title="Runic alphabet" label="runic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="12131" end="12139" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q819049" start="12144" end="12151" title="pledge (law)" label="pledged"/>
<link wikidata="Q153940" start="12155" end="12166" title="Christian I of Denmark" label="Christian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="12242" end="12247" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233804" start="12264" end="12272" title="Margaret of Denmark, Queen of Scotland" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q222616" start="12287" end="12308" title="James III of Scotland" label="James III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="12376" end="12395" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="12945" end="12952" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="13118" end="13127" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q633379" start="13169" end="13179" title="Whitefish (fisheries term)" label="White fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="13573" end="13598" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="13811" end="13815" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="13953" end="13961" title="soda ash" label="soda ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="14086" end="14092" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="14119" end="14135" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite risings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971849" start="14624" end="14642" title="Broad Bottom Ministry" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="14721" end="14729" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="14777" end="14787" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="14796" end="14806" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14837" end="14848" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14853" end="14865" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="14877" end="14886" title="Armistice" label="Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q275599" start="14900" end="14922" title="German High Seas Fleet" label="German High Seas Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q699527" start="15004" end="15069" title="Scuttling of the German fleet at Scapa Flow" label="The German sailors opened the seacocks and scuttled all the ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="15209" end="15215" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089879" start="15275" end="15283" title="Churchill Barriers" label="barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545493" start="15583" end="15597" title="Italian Chapel" label="Italian Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="16661" end="16667" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="16692" end="16707" title="List of Scottish islands" label="Scottish island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860233" start="16826" end="16840" title="Pentland Firth" label="Pentland Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q584681" start="16888" end="16903" title="South Ronaldsay" label="South Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265481" start="16908" end="16922" title="Duncansby Head" label="Duncansby Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="16926" end="16935" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="17112" end="17128" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790793" start="17181" end="17198" title="Fair Isle Channel" label="Fair Isle Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916345" start="17345" end="17354" title="Ward Hill, Hoy" label="Ward Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172903" start="17443" end="17447" title="loch" label="loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="17673" end="17687" title="Tide" label="tidal currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="17993" end="18001" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="18006" end="18015" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418411" start="18035" end="18043" title="Finstown" label="Finstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850747" start="18069" end="18076" title="Balfour, Orkney" label="Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059275" start="18078" end="18084" title="Dounby" label="Dounby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916915" start="18086" end="18092" title="Houton" label="Houton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673878" start="18094" end="18102" title="Longhope, Orkney" label="Longhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708810" start="18104" end="18110" title="Lyness" label="Lyness"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059277" start="18112" end="18121" title="Pierowall" label="Pierowall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026294" start="18123" end="18146" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995958" start="18152" end="18161" title="Whitehall, Orkney" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="18230" end="18247" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="18266" end="18274" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="18322" end="18331" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="18363" end="18374" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126951324" start="18400" end="18405" title="Moine Supergroup" label="Moine"/>
<link wikidata="Q788269" start="18543" end="18551" title="Graemsay" label="Graemsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="18582" end="18588" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="18593" end="18600" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q730523" start="18697" end="18705" title="Eifelian" label="Eifelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667282" start="18813" end="18825" title="Orcadian Basin" label="Lake Orcadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335730" start="18999" end="19009" title="Eday Group" label="Eday Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q876798" start="19049" end="19062" title="Unconformity" label="unconformably"/>
<link wikidata="Q319440" start="19334" end="19343" title="Syncline" label="synclinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="19427" end="19433" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="19436" end="19449" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q774790" start="19670" end="19681" title="Lamprophyre" label="Lamprophyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q662806" start="19682" end="19687" title="Dike (geology)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="19696" end="19703" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625751" start="19738" end="19755" title="Glacial striation" label="Glacial striation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="19776" end="19781" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="19786" end="19791" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q372934" start="19792" end="19800" title="Glacial erratic" label="erratics"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="19894" end="19907" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="19932" end="19936" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="19958" end="19965" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="20100" end="20108" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126449" start="20157" end="20174" title="Norwegian Current" label="Norwegian Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="20210" end="20230" title="North Atlantic Drift" label="North Atlantic Drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="20267" end="20278" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="20695" end="20706" title="Midsummer" label="longest day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244681" start="20749" end="20752" title="British Summer Time" label="BST"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="20899" end="20911" title="shortest day" label="shortest day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="20979" end="20994" title="aurora borealis" label="aurora borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242590" start="21195" end="21211" title="Loch of Hundland" label="Loch of Hundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11994103" start="21305" end="21327" title="Orkney Islands Council" label="Orkney Islands Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966508" start="21744" end="21774" title="Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland" label="Sheriff of Orkney and Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152837" start="21910" end="21933" title="Commissioners of Supply" label="Commissioners of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="22020" end="22025" title="Shires of Scotland" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="22206" end="22222" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679633" start="22374" end="22385" title="Lord Lieutenant of Orkney and Shetland" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161712" start="22391" end="22419" title="Orkney and Shetland (Parliament of Scotland constituency)" label="parliamentary constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="22537" end="22573" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q17827907" start="22813" end="22835" title="Kirkwall Sheriff Court" label="Kirkwall Sheriff Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="23046" end="23082" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="23125" end="23130" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626641" start="23136" end="23153" title="landward district" label="landward district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083725" start="23285" end="23297" title="Islands council areas of Scotland" label="island areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="23336" end="23349" title="Western Isles" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901485" start="23920" end="23926" title="Birsay" label="Birsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663885" start="23931" end="23937" title="Harray" label="Harray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282606" start="23958" end="23962" title="Eday" label="Eday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418367" start="23964" end="23968" title="Evie, Orkney" label="Evie"/>
<link wikidata="Q960571" start="23973" end="23980" title="Rendall" label="Rendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454293" start="23982" end="23987" title="Firth, Orkney" label="Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883129" start="23989" end="23993" title="Holm, Orkney" label="Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139771" start="23995" end="23998" title="Hoy, Orkney" label="Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q788269" start="24003" end="24011" title="Graemsay" label="Graemsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="24013" end="24021" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594986" start="24026" end="24032" title="St Ola" label="St Ola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031524" start="24069" end="24075" title="Orphir" label="Orphir"/>
<link wikidata="Q931770" start="24077" end="24089" title="Papa Westray" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551897" start="24091" end="24097" title="Rousay" label="Rousay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592427" start="24099" end="24109" title="St Andrews, Orkney" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250977" start="24114" end="24122" title="Deerness" label="Deerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417102" start="24124" end="24132" title="Sandwick, Orkney" label="Sandwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434255" start="24134" end="24143" title="Shapinsay" label="Shapinsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q584681" start="24145" end="24160" title="South Ronaldsay" label="South Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607595" start="24162" end="24170" title="Stenness" label="Stenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="24172" end="24181" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758466" start="24213" end="24221" title="Stronsay" label="Stronsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555977" start="24223" end="24228" title="South Walls" label="Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q385306" start="24233" end="24239" title="Flotta" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506018" start="24241" end="24248" title="Westray" label="Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612187" start="24362" end="24380" title="List of community council areas in Scotland" label="Community councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="25164" end="25182" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130641940" start="25256" end="25289" title="Orkney Islands Church of Scotland" label="Orkney Islands Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="25731" end="25736" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q208329" start="25739" end="25747" title="Kirkwall" label="Kirkwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="25752" end="25761" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="25847" end="25852" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="26035" end="26043" title="Farmland (farming)" label="farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="26307" end="26316" title="Stromness (parish)" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867288" start="26599" end="26613" title="Loch of Harray" label="Loch of Harray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736274" start="26622" end="26638" title="Loch of Stenness" label="Loch of Stenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="26687" end="26696" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="26698" end="26705" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="26710" end="26716" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334966" start="26785" end="26810" title="Heart of Neolithic Orkney" label="Heart of Neolithic Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="26811" end="26830" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552222" start="26969" end="26980" title="Sule Skerry" label="Sule Skerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818674" start="26985" end="26995" title="Sule Stack" label="Sule Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="27108" end="27114" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844273" start="27237" end="27242" title="Holm (island)" label="holms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265993" start="27563" end="27578" title="North Ronaldsay" label="North Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268170" start="27621" end="27627" title="Sanday, Orkney" label="Sanday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506018" start="27644" end="27651" title="Westray" label="Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q931770" start="27720" end="27732" title="Papa Westray" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282606" start="27767" end="27771" title="Eday" label="Eday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="27837" end="27845" title="moorland" label="moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="27914" end="27923" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="27924" end="27930" title="quarry" label="quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551897" start="27936" end="27942" title="Rousay" label="Rousay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297992" start="27944" end="27951" title="Egilsay" label="Egilsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q745668" start="27956" end="27963" title="Gairsay" label="Gairsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422949" start="28006" end="28021" title="Eynhallow Sound" label="Eynhallow Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q585490" start="28094" end="28109" title="chambered cairn" label="chambered cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q537285" start="28180" end="28184" title="Wyre, Orkney" label="Wyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758466" start="28250" end="28258" title="Stronsay" label="Stronsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411576" start="28263" end="28276" title="Papa Stronsay" label="Papa Stronsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q779003" start="28333" end="28341" title="Auskerry" label="Auskerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434255" start="28398" end="28407" title="Shapinsay" label="Shapinsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850755" start="28416" end="28430" title="Balfour Castle" label="Balfour Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026659" start="28537" end="28549" title="Calf of Eday" label="Calf of Eday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158919" start="28551" end="28557" title="Damsay" label="Damsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385851" start="28559" end="28568" title="Eynhallow" label="Eynhallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396255" start="28570" end="28575" title="Faray" label="Faray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650908" start="28577" end="28589" title="Helliar Holm" label="Helliar Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q666116" start="28591" end="28604" title="Holm of Faray" label="Holm of Faray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748473" start="28606" end="28618" title="Holm of Huip" label="Holm of Huip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624996" start="28620" end="28632" title="Holm of Papa" label="Holm of Papa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761390" start="28634" end="28651" title="Holm of Scockness" label="Holm of Scockness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749462" start="28653" end="28662" title="Kili Holm" label="Kili Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432590" start="28664" end="28674" title="Linga Holm" label="Linga Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748476" start="28676" end="28693" title="Muckle Green Holm" label="Muckle Green Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981693" start="28695" end="28704" title="Rusk Holm" label="Rusk Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q941270" start="28709" end="28719" title="Sweyn Holm" label="Sweyn Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="28784" end="28794" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139771" start="28796" end="28799" title="Hoy, Orkney" label="Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916345" start="28860" end="28869" title="Ward Hill, Hoy" label="Ward Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738637" start="28939" end="28953" title="Old Man of Hoy" label="Old Man of Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="28970" end="28978" title="Stack (geology)" label="seastack"/>
<link wikidata="Q788269" start="28980" end="28988" title="Graemsay" label="Graemsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q385306" start="28993" end="28999" title="Flotta" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555977" start="29102" end="29113" title="South Walls" label="South Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q91285" start="29133" end="29147" title="Martello tower" label="Martello tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q928684" start="29186" end="29192" title="Burray" label="Burray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739260" start="29351" end="29366" title="Ploughing Match" label="Ploughing Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543831" start="29441" end="29459" title="Tomb of the Eagles" label="Tomb of the Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608688" start="29486" end="29497" title="Glimps Holm" label="Glimps Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449390" start="29503" end="29512" title="Lamb Holm" label="Lamb Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089879" start="29558" end="29576" title="Churchill Barriers" label="Churchill Barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749964" start="29613" end="29627" title="Calf of Flotta" label="Calf of Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051676" start="29629" end="29633" title="Cava (island)" label="Cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131229" start="29635" end="29643" title="Copinsay" label="Copinsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747849" start="29645" end="29654" title="Corn Holm" label="Corn Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396086" start="29656" end="29660" title="Fara, Orkney" label="Fara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608688" start="29662" end="29673" title="Glimps Holm" label="Glimps Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720148" start="29675" end="29680" title="Hunda" label="Hunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449390" start="29682" end="29691" title="Lamb Holm" label="Lamb Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748323" start="29693" end="29704" title="Rysa Little" label="Rysa Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q981284" start="29706" end="29712" title="Switha" label="Switha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470309" start="29717" end="29722" title="Swona" label="Swona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719864" start="29728" end="29745" title="Pentland Skerries" label="Pentland Skerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="29841" end="29857" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050931" start="29873" end="29892" title="Orkney and Shetland (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Orkney and Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="29893" end="29905" title="United Kingdom constituencies" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="29924" end="29944" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q269124" start="29979" end="29998" title="Alistair Carmichael" label="Alistair Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250438" start="30031" end="30048" title="Scottish Liberal Democrats" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437849" start="30063" end="30076" title="Scottish Liberal Party" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="30152" end="30171" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248274" start="30176" end="30182" title="Orkney (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="30207" end="30240" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="30254" end="30273" title="Plurality voting system" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691804" start="30301" end="30314" title="Liam McArthur" label="Liam McArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q333807" start="30369" end="30380" title="Jim Wallace, Baron Wallace of Tankerness" label="Jim Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="30401" end="30422" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="Deputy First Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549306" start="30445" end="30466" title="Highlands and Islands (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Highlands and Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437892" start="30467" end="30483" title="Scottish Parliament constituencies and regions" label="electoral region"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="30603" end="30624" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102964" start="30632" end="30660" title="Orkney and Shetland Movement" label="Orkney and Shetland Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="30735" end="30758" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458570" start="30963" end="31000" title="2014 Scottish independence referendum" label="2014 Scottish independence referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="31344" end="31400" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31466" end="31490" title="Levelling up policy of the Boris Johnson government#White paper" label="Levelling Up White Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="31635" end="31643" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="31649" end="31662" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="31664" end="31672" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="31681" end="31694" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="32014" end="32038" title="Crown Dependencies" label="British Crown Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="32042" end="32066" title="self-governance" label="self-governing territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="32720" end="32727" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q27690" start="32741" end="32749" title="Homarus gammarus" label="lobsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="32751" end="32755" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="32782" end="32788" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="32873" end="32877" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="32879" end="32885" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="32887" end="32893" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="32895" end="32899" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="32901" end="32905" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="32916" end="32923" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q385306" start="33126" end="33132" title="Flotta" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="33311" end="33324" title="Scotch whisky" label="Scotch whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="33325" end="33337" title="distillation" label="distilleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q982716" start="33349" end="33365" title="Scapa distillery" label="Scapa distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q982844" start="33374" end="33398" title="Highland Park distillery" label="Highland Park distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="33518" end="33521" title="VAT" label="VAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="34453" end="34470" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98822251" start="35522" end="35547" title="UHI Archaeology Institute" label="UHI Archaeology Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102955" start="35761" end="35798" title="Orkney International Science Festival" label="Orkney International Science Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594089" start="35845" end="35882" title="St Magnus Festival" label="St Magnus International Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q840695" start="36354" end="36370" title="Renewable energy in Scotland" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14367588" start="36470" end="36507" title="100% renewable energy" label="100% of its net power from renewables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412797" start="36602" end="36631" title="European Marine Energy Centre" label="European Marine Energy Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748476" start="36798" end="36813" title="Fall of Warness" label="Fall of Warness"/>
<link wikidata="Q493854" start="37091" end="37119" title="Scottish and Southern Energy" label="Scottish and Southern Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859178" start="37148" end="37173" title="University of Strathclyde" label="University of Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105319" start="37468" end="37509" title="polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis" label="polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q478859" start="37525" end="37541" title="hydrogen economy" label="hydrogen economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551748" start="37546" end="37562" title="hydrogen vehicle" label="hydrogen vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q278784" start="37568" end="37584" title="district heating" label="district heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="37853" end="37856" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="38439" end="38442" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q99513382" start="39598" end="39612" title="green hydrogen" label="green hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="40101" end="40109" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149321" start="40389" end="40418" title="Highlands and Islands Airports Limited" label="Highland and Islands Airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431732" start="40456" end="40472" title="Kirkwall Airport" label="Kirkwall Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="40474" end="40482" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981" start="40527" end="40535" title="Aberdeen Airport" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8716" start="40537" end="40546" title="Edinburgh Airport" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8721" start="40548" end="40555" title="Glasgow Airport" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431553" start="40560" end="40569" title="Inverness Airport" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432932" start="40586" end="40602" title="Sumburgh Airport" label="Sumburgh Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945983" start="40702" end="40710" title="Stronsay Airport" label="Stronsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029174" start="40712" end="40716" title="Eday Airport" label="Eday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334435" start="40718" end="40733" title="North Ronaldsay Airport" label="North Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655525" start="40735" end="40742" title="Westray Airport" label="Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033856" start="40744" end="40756" title="Papa Westray Airport" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607603" start="40758" end="40764" title="Sanday Airport" label="Sanday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40770" end="40776" title="Flotta#Airport" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583710" start="40782" end="40825" title="Loganair Westray to Papa Westray route" label="shortest scheduled air service in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026294" start="41256" end="41279" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016927" start="41293" end="41309" title="Pentland Ferries" label="Pentland Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985724" start="41336" end="41343" title="Burwick, Orkney" label="Burwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q213485" start="41440" end="41447" title="Lerwick, Shetland" label="Lerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783163" start="41473" end="41490" title="NorthLink Ferries" label="NorthLink Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q679476" start="41549" end="41566" title="Scrabster Harbour" label="Scrabster Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q526576" start="41568" end="41574" title="Thurso" label="Thurso"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="41578" end="41587" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102954" start="41722" end="41736" title="Orkney Ferries" label="Orkney Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506018" start="41794" end="41801" title="Westray" label="Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q931770" start="41803" end="41815" title="Papa Westray" label="Papa Westray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265993" start="41828" end="41843" title="North Ronaldsay" label="North Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268170" start="41845" end="41851" title="Sanday, Orkney" label="Sanday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282606" start="41853" end="41857" title="Eday" label="Eday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758466" start="41859" end="41867" title="Stronsay" label="Stronsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434255" start="41873" end="41882" title="Shapinsay" label="Shapinsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139771" start="41943" end="41946" title="Hoy, Orkney" label="Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q788269" start="41951" end="41959" title="Graemsay" label="Graemsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708810" start="41999" end="42005" title="Lyness" label="Lyness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673878" start="42029" end="42037" title="Longhope, Orkney" label="Longhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555977" start="42041" end="42052" title="South Walls" label="South Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q385306" start="42058" end="42064" title="Flotta" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916915" start="42081" end="42087" title="Houton" label="Houton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551897" start="42122" end="42128" title="Rousay" label="Rousay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297992" start="42130" end="42137" title="Egilsay" label="Egilsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q537285" start="42142" end="42146" title="Wyre, Orkney" label="Wyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q115141125" start="42163" end="42171" title="Tingwall, Orkney" label="Tingwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q960571" start="42180" end="42187" title="Rendall" label="Rendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059277" start="42262" end="42271" title="Pierowall" label="Pierowall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089879" start="42508" end="42526" title="Churchill Barriers" label="Churchill Barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q928684" start="42530" end="42536" title="Burray" label="Burray"/>
<link wikidata="Q584681" start="42541" end="42556" title="South Ronaldsay" label="South Ronaldsay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42574" end="42594" title="Stagecoach Highlands#Orkney Islands" label="Stagecoach Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="42633" end="42642" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607595" start="42644" end="42652" title="Stenness" label="Stenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q507076" start="42657" end="42665" title="Maeshowe" label="Maeshowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418411" start="42667" end="42675" title="Finstown" label="Finstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059303" start="42687" end="42701" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s, Orkney" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q928684" start="42703" end="42709" title="Burray Village" label="Burray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026294" start="42715" end="42738" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031524" start="42779" end="42785" title="Orphir" label="Orphir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916915" start="42839" end="42845" title="Houton" label="Houton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139771" start="42890" end="42893" title="Hoy, Orkney" label="Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q385306" start="42898" end="42904" title="Flotta" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431732" start="42923" end="42939" title="Kirkwall Airport" label="Kirkwall Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059278" start="42953" end="42963" title="Tankerness" label="Tankerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250977" start="42968" end="42976" title="Deerness" label="Deerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551897" start="43054" end="43060" title="Rousay" label="Rousay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297992" start="43062" end="43069" title="Egilsay" label="Egilsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q537285" start="43074" end="43078" title="Wyre, Orkney" label="Wyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418367" start="43081" end="43085" title="Evie, Orkney" label="Evie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901485" start="43090" end="43096" title="Birsay" label="Birsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q816437" start="43129" end="43139" title="Skara Brae" label="Skara Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059275" start="43141" end="43147" title="Dounby" label="Dounby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663885" start="43149" end="43155" title="Harray" label="Harray"/>
<link wikidata="Q21492047" start="43297" end="43304" title="Marwick" label="Marwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783163" start="43392" end="43401" title="NorthLink Ferries" label="NorthLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755279" start="43717" end="43729" title="The Orcadian" label="The Orcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834924" start="43946" end="43962" title="BBC Radio Orkney" label="BBC Radio Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876757" start="43985" end="44003" title="BBC Radio Scotland" label="BBC Radio Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378498" start="44082" end="44098" title="commercial radio" label="commercial radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767494" start="44108" end="44131" title="The Superstation Orkney" label="The Superstation Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="44207" end="44216" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q15256166" start="44253" end="44256" title="Moray Firth Radio" label="MFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179112" start="44332" end="44347" title="community radio" label="community radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q28845981" start="44419" end="44445" title="Orkney Library and Archive" label="Orkney Library and Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="45004" end="45009" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="45045" end="45050" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803326" start="45065" end="45087" title="Buckquoy spindle-whorl" label="Buckquoy spindle-whorl"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="45140" end="45149" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="45194" end="45202" title="toponymy" label="toponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="45234" end="45244" title="West Norse" label="West Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="45288" end="45292" title="Norn language" label="Norn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336506" start="45398" end="45414" title="Orcadian dialect" label="Orcadian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919205" start="45418" end="45431" title="Insular Scots" label="Insular Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="45676" end="45682" title="accent (dialect)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707284" start="45932" end="45937" title="trow (folklore)" label="trows"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="45959" end="45964" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584977" start="46141" end="46149" title="King Lot" label="King Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="46177" end="46193" title="Arthurian legend" label="Arthurian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="46201" end="46207" title="Thomas Malory" label="Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="46238" end="46245" title="Gawaine" label="Gawaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987269" start="46247" end="46256" title="Agravaine" label="Agravaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413003" start="46258" end="46264" title="Gareth" label="Gareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987228" start="46270" end="46277" title="Gaheris" label="Gaheris"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="46306" end="46323" title="Matter of Britain" label="Matter of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="46367" end="46387" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238693" start="46395" end="46426" title="History of the Kings of Britain" label="History of the Kings of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q304752" start="46531" end="46541" title="Edwin Muir" label="Edwin Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q639647" start="46565" end="46584" title="George Mackay Brown" label="George Mackay Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q919835" start="46603" end="46617" title="Eric Linklater" label="Eric Linklater"/>
<link wikidata="Q115290" start="46639" end="46647" title="Orcadians" label="Orcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="46904" end="46909" title="Scottish people" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="46979" end="46999" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 Scotland Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114749" start="47025" end="47042" title="Scottish national identity" label="Scottish identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="47215" end="47231" title="Mainland, Orkney" label="Mainland, Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="47301" end="47319" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="47328" end="47334" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="47336" end="47341" title="clans" label="clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="47343" end="47351" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="47736" end="47750" title="Scots language" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="47889" end="47893" title="grey seal" label="grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="47898" end="47910" title="Harbor seal" label="common seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="47932" end="47939" title="Atlantic puffin" label="puffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q310848" start="47941" end="47950" title="kittiwake" label="kittiwake"/>
<link wikidata="Q212055" start="47953" end="47968" title="black guillemot" label="black guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="47981" end="47987" title="common raven" label="ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207760" start="47993" end="48003" title="great skua" label="great skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="48038" end="48044" title="European otter" label="otters"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752709" start="48089" end="48100" title="Orkney vole" label="Orkney vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q243727" start="48131" end="48142" title="common vole" label="common vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="48157" end="48166" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="48181" end="48188" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q635916" start="48444" end="48453" title="Aster tripolium" label="sea aster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034404" start="48455" end="48465" title="Scilla verna" label="sea squill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21036" start="48467" end="48477" title="Armeria maritima" label="sea thrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q157375" start="48479" end="48498" title="Limonium" label="common sea-lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543735" start="48500" end="48504" title="Erica cinerea" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="48509" end="48523" title="Calluna" label="common heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q147091" start="48529" end="48546" title="Primula scotica" label="Scottish primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061313" start="48610" end="48620" title="Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653133" start="48688" end="48700" title="Happy Valley (garden)" label="Happy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118656" start="48830" end="48851" title="North Ronaldsay sheep" label="North Ronaldsay sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="48928" end="48935" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="49086" end="49092" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657452" start="49145" end="49167" title="Salvelinus inframundus" label="Salvelinus inframundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="49277" end="49284" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="49351" end="49356" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q243727" start="49396" end="49407" title="common vole" label="common vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752709" start="49424" end="49435" title="Orkney vole" label="Orkney vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537425" start="49479" end="49489" title="NatureScot" label="NatureScot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="49860" end="49871" title="hen harrier" label="hen harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q25769" start="49873" end="49888" title="short-eared owl" label="short-eared owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="50322" end="50335" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="RSPB Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537425" start="50337" end="50362" title="Scottish Natural Heritage" label="Scottish Natural Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="50582" end="50591" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="51185" end="51208" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191622" start="51216" end="51245" title="Special Area of Conservation" label="Special Areas of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="51283" end="51303" title="National scenic area (Scotland)" label="national scenic area"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869728" start="51310" end="51352" title="Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area" label="Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q15817131" start="51440" end="51448" title="sand eel" label="sand eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q68441067" start="51567" end="51608" title="Marine Protected Areas in Scotland" label="Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q208324" start="51731" end="51743" title="Nordic cross" label="Nordic cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="52182" end="52203" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="52367" end="52377" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806158" start="52408" end="52440" title="Timeline of prehistoric Scotland" label="Timeline of prehistoric Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249814" start="52443" end="52463" title="Prehistoric Scotland" label="Prehistoric Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888503" start="52466" end="52483" title="Battle of Florvåg" label="Battle of Florvåg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633819" start="52486" end="52510" title="List of places in Orkney" label="List of places in Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102949" start="52513" end="52524" title="Orkney Club" label="Orkney Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102950" start="52527" end="52541" title="Orkney College" label="Orkney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109400" start="52544" end="52565" title="Rögnvald Kali Kolsson" label="Rögnvald Kali Kolsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876900" start="52568" end="52576" title="Udal Law" label="Udal Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q130641940" start="52579" end="52612" title="Orkney Islands Church of Scotland" label="Orkney Islands Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52615" end="52633" title=":Category:Parishes of Orkney" label="Parishes of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916866" start="52636" end="52699" title="Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles" label="Constitutional status of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4427815" start="52702" end="52729" title="Solar eclipse of 1 May 1185" label="Solar eclipse of 1 May 1185"/>
<link wikidata="Q106829330" start="52732" end="52759" title="Baha&amp;#x27;i Faith in Orkney" label="Baha&amp;#x27;i Faith in Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="53349" end="53354" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527987" start="54825" end="54846" title="E. E. Fresson" label="Fresson, Captain E.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q6760684" start="54987" end="55002" title="Margot Livesey" label="Livesey, Margot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22647" wikidata="Q1139771" url="?curid=22647" title="Hoy, Orkney">
<text>Hoy (from Old Norse , meaning &quot;high island&quot;) is an island in Orkney, Scotland, measuring – the second largest in the archipelago, after Mainland. A natural causeway, &quot;the Ayre&quot;, links the island to the smaller South Walls; the two islands are treated as one entity by the UK census. Hoy is also the name of a hamlet in the northwest of the island.

== Geography ==
At in extent, Hoy is the 12th largest of Scotland&#x27;s islands. It is also the &quot;highest and wildest and wettest ( of rain) of all the Orkney islands&quot;. 

The Old Man of Hoy, a sea stack formed from Old Red Sandstone, can be found in the northwest on the Rackwick coast. It is one of the tallest stacks in the United Kingdom at a height of . The Old Man is popular with climbers, and was first climbed in 1966. Created by the erosion of a cliff through hydraulic action sometime after 1750, the stack is no more than a few hundred years old, and a painting from 1817 shows the stack with an arch at the bottom which has now further eroded and no longer remains. It may soon collapse into the sea.

The dramatic coastline of Hoy can be seen by visitors travelling to Orkney by ferry from the Scottish mainland. It has some of the highest sea cliffs in the UK at St John&#x27;s Head, which reach .

The name Hoy comes from the Norse word &quot;Háey&quot; meaning &quot;high island&quot;. It is therefore not surprising that the island of Hoy is the most mountainous in the Orkney archipelago. The highest point on the island (and the whole archipelago) is in the north at Ward Hill, which stands at . There is a trig point at the summit.

The main settlements on the island are Lyness, Rackwick and Quoyness. Longhope is a village on neighbouring South Walls. A road linking Hoy to South Walls was constructed towards the end of the 19th century. Prior to that time the latter had only been accessible by land across the shingle beach of the Ayre at low tide. The status of South Walls is now considered by some writers as a peninsula attached to Hoy and by others as still being an island. For example neither the 2001 or 2011 censuses mention South Walls in their lists of inhabited islands and Haswell-Smith states that South Walls &quot;was an island&quot; until the causeway over the Ayre was constructed. The Gazetteer for Scotland states that it is &quot;a peninsula, sometimes described as an island.&quot; 

The island is part of the Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area, one of 40 in Scotland.

== History ==

===Prehistory===
The Dwarfie Stane lies in the north of the Rackwick valley and dates back to around 3000 BCE. It is unique in northern Europe, bearing similarity to Neolithic or Bronze Age tombs around the Mediterranean. The tomb has a small rectangular entrance and cleft, hence its name. 

===19th century===
The two most northerly Martello Towers in the UK stand here, built in 1814 to defend merchant shipping in the natural harbour of Longhope against privateers commissioned by United States President James Madison, who declared war in 1812.

=== World Wars ===
The main naval base for the British fleet in both the First and Second World Wars, Scapa Flow, was at Lyness in the southeast of the island.

During the early years of the Second World War, up to 12,000 personnel were based in and around Lyness to support the defences of the naval anchorage at Scapa Flow and the ships that used it. To support this huge population, hundreds of accommodation huts were built in a number of camps around Lyness. A large wharf was built (known as the Golden Wharf because of its huge cost) along with a series of piers and slipways. Offices, workshops, stores and recreational buildings were erected, including a cinema, a theatre and several churches. An earlier headquarters building was replaced in 1943 by an imposing concrete HQ and communications centre, also sited high on Wee Fea, which now serves as a hotel.

Lyness Royal Naval Cemetery is around inland from the naval base and has an area of around .

==Demographics==
Although the population of Hoy is now only around 400, there was a much larger population in the past. In 1890 there were four schools on the island and four churches, suggesting a much larger population. Despite the larger population there was no paved road between the north of the island and the south, only a footpath. There was, however, an unsurfaced road between the two villages on the north of the isle; Rackwick and Moaness.

== Transport ==
===Ferry===
Orkney Ferries operate two services to Hoy:
*A ro-ro vehicle ferry between Houton on Orkney Mainland and Lyness on Hoy. Some crossings are via Flotta. Foot passengers may also travel to Longhope, South Walls where the ferry is berthed overnight.
*A small passenger ferry between Stromness on Orkney Mainland and Moaness on Hoy via the small island of Graemsay.
===Bus===
The Hoy and Walls Community Bus provides a regular timetabled bus service across the islands of Hoy and Walls. The buses go from Moaness on Hoy to Hackness on South Walls, via Linksness, Lyness, North Walls, Brims, and Longhope.

===Airport===
There have been two airfields on South Walls, perhaps due to its connections with the navy. One on the southern coast (Snelsetter) which opened in August 1934 and was closed at the end of World War Two; it was used by military and civil aircraft, and now is open land. Another, just east of the causeway that links the two islands of Hoy and South Walls, opened in November 1972 and closed in 1993. It was used by civilian aircraft solely and was operated by the airline Loganair; it is also now open land, used as an emergency landing strip only. The first flight to a nearby island of Flotta on 1 March 1977 was recorded to have landed at Hoy.

== Longhope lifeboat station ==

A lifeboat has been on Hoy since 1874, at first housed in a prominent stone building close to the west end of the causeway that links the two islands of Hoy and South Walls. It was stationed there as it meant that the lifeboat could be dragged over wooden skids into the sea in either North Bay, giving access to Scapa Flow, or in Aith Hope, an offshoot of the notorious Pentland Firth to the south. The shed continued to serve as the base of the Longhope lifeboat until 1906.

The replacement lifeboat station stands slightly to the south of the original station cost £2,700 to build in 1906 and was in use until 1999. On 17 March 1969 whilst based here, the lifeboat &quot;T.G.B.&quot; (ON 962) capsized while on service to the Liberian vessel &quot;Irene&quot;. Her entire crew of eight lost their lives. This station is now the home of the Longhope Lifeboat Museum, which has on display lifeboat &quot;Thomas McCunn&quot;, stationed here from 1933 to 1962.

In 2000 an Arun-class lifeboat, &quot;Sir Max Aitken II&quot; became the Longhope lifeboat. This class was designed to stay permanently afloat, and the decision was taken to move her to purpose-built moorings at Longhope pier. The lifeboats that have served here since have also been stationed at Longhope, including the current vessel the &quot;Helen Comrie&quot; (a Tamar-class lifeboat) and her predecessor &quot;The Queen Mother&quot;, which was based here between 2004 and 2006. A station has been built where the lifeboat is moored at Longhope which is also the main harbour for boats to and from the island.

It is one of three lifeboat stations in Orkney, the others being Stromness Lifeboat Station, and Kirkwall Lifeboat Station.

== Mythology ==
In Norse mythology, Hoy hosted Hjaðningavíg, the never-ending battle between Heðin and Högni.

==Wildlife==
Hoy is an Important Bird Area.
The northern part of the island is an RSPB reserve due to its importance for birdlife, particularly great skuas and red-throated divers. It was sold to the RSPB by the Hoy Trust for a nominal amount.
&quot;Anastrepta orcadensis&quot;, a liverwort also known as Orkney Notchwort, was first discovered on Ward Hill by William Jackson Hooker in 1808.

The northern and western parts of Hoy, along with much of the adjoining sea area, is designated as a Special Protection Area due to its importance for nine breeding bird species: arctic skua, fulmar, great black-backed gull, great skua, guillemot, Black-legged kittiwake, peregrine falcon, puffin and red-throated diver. The area is important for its seabird assemblage, which regularly supports 120,000 individual seabirds during the breeding season.

One of Orkney&#x27;s few woodlands is found on Hoy, and is among the most northerly areas of woodland in the UK. Patches of the woodland are scattered across the island. There is the remote possibility of locally extant Orkney charr (&quot;Salvelinus inframundus&quot;) documented in 1908 at Heldale Water.

==In popular culture==
Hoy is featured prominently in the 1984 music video for &quot;Here Comes The Rain Again&quot; by the Eurythmics.

Hoy has a performing arts theatre, the Gable End Theatre, which opened in 2000 and has a capacity of 75. The theatre is managed by the Hoy and Walls drama community.

Some rather incongruous Art Deco structures nearby date from this period. The Arts and Crafts architect William Lethaby rebuilt Melsetter house for mountaineer Thomas Middlemore at the end of the 19th century, leaving untouched the adjacent barn which is probably mid-18th century.

In Poul Anderson&#x27;s story &quot;The Bitter Bread&quot; the protagonist lives in secluded retirement on Hoy. There is a description of the island: &quot;Steep red and yellow cliffs, sea green in sunlight or gray under clouds until it breaks in whiteness and thunder, gulls riding a cold loud wind, inland the heather and a few gnarly trees across hills where sheep graze, a hamlet of rough and gentle Orkney folk an hour&#x27;s walk away, my cat, my books, my rememberings.&quot;

==Gallery==
== See also ==

* List of islands of Scotland

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* Irvine, James M. (ed.) (2006) &quot;The Orkneys and Schetland in Blaeu&#x27;s Atlas Novus of 1654&quot;. Ashtead. James M. Irvine. 
* Omand, Donald (ed.) (2003) &quot;The Orkney Book&quot;. Edinburgh. Birlinn. 

==External links==
*Island of Hoy website launched December 2008
*Old Man of Hoy picture gallery </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1139771" start="0" end="3" title="Hoy, Orkney" label="Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="10" end="19" title="Old Norse language" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="71" end="77" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="127" end="138" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="146" end="154" title="Orkney Mainland" label="Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555977" start="230" end="241" title="South Walls" label="South Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="426" end="449" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="Scotland&amp;#x27;s islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738637" start="554" end="568" title="Old Man of Hoy" label="Old Man of Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517523" start="594" end="611" title="Old Red Sandstone" label="Old Red Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954360" start="848" end="864" title="hydraulic action" label="hydraulic action"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1320" end="1325" title="Old Norse language" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="1473" end="1484" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916345" start="1565" end="1574" title="Ward Hill, Hoy" label="Ward Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q131862" start="1605" end="1615" title="Triangulation station" label="trig point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555977" start="1740" end="1751" title="South Walls" label="South Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059407" start="1914" end="1927" title="shingle beach" label="shingle beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12715032" start="2308" end="2330" title="Gazetteer for Scotland" label="Gazetteer for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869728" start="2436" end="2478" title="Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area" label="Hoy and West Mainland National Scenic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268415" start="2540" end="2553" title="Dwarfie Stane" label="Dwarfie Stane"/>
<link wikidata="Q107999070" start="2579" end="2587" title="Rackwick" label="Rackwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2685" end="2694" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2698" end="2708" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2726" end="2739" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q91285" start="2854" end="2869" title="Martello tower" label="Martello Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673878" start="2960" end="2968" title="Longhope, Orkney" label="Longhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="2977" end="2986" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="3028" end="3041" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3143" end="3148" title="World War I" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3153" end="3169" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="3172" end="3182" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708810" start="3191" end="3197" title="Lyness" label="Lyness"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="3542" end="3547" title="wharf" label="wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102954" start="4515" end="4529" title="Orkney Ferries" label="Orkney Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916915" start="4590" end="4596" title="Houton" label="Houton"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="4794" end="4803" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q788269" start="4866" end="4874" title="Graemsay" label="Graemsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968141" start="5094" end="5099" title="Brims, Orkney" label="Brims"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="5425" end="5433" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q934983" start="5601" end="5609" title="Loganair" label="Loganair"/>
<link wikidata="Q385306" start="5717" end="5723" title="Flotta" label="Flotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860233" start="6181" end="6195" title="Pentland Firth" label="Pentland Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283715" start="6479" end="6506" title="RNLB T.G.B. (ON 962)" label="&amp;quot;T.G.B.&amp;quot; (ON 962)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17829284" start="6654" end="6678" title="Longhope Lifeboat Museum" label="Longhope Lifeboat Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277257" start="6716" end="6729" title="RNLB Thomas McCunn (ON 759)" label="Thomas McCunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802151" start="6783" end="6802" title="Arun-class lifeboat" label="Arun-class lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680763" start="7140" end="7160" title="Tamar-class lifeboat" label="Tamar-class lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="7428" end="7434" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283716" start="7453" end="7479" title="Stromness Lifeboat Station" label="Stromness Lifeboat Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283714" start="7485" end="7510" title="Kirkwall Lifeboat Station" label="Kirkwall Lifeboat Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="7532" end="7547" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114143" start="7560" end="7572" title="Hjaðningavíg" label="Hjaðningavíg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="7647" end="7666" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="7706" end="7710" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="7711" end="7718" title="nature reserve" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q207760" start="7768" end="7778" title="great skua" label="great skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q26691" start="7784" end="7802" title="red-throated diver" label="red-throated diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751989" start="7874" end="7895" title="Anastrepta orcadensis" label="Anastrepta orcadensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189808" start="7905" end="7914" title="Marchantiophyta" label="liverwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q472639" start="7984" end="8006" title="William Jackson Hooker" label="William Jackson Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463705" start="8118" end="8141" title="Special Protection Area" label="Special Protection Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q203053" start="8196" end="8207" title="arctic skua" label="arctic skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q311224" start="8209" end="8215" title="fulmar" label="fulmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26629" start="8217" end="8240" title="great black-backed gull" label="great black-backed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062" start="8254" end="8263" title="Common murre" label="guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26612" start="8265" end="8287" title="Black-legged kittiwake" label="Black-legged kittiwake"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="8289" end="8305" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="8307" end="8313" title="Atlantic puffin" label="puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657452" start="8690" end="8702" title="Orkney charr" label="Orkney charr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657452" start="8710" end="8732" title="Salvelinus inframundus" label="Salvelinus inframundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q385871" start="8863" end="8888" title="Here Comes The Rain Again" label="Here Comes The Rain Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q207706" start="8902" end="8912" title="Eurythmics" label="Eurythmics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="9106" end="9114" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="9160" end="9175" title="Arts and Crafts Movement" label="Arts and Crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947914" start="9186" end="9201" title="William Lethaby" label="William Lethaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949479" start="9242" end="9259" title="Thomas Middlemore" label="Thomas Middlemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="9368" end="9381" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="9879" end="9906" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="List of islands of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22648" wikidata="Q1551897" url="?curid=22648" title="Rousay">
<text>Rousay (, ; meaning Rolf&#x27;s Island) is a small, hilly island about north of Mainland, the largest island in the Orkney Islands of Scotland. It has been nicknamed &quot;Egypt of the north&quot;, due to its archaeological diversity and importance.

Like its neighbours Egilsay and Wyre, it can be reached by ro-ro ferry from Tingwall. This service is operated by Orkney Ferries, and can take up to 95 passengers (reduced to 50 in winter), and 10 cars. The ferry links the islands of Rousay, Egilsay, and Wyre with each other, and with the mainland of Orkney.

== Demographics ==
In the 2001 census, Rousay had a population of 212. Most employment is in farming, fishing or fish-farming; craft businesses and seasonal tourism-related work are present.

==Geography==

It is separated from mainland Orkney by Eynhallow Sound. 
One road circles the island, about long, and most arable land lies in the few hundred yards between it and the coastline. With an area of , it is the fifth largest of the Orkney Islands. Among several freshwater lochs on the island, the biggest is Muckle Water.

==Natural history==
Rousay is a &#x27;Site of Special Scientific Interest&#x27; with notable cliff formations and wildflower colonies, and has an RSPB bird reserve. The hilliest Orkney island after Hoy, it offers good views of neighbouring islands from Blotchnifiold , and Keirfea or Knitchen (both over ). Archaeological remains are present, especially a cluster of sites connected by a footpath near the western shore.

Its wildlife includes grey seals and European otters. Two sites, totaling some 630 ha, have been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because they support breeding populations of moorland birds, including Arctic terns.

==History==

Humans first made a Neolithic settlement at Rinyo. Other remnants include Bronze Age burnt mounds, Iron Age crannogs and brochs (the highest density anywhere in Scotland: three within of coastline), Viking boat burials, remains of a medieval church and a stately home at Trumland.

Over 100 archaeological sites have been identified. Only a small fraction have been excavated and characterized. The most spectacular of the sites is the complex of Midhowe Broch and Midhowe Chambered Cairn. Blackhammer Chambered Cairn, Taversoe Tuick, and Knowe of Yarso chambered cairn are important tombs.

Rousay placenames reflect its Norse heritage. &#x27;Hrólfs-øy&#x27; or &#x27;Hrolfsey&#x27; was based on the male name &#x27;Hrolf&#x27; (Rolf). Hugh Marwick&#x27;s work showed the name developing from &#x27;Rollesay&#x27; in the 14th century, through &#x27;Rolsay&#x27; in the 15th, and &#x27;Rowsay&#x27; in the early 16th, with the spelling &#x27;Rousay&#x27; first recorded in 1549.

Most Rousay people earned their living from farming and/or fishing. In the 19th century, records reflect tradespeople supplying the needs of a rural community: blacksmiths and joiners, shoemakers and shopkeepers, with women making dresses and plaiting straw. Throughout the century, Rousay&#x27;s landlords demanded high rents from crofters, many of whom became homeless in a series of clearances along the western coast, ordered by landowner George William Traill in the 1820s and 1830s.

Traill&#x27;s nephew General Sir Frederick Traill-Burroughs inherited much of the island and bought more. Traill-Burroughs built a large house at Trumland, designed by David Bryce of Edinburgh. From 1870 to 1883, improvements transformed the island: Trumland pier, island schools, a public market, the first steamship service, a post office, and the first resident doctor. He was known locally as &quot;the little general&quot; as he was a man of short stature. Poet Edwin Muir recalled in a memoir of his childhood seeing the little general walking around his estates.

Rousay&#x27;s population in the mid-19th century was over 900, but emigration following land clearances reduced that to 627 by 1900, and half a century later it had fallen to 342. Depopulation accelerated, and in the next twenty years the number fell to 181, its lowest ever. From the 1970s onward new families settled on Rousay: most came from the south, especially from England. The population is now over 200.

The Yetnasteen stone is said to have once been a giant who revives every New Year at midnight and visits the Loch of Scockness to drink.

==Education==
A primary school enrolls 24 boys and girls aged 3 to 12. Once a child completes his/her primary education, they attend Kirkwall Grammar School or Stromness Academy.

==Notables==
Poet Pauline Stainer spent two years on the island, and in 1999 published a collection of her poems about Rousay, &quot;Parable Island&quot;.

Robert C. Marwick (1922–2013) was a school teacher, headmaster and author born on Innister farm, in the Wasbister district. His publications about Rousay include &quot;From My Rousay Schoolbag&quot; (1995), &quot;Rousay Roots&quot; (1995) and &quot;In Dreams We Moor&quot; (2000).

Actor Graham Fellows owns a disused church there, which he intended to turn into an &quot;artists refuge&quot;.

Late artists&#x27; patron Margaret Gardiner spent a large part of her life there and in 1979 founded the Pier Art Gallery in Stromness.

Astronomer, musician and author, John C Vetterlein, has lived full-time on Rousay for over 20 years.

==Rousay Sound==
Rousay is separated from the neighbouring island of Egilsay by Rousay Sound. The sound experiences strong tides, which creates the perfect conditions for maerl beds to form. The maerl beds in turn provide a sheltered habitat for species such as peacock worms and various sponges, as well as small fish, shrimps, gobies and crabs. Since 2014 the sound, along with the neighbouring Wyre Sound (which separates Rousay from Wyre), has been designated as a Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area (NCMPA). Fishing activities are controlled within the MPA, and no dredging, beam trawling, demersal trawling or Seine fishing is permitted.

==See also==

* List of islands of Scotland

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==
*AroundRousay.co.uk: Information on the island of Rousay
*DiscoverRousay.co.uk: Tourism website for the island of Rousay 
*Rousay Roots - Rousay history 
*Visit Orkney: Orkney Tourist Board: Rousay
*Visit Rousay: Overview of Rousay</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1551897" start="0" end="6" title="Rousay" label="Rousay"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="80" end="88" title="The Mainland, Orkney" label="Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="116" end="130" title="Orkney Islands" label="Orkney Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="134" end="142" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="172" end="177" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="209" end="223" title="Archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297992" start="271" end="278" title="Egilsay" label="Egilsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q537285" start="283" end="287" title="Wyre, Orkney" label="Wyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="310" end="315" title="ro-ro" label="ro-ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102954" start="365" end="379" title="Orkney Ferries" label="Orkney Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385851" start="809" end="818" title="Eynhallow" label="Eynhallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260170" start="1075" end="1087" title="Muckle Water" label="Muckle Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="1128" end="1163" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="1236" end="1240" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139771" start="1288" end="1291" title="Hoy, Orkney" label="Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="1534" end="1543" title="grey seal" label="grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="1549" end="1563" title="European otter" label="European otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="1623" end="1642" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="1652" end="1674" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="1720" end="1728" title="moorland" label="moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26800" start="1746" end="1757" title="Arctic tern" label="Arctic tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1794" end="1803" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335117" start="1818" end="1823" title="Rinyo" label="Rinyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1848" end="1858" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016853" start="1859" end="1870" title="burnt mound" label="burnt mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1873" end="1881" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q91759" start="1882" end="1889" title="crannog" label="crannog"/>
<link wikidata="Q82137" start="1895" end="1900" title="broch" label="broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1973" end="1979" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2007" end="2015" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="2029" end="2041" title="stately home" label="stately home"/>
<link wikidata="Q17828175" start="2045" end="2053" title="Trumland" label="Trumland"/>
<link wikidata="Q923344" start="2221" end="2234" title="Midhowe Broch" label="Midhowe Broch"/>
<link wikidata="Q568592" start="2239" end="2262" title="Midhowe Chambered Cairn" label="Midhowe Chambered Cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q880846" start="2264" end="2291" title="Blackhammer Chambered Cairn" label="Blackhammer Chambered Cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558256" start="2293" end="2307" title="Taversoe Tuick" label="Taversoe Tuick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693295" start="2313" end="2343" title="Knowe of Yarso chambered cairn" label="Knowe of Yarso chambered cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908400" start="2396" end="2401" title="North Germanic peoples" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634464" start="2511" end="2530" title="Hugh Marwick" label="Hugh Marwick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622387" start="2997" end="3011" title="straw plaiting" label="plaiting straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402801" start="3086" end="3094" title="croft (land)" label="crofters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498878" start="3265" end="3303" title="Frederick Traill-Burroughs" label="General Sir Frederick Traill-Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17828175" start="3390" end="3398" title="Trumland" label="Trumland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231854" start="3412" end="3423" title="David Bryce" label="David Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q304752" start="3711" end="3721" title="Edwin Muir" label="Edwin Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4187" end="4194" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="4278" end="4283" title="giant (mythology)" label="giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58695616" start="4500" end="4523" title="Kirkwall Grammar School" label="Kirkwall Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q124570735" start="4527" end="4544" title="Stromness Academy" label="Stromness Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15511976" start="4565" end="4580" title="Pauline Stainer" label="Pauline Stainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113246" start="4991" end="5005" title="Graham Fellows" label="Graham Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759434" start="5124" end="5141" title="Margaret Gardiner (art collector)" label="Margaret Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191713" start="5203" end="5219" title="Pier Art Gallery" label="Pier Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q839556" start="5223" end="5232" title="Stromness" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q491713" start="5435" end="5440" title="Sound (geography)" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303217" start="5508" end="5513" title="maerl" label="maerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171262" start="5599" end="5611" title="peacock worm" label="peacock worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="5625" end="5631" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q56282003" start="5666" end="5672" title="goby" label="gobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="5677" end="5681" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q537285" start="5774" end="5778" title="Wyre, Orkney" label="Wyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q68441067" start="5806" end="5847" title="Marine Protected Areas in Scotland" label="Nature Conservation Marine Protected Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="5914" end="5922" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q811598" start="5924" end="5937" title="beam trawling" label="beam trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q811598" start="5939" end="5956" title="Bottom trawling" label="demersal trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="5960" end="5973" title="Seine fishing" label="Seine fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q587046" start="6005" end="6032" title="List of islands of Scotland" label="List of islands of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22649" wikidata="Q193181" url="?curid=22649" title="Observation">
<text>Observation in the natural sciences is an act or instance of noticing or perceiving and the acquisition of information from a primary source. In living beings, observation employs the senses. In science, observation can also involve the perception and recording of data via the use of scientific instruments. The term may also refer to any data collected during the scientific activity. Observations can be qualitative, that is, the absence or presence of a property is noted and the observed phenomenon described, or quantitative if a numerical value is attached to the observed phenomenon by counting or measuring.

==Science==
The scientific method requires observations of natural phenomena to formulate and test hypotheses. It consists of the following steps:
# Ask a question about a phenomenon
# Make observations of the phenomenon
# Formulate a hypothesis that tentatively answers the question
# Predict logical, observable consequences of the hypothesis that have not yet been investigated
# Test the hypothesis&#x27; predictions by an experiment, observational study, field study, or simulation
# Draw a conclusion from data gathered in the experiment, or revise the hypothesis or form a new one and repeat the process
# Write a descriptive method of observation and the results or conclusions reached
# Have peers with experience researching the same phenomenon evaluate the results

Observations play a role in the second and fifth steps of the scientific method. However, the need for reproducibility requires that observations by different observers can be comparable. Human sense impressions are subjective and qualitative, making them difficult to record or compare. The use of measurement was developed to allow the recording and comparison of observations made at different times and places, by different people. The measurement consists of using observation to compare the phenomenon being observed to a standard unit. The standard unit can be an artifact, process, or definition which can be duplicated or shared by all observers. In measurement, the number of standard units which is equal to the observation is counted. Measurement reduces an observation to a number that can be recorded, and two observations which result in the same number are equal within the resolution of the process.

Human senses are limited and subject to errors in perception, such as optical illusions. Scientific instruments were developed to aid human abilities of observation, such as weighing scales, clocks, telescopes, microscopes, thermometers, cameras, and tape recorders, and also translate into perceptible form events that are unobservable by the senses, such as indicator dyes, voltmeters, spectrometers, infrared cameras, oscilloscopes, interferometers, Geiger counters, and radio receivers.

One problem encountered throughout scientific fields is that the observation may affect the process being observed, resulting in a different outcome than if the process was unobserved. This is called the &quot;observer effect&quot;. For example, it is not normally possible to check the air pressure in an automobile tire without letting out some of the air, thereby changing the pressure. However, in most fields of science, it is possible to reduce the effects of observation to insignificance by using better instruments.

Considered as a physical process itself, all forms of observation (human or instrumental) involve amplification and are thus thermodynamically irreversible processes, increasing entropy.

==Paradoxes==
In some specific fields of science, the results of observation differ depending on factors that are not important in everyday observation. These are usually illustrated with apparent &quot;paradoxes&quot; in which an event appears different when observed from two different points of view, seeming to violate &quot;common sense&quot;.
* Relativity: In relativistic physics which deals with velocities close to the speed of light, it is found that different observers may observe different values for the length, time rates, mass, and many other properties of an object, depending on the observer&#x27;s velocity relative to the object. For example, in the twin paradox one twin goes on a trip near the speed of light and comes home younger than the twin who stayed at home. This is not a paradox: time passes at a slower rate when measured from a frame moving concerning the object. In relativistic physics, an observation must always be qualified by specifying the state of motion of the observer, its reference frame.
* Quantum mechanics: In quantum mechanics, which deals with the behavior of very small objects, it is not possible to observe a system without changing the system, and the &quot;observer&quot; must be considered part of the system being observed. In isolation, quantum objects are represented by a wave function which often exists in a superposition or mixture of different states. However, when an observation is made to determine the actual location or state of the object, it always finds the object in a single state, not a &quot;mixture&quot;. The interaction of the observation process appears to &quot;collapse&quot; the wave function into a single state. So any interaction between an isolated wave function and the external world that results in this wave function collapse is called an &quot;observation&quot; or &quot;measurement&quot;, whether or not it is part of a deliberate observation process.

==Biases==
The human senses do not function like a video camcorder, impartially recording all observations. Human perception occurs by a complex, unconscious process of abstraction, in which certain details of the incoming sense data are noticed and remembered, and the rest is forgotten. What is kept and what is thrown away depends on an internal model or representation of the world, called by psychologists a &quot;schema&quot;, that is built up over our entire lives. The data is fitted into this schema. Later when events are remembered, memory gaps may even be filled by &quot;plausible&quot; data the mind makes up to fit the model; this is called &quot;reconstructive memory&quot;. How much attention the various perceived data are given depends on an internal value system, which judges how important it is to the individual. Thus two people can view the same event and come away with very different perceptions of it, even disagreeing about simple facts. This is why eyewitness testimony is notoriously unreliable. Correct scientific technique emphasizes careful recording of observations, separating experimental observations from the conclusions drawn from them, and techniques such as blind or double blind experiments, to minimize observational bias.

Several of the more important ways observations can be affected by human psychology are given below.

===Streetlight effect===

===Confirmation bias===

Human observations are biased toward confirming the observer&#x27;s conscious and unconscious expectations and view of the world; we &quot;see what we expect to see&quot;. In psychology, this is called confirmation bias. Since the object of scientific research is the discovery of new phenomena, this bias can and has caused new discoveries to be overlooked; one example is the discovery of x-rays. It can also result in erroneous scientific support for widely held cultural myths, on the other hand, as in the scientific racism that supported ideas of racial superiority in the early 20th century. 

===Processing bias===
Modern scientific instruments can extensively process &quot;observations&quot; before they are presented to the human senses, and particularly with computerized instruments, there is sometimes a question as to where in the data processing chain &quot;observing&quot; ends and &quot;drawing conclusions&quot; begins. This has recently become an issue with digitally enhanced images published as experimental data in papers in scientific journals. The images are enhanced to bring out features that the researcher wants to emphasize, but this also has the effect of supporting the researcher&#x27;s conclusions. This is a form of bias that is difficult to quantify. Some scientific journals have begun to set detailed standards for what types of image processing are allowed in research results. Computerized instruments often keep a copy of the &quot;raw data&quot; from sensors before processing, which is the ultimate defense against processing bias, and similarly, scientific standards require preservation of the original unenhanced &quot;raw&quot; versions of images used as research data.

==See also==

* Deixis
* Extrospection 
* Introspection
* List of cognitive biases
* Metaphysics of presence
* Naturalistic observation
* Observation unit
* Observational astronomy
* Observational error
* Observational learning
* Observational study
* Observable quantity
* Observations and Measurements
* Observatory
* Observer effect
* Noumenon
* Present
* Self
* Theory ladenness
* Uncertainty principle
* Unobservable
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="0" end="11" title="Observation" label="Observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="19" end="35" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338318" start="61" end="69" title="noticing" label="noticing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="107" end="118" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="126" end="140" title="primary source" label="primary source"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="184" end="189" title="sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="195" end="202" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="237" end="247" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="265" end="269" title="data (information)" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099911" start="285" end="306" title="scientific instrument" label="scientific instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268708" start="407" end="418" title="qualitative property" label="qualitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q730675" start="518" end="530" title="quantitative data" label="quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="580" end="590" title="phenomenon" label="phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="634" end="651" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q65942121" start="677" end="694" title="list of natural phenomena" label="natural phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="717" end="727" title="hypothesis" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q189756" start="773" end="781" title="question" label="question"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="790" end="800" title="phenomenon" label="phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="853" end="863" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q748250" start="904" end="911" title="prediction" label="Predict"/>
<link wikidata="Q261155" start="932" end="944" title="consequent" label="consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q101965" start="1045" end="1055" title="experiment" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q818574" start="1057" end="1076" title="observational study" label="observational study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="1078" end="1089" title="field research" label="field study"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="1094" end="1104" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="1114" end="1124" title="logical consequence" label="conclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="1130" end="1134" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425625" start="1210" end="1216" title="reproducibility" label="repeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q367158" start="1239" end="1257" title="protocol (science)" label="descriptive method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995644" start="1281" end="1287" title="result" label="result"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="1373" end="1381" title="peer review" label="evaluate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425625" start="1498" end="1513" title="reproducibility" label="reproducibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="1589" end="1594" title="sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q25396191" start="1611" end="1621" title="subjectivity" label="subjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268708" start="1626" end="1637" title="qualitative data" label="qualitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q12453" start="1694" end="1705" title="measurement" label="measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271511" start="1923" end="1936" title="Standard (metrology)" label="standard unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12453" start="2285" end="2295" title="measurement" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q174923" start="2383" end="2399" title="optical illusion" label="optical illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099911" start="2402" end="2423" title="Scientific instrument" label="Scientific instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q134566" start="2487" end="2501" title="weighing scale" label="weighing scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="2504" end="2509" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="2512" end="2521" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="2524" end="2534" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="2537" end="2548" title="thermometer" label="thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="2551" end="2557" title="camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="2564" end="2577" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q300951" start="2673" end="2687" title="pH indicator" label="indicator dyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179741" start="2689" end="2698" title="voltmeter" label="voltmeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="2701" end="2713" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="2716" end="2731" title="infrared camera" label="infrared camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="2734" end="2746" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="2749" end="2763" title="interferometer" label="interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48171" start="2766" end="2780" title="Geiger counter" label="Geiger counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="2787" end="2801" title="radio receiver" label="radio receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9251458" start="3015" end="3030" title="observer effect (physics)" label="observer effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q632388" start="3474" end="3496" title="irreversibility" label="irreversible processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="3509" end="3516" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="3722" end="3729" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393075" start="3885" end="3905" title="relativistic physics" label="relativistic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="3947" end="3961" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q33539" start="4189" end="4201" title="twin paradox" label="twin paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q184876" start="4536" end="4551" title="Frame of reference" label="reference frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="4577" end="4594" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075482" start="4671" end="4687" title="observer (quantum physics)" label="observe a system"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="4777" end="4783" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="4851" end="4864" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q830791" start="4889" end="4902" title="quantum superposition" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="4927" end="4933" title="quantum state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q842189" start="5162" end="5170" title="wave function collapse" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="5522" end="5531" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="5634" end="5645" title="abstraction" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="5884" end="5890" title="schema (psychology)" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302799" start="6127" end="6148" title="reconstructive memory" label="reconstructive memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422884" start="6443" end="6463" title="eyewitness testimony" label="eyewitness testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="6664" end="6669" title="blind experiment" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="6673" end="6696" title="double blind experiment" label="double blind experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="7087" end="7104" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772819" start="7153" end="7162" title="Discovery (observation)" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="7276" end="7281" title="x-ray" label="x-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="7396" end="7413" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="7863" end="7881" title="digital image processing" label="digitally enhanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q12042160" start="7923" end="7929" title="scientific paper" label="papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="7933" end="7951" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="8177" end="8195" title="scientific journal" label="scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="8252" end="8268" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q340015" start="8619" end="8625" title="Deixis" label="Deixis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="8628" end="8641" title="Extrospection" label="Extrospection"/>
<link wikidata="Q210501" start="8645" end="8658" title="Introspection" label="Introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607828" start="8661" end="8685" title="List of cognitive biases" label="List of cognitive biases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774411" start="8688" end="8711" title="Metaphysics of presence" label="Metaphysics of presence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521337" start="8714" end="8738" title="Naturalistic observation" label="Naturalistic observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13611879" start="8741" end="8757" title="Observation unit" label="Observation unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="8760" end="8783" title="Observational astronomy" label="Observational astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q196372" start="8786" end="8805" title="Observational error" label="Observational error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="8808" end="8830" title="Observational learning" label="Observational learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q818574" start="8833" end="8852" title="Observational study" label="Observational study"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422623" start="8855" end="8874" title="Observable quantity" label="Observable quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075443" start="8877" end="8906" title="Observations and Measurements" label="Observations and Measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="8909" end="8920" title="Observatory" label="Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075488" start="8923" end="8938" title="Observer effect (disambiguation)" label="Observer effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q239581" start="8941" end="8949" title="Noumenon" label="Noumenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193168" start="8952" end="8959" title="Present" label="Present"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="8962" end="8966" title="Self" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782462" start="8969" end="8985" title="Theory ladenness" label="Theory ladenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="8988" end="9009" title="Uncertainty principle" label="Uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799040" start="9012" end="9024" title="Unobservable" label="Unobservable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22652" wikidata="Q7079777" url="?curid=22652" title="Oftel">
<text>The Office of Telecommunications (Oftel) (&quot;the telecommunications regulator&quot;) was a department in the United Kingdom government, under civil service control, charged with promoting competition and maintaining the interests of consumers in the UK telecommunications market. It was set up under the Telecommunications Act 1984 after privatisation of the nationalised operator BT.

Oftel was accused by critics such as Freeserve of having been &quot;captured&quot; by BT, and of giving the dominant operator too much freedom to leverage its monopoly status in fixed line telephony into other markets such as ADSL.

On 29 December 2003, the duties of Oftel were inherited by Ofcom, which was the result of the consolidation of five separate British telecommunications, radio spectrum and broadcasting regulators.

==Director-General of Oftel==
*Bryan Carsberg 1 August 1984 – 12 June 1992
*Bill Wigglesworth (acting) 13 June 1992 – 31 March 1998
*Donald Cruickshank 1 April 1993 – 31 March 1998
*David Edmonds 1 April 1998 – 29 December 2003

==External links==
* Archive of Oftel official website
*Oftel - Annual Report 1992

==See also==
*UK Telephone area (STD) codes
*UK topics

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7079777" start="4" end="32" title="Oftel" label="Office of Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079777" start="34" end="39" title="Oftel" label="Oftel"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="112" end="126" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="145" end="158" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="256" end="274" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695853" start="307" end="334" title="Telecommunications Act 1984" label="Telecommunications Act 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="384" end="386" title="British Telecom" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378538" start="426" end="435" title="Freeserve" label="Freeserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408462" start="457" end="465" title="Regulatory_capture" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="548" end="556" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="615" end="619" title="Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="681" end="686" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294202" start="953" end="971" title="Donald Cruickshank" label="Donald Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233269" start="1002" end="1015" title="David Edmonds (businessman)" label="David Edmonds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1147" end="1176" title="Area code#United Kingdom" label="UK Telephone area (STD) codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112788" start="1178" end="1187" title="UK topics" label="UK topics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22653" wikidata="Q404273" url="?curid=22653" title="OCR">
<text>OCR may refer to:
==Science and technology==
* Optical character recognition, conversion of images of text into characters
* Organically moderated and cooled reactor, a type of nuclear reactor
* Oxidizable carbon ratio dating, a method of absolute dating
* Transvaginal oocyte retrieval, a technique used in vitro fertilization
* Oil control ring, a piston ring
* Over consolidation ratio, a consolidation measurement in geotechnical engineering

==Offices of civil rights==
* Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education
* State Office of Civil Rights, United States Department of State
* GSA Office of Civil Rights, General Services Administration
* HHS Office for Civil Rights, United States Department of Health and Human Services
* DOJ Office for Civil Rights, Office of Justice Programs

==Economics==
* Official cash rate, the interest rate paid by banks in the overnight money market
* Optimum currency region, a theoretical optimal area where one currency would make most benefit

==Other uses==
* Original cast recording, a recording of a stage musical featuring the show&#x27;s original cast
* Otago Central Railway, now a &quot;heritage railway&quot; in Otago, New Zealand
* Ottawa Central Railway a Canadian Shortline owned by CN Rail
* OverClocked ReMix, an organization and website dedicated to preserving and paying tribute to video game music through re-orchestration and reinterpretation
* Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations, an exam board in England, Wales and Northern Ireland
* Obstacle course racing

==See also==
* OCR-A, a font designed to simplify character recognition
** OCR-B</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q404273" start="0" end="3" title="OCR" label="OCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q167555" start="47" end="76" title="Optical character recognition" label="Optical character recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q389329" start="125" end="165" title="Organically moderated and cooled reactor" label="Organically moderated and cooled reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115644" start="195" end="225" title="Oxidizable carbon ratio dating" label="Oxidizable carbon ratio dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835401" start="257" end="286" title="Transvaginal oocyte retrieval" label="Transvaginal oocyte retrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127214" start="350" end="361" title="piston ring" label="piston ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331234" start="392" end="405" title="consolidation (soil)" label="consolidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079156" start="477" end="500" title="Office for Civil Rights" label="Office for Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="563" end="596" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501657" start="627" end="658" title="General Services Administration" label="General Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="690" end="743" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="United States Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476399" start="775" end="801" title="Office of Justice Programs" label="Office of Justice Programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079583" start="819" end="837" title="Official cash rate" label="Official cash rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q391903" start="903" end="926" title="Optimum currency region" label="Optimum currency region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049564" start="1016" end="1039" title="Original cast recording" label="Original cast recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242949" start="1114" end="1135" title="Otago Central Railway" label="Otago Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357760" start="1196" end="1218" title="Ottawa Central Railway" label="Ottawa Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435423" start="1259" end="1276" title="OverClocked ReMix" label="OverClocked ReMix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115200" start="1417" end="1455" title="Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations" label="Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703797" start="1512" end="1534" title="Obstacle course racing" label="Obstacle course racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q682579" start="1551" end="1556" title="OCR-A" label="OCR-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q651105" start="1611" end="1616" title="OCR-B" label="OCR-B"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22654" wikidata="Q389149" url="?curid=22654" title="Ohio-class submarine">
<text>The &quot;Ohio&quot; class of nuclear-powered submarines includes the United States Navy&#x27;s 14 ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) and its four cruise missile submarines (SSGNs). Each displacing 18,750 tons submerged, the &quot;Ohio&quot;-class boats are the largest submarines ever built for the U.S. Navy. They are also the third-largest submarines ever built, behind the Russian Navy&#x27;s Soviet era 48,000-ton , the last of which was retired in 2023, and 24,000-ton . Capable of carrying 24 Trident II missiles apiece, the &quot;Ohio&quot; class are equipped with just as many missiles as, if not more than, either the Borei class (16) or the deactivated Typhoon class (20).

Like their predecessors the and es, the &quot;Ohio&quot;-class SSBNs are part of the United States&#x27; nuclear-deterrent triad, along with U.S. Air Force strategic bombers and intercontinental ballistic missiles. The 14 SSBNs together carry about half of U.S. active strategic thermonuclear warheads. Although the Trident missiles have no preset targets when the submarines go on patrol, they can be given targets quickly, from the United States Strategic Command based in Nebraska, using secure and constant radio communications links, including very low frequency systems.

All the &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines, except for , are named for U.S. states, which U.S. Navy tradition had previously reserved for battleships and later cruisers. The &quot;Ohio&quot; class is to be gradually replaced by the beginning in 2031.

== Description ==
The &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarine was designed for extended strategic deterrent patrols. Each submarine is assigned two complete crews, called the Blue crew and the Gold crew, each typically serving 70-to-90-day deterrent patrols. To decrease the time in port for crew turnover and replenishment, three large logistics hatches have been installed to provide large-diameter resupply and repair access. These hatches allow rapid transfer of supply pallets, equipment replacement modules, and machinery components, speeding up replenishment and maintenance of the submarines. Moreover, the &quot;stealth&quot; ability of the submarines was significantly improved over all previous ballistic-missile subs.&quot; Ohio&quot; was virtually undetectable in her sea trials in 1982, giving the U.S. Navy extremely advanced flexibility.
The class&#x27;s design allows the boat to operate for about 15 years between major overhauls. These submarines are reported to be as quiet at their cruising speed of or more as the previous s at , although exact information remains classified. Fire control for their Mark 48 torpedoes is carried out by Mark 118 Mod 2 system, while the Missile Fire Control system is a Mark 98.

The &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines were constructed from sections of hull, with each four-deck section being in diameter. The sections were produced at the General Dynamics Electric Boat facility, Quonset Point, Rhode Island, and then assembled at its shipyard at Groton, Connecticut.

The US Navy has a total of 18 &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines which consist of 14 ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs), and four cruise missile submarines (SSGNs). The SSBN submarines provide the sea-based leg of the U.S. nuclear triad. Each SSBN submarine is armed with up to 20 Trident II submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBM). Each SSGN is capable of carrying 154 Tomahawk cruise missiles, plus a complement of Harpoon missiles to be fired through their torpedo tubes.

== History ==
The &quot;Ohio&quot; class was designed in the 1970s to carry the concurrently designed Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile. The first eight &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines were armed at first with 24 Trident I C4 SLBMs. Beginning with the ninth Trident submarine, , the remaining boats were equipped with the larger, three-stage Trident II D5 missile. The Trident I missile carries eight multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles, while the Trident II missile carries 12, in total delivering more destructive power than the Trident I missile and with greater accuracy. Starting with in 2000, the Navy began converting its remaining ballistic missile submarines armed with C4 missiles to carry D5 missiles. This task was completed in mid-2008. The first eight submarines had their home ports at Bangor, Washington, to replace the submarines carrying Polaris A3 missiles that were then being decommissioned. The remaining 10 submarines originally had their home ports at Kings Bay, Georgia, replacing the Poseidon and Trident Backfit submarines of the Atlantic Fleet.

=== SSBN/SSGN conversions ===

In 1994, the Nuclear Posture Review study determined that, of the 18 &quot;Ohio&quot; SSBNs the U.S. Navy would be operating in total, 14 would be sufficient for the strategic needs of the U.S. The decision was made to convert four &quot;Ohio&quot;-class boats into SSGNs capable of conducting conventional land attack and special operations. As a result, the four oldest boats of the class—&quot;Ohio&quot;, &quot;Michigan&quot;, &quot;Florida&quot;, and &quot;Georgia&quot;—progressively entered the conversion process in late 2002 and were returned to active service by 2008. The boats could thereafter carry 154 Tomahawk cruise missiles and 66 special operations personnel, among other capabilities and upgrades. The cost to refit the four boats was around US$1 billion (2008 dollars) per vessel. During the conversion of these four submarines to SSGNs (see below), five of the remaining submarines, , , , , and , were transferred from Kings Bay to Bangor. Further transfers occur as the strategic weapons goals of the United States change.
In 2011, &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines carried out 28 deterrent patrols. Each patrol lasts around 70 days. Four boats are on station (&quot;hard alert&quot;) in designated patrol areas at any given time. From January to June 2014, &quot;Pennsylvania&quot; carried out a 140-day-long patrol, the longest to date.

The conversion modified 22 of the 24 diameter Trident missile tubes to contain large vertical launch systems, one configuration of which may be a cluster of seven Tomahawk cruise missiles. In this configuration, the number of cruise missiles carried could be a maximum of 154, the equivalent of what is typically deployed in a surface battle group. Other payload possibilities include new generations of supersonic and hypersonic cruise missiles, and Submarine Launched Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles, the ADM-160 MALD, sensors for antisubmarine warfare or intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance missions, counter mine warfare payloads such as the AN/BLQ-11 Long Term Mine Reconnaissance System, and the broaching universal buoyant launcher and stealthy affordable capsule system specialized payload canisters.
The missile tubes also have room for stowage canisters that can extend the forward deployment time for special forces. The other two Trident tubes are converted to swimmer lockout chambers. For special operations, the Dry Combat Submersible (which replaced the Advanced SEAL Delivery System), as well as the dry deck shelter, can be mounted on the lockout chamber and the boat will be able to host up to 66 special-operations sailors or Marines, such as Navy SEALs, or USMC MARSOC teams. Improved communications equipment installed during the upgrade allows the SSGNs to serve as a forward-deployed, clandestine Small Combatant Joint Command Center.

On 26 September 2002, the Navy awarded General Dynamics Electric Boat a US$442.9 million contract to begin the first phase of the SSGN submarine conversion program. Those funds covered only the initial phase of conversion for the first two boats on the schedule. Advance procurement was funded at $355 million in fiscal year 2002, $825 million in the FY 2003 budget and, through the five-year defense budget plan, at $936 million in FY 2004, $505 million in FY 2005, and $170 million in FY 2006. Thus, the total cost to refit the four boats is just under $700 million per vessel.

In November 2002, &quot;Ohio&quot; entered a dry-dock, beginning her 36-month refueling and missile-conversion overhaul. Electric Boat announced on 9 January 2006 that the conversion had been completed. The converted &quot;Ohio&quot; rejoined the fleet in February 2006, followed by &quot;Florida&quot; in April 2006. The converted &quot;Michigan&quot; was delivered in November 2006. The converted &quot;Ohio&quot; went to sea for the first time in October 2007. &quot;Georgia&quot; returned to the fleet in March 2008 at Kings Bay. These four SSGNs are expected to remain in service until about 2023–2026. At that point, their capabilities will be replaced with Virginia Payload Module-equipped .

===Missile tube reduction===
As part of the New START treaty, four tubes on each SSBN were deactivated in 2017, reducing the number of missiles to 20 per boat.

===Detailed cross-section===
==Boats in class==

Note: Boats based at Naval Base Kitsap, Washington are operated by the U.S. Pacific Fleet, while boats based at Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay, Georgia are operated by U.S. Fleet Forces Command, (formerly the U.S. Atlantic Fleet).

==Replacement==
The U.S. Department of Defense anticipated a continued need for a sea-based strategic nuclear force. The first of the current &quot;Ohio&quot;-class SSBNs was expected to be retired by 2029, so the replacement submarine would need to be seaworthy by that time. A replacement was expected to cost over $4 billion per unit compared to &quot;Ohio&quot;″s $2 billion. The U.S. Navy explored two options. The first option was a variant of the nuclear-powered attack submarines. The second option was a dedicated SSBN, either with a new hull or based on an overhaul of the current &quot;Ohio&quot; class.

With the cooperation of both Electric Boat and Newport News Shipbuilding, in 2007, the U.S. Navy began a cost-control study. Then in December 2008, the U.S. Navy awarded Electric Boat a contract for the missile compartment design of the &quot;Ohio&quot;-class replacement, worth up to $592 million. Newport News is expected to receive close to 4% of that project. In April 2009, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates stated that the U.S. Navy was expected to begin such a program in 2010. The new vessel was scheduled to enter the design phase by 2014. If a new hull design was to be used, the program needed to be initiated by 2016 to meet the 2029 deadline.

The &quot;Columbia&quot; class was officially designated on 14 December 2016, by Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus, and the lead submarine will be . The Navy wants to procure the first &quot;Columbia&quot;-class boat in FY2021, though it is not expected to enter service until 2031.

In 2020, Navy officials first publicly discussed the idea of extending the lives of select &quot;Ohio&quot;-class boats at the Naval Submarine League&#x27;s 2020 conference. During the 2022 conference, Rear Admiral Scott Pappano, the program executive officer for strategic submarines, and Rear Admiral Douglas G. Perry, the director of undersea warfare on the Chief of Naval Operations&#x27; staff, discussed the &quot;Columbia&quot;-class program, and also touched on the possibility of finding &quot;Ohio&quot;-class boats that had sufficient remaining nuclear fuel and were in good enough material state to be given a further extension to their lives.

== In popular culture ==

As ballistic-missile submarines, the &quot;Ohio&quot; class has occasionally been portrayed in fiction books and films.
* Tom Clancy wrote &quot;Ohio&quot;-class submarines into several novels, such as in &quot;The Sum of All Fears&quot; (1991).
* The fictional USS &quot;Montana&quot; is featured in the 1989 film &quot;The Abyss.&quot;
* is the setting for the 1995 submarine film &quot;Crimson Tide&quot;.
* The fictional ballistic missile submarine USS &quot;Colorado&quot; (SSBN-753) is the primary setting for the ABC television series &quot;Last Resort&quot;.
* is featured in Season 1, Episode 13 of the American television series&quot; The Brave&quot;.

==See also==
* List of submarine classes of the United States Navy
* List of submarines of the United States Navy
* List of submarine classes in service
* Submarines in the United States Navy
* Submarine-launched ballistic missile

==Notes==
== References ==
==Bibliography==
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* Chonday video: The Largest Submarine in the U.S. Navy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q389149" start="4" end="26" title="Ohio-class submarine" label="&amp;quot;Ohio&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="30" end="56" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear-powered submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="70" end="88" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="99" end="126" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="149" end="173" title="cruise missile submarine" label="cruise missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="189" end="199" title="Displacement (ship)" label="displacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="379" end="391" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="399" end="405" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q484374" start="502" end="512" title="UGM-133 Trident II" label="Trident II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="792" end="815" title="Nuclear triad" label="nuclear-deterrent triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="828" end="842" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="843" end="859" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="865" end="900" title="intercontinental ballistic missiles" label="intercontinental ballistic missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="966" end="979" title="Thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753390" start="1121" end="1152" title="United States Strategic Command" label="United States Strategic Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="1162" end="1170" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379628" start="1198" end="1224" title="communication with submarines" label="radio communications links"/>
<link wikidata="Q549933" start="1236" end="1254" title="very low frequency" label="very low frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="1335" end="1345" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="1402" end="1412" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="1424" end="1431" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194008" start="2631" end="2646" title="Mark 48 torpedo" label="Mark 48 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325893" start="2902" end="2932" title="General Dynamics Electric Boat" label="General Dynamics Electric Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748229" start="2943" end="2956" title="Quonset Point" label="Quonset Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="2958" end="2970" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q10385027" start="3010" end="3029" title="Groton, Connecticut" label="Groton, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001879" start="3163" end="3187" title="cruise missile submarine" label="cruise missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="3256" end="3269" title="nuclear triad" label="nuclear triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q484374" start="3314" end="3324" title="UGM-133 Trident II" label="Trident II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="3325" end="3361" title="submarine-launched ballistic missile" label="submarine-launched ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="3408" end="3416" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="3417" end="3431" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q331436" start="3455" end="3470" title="Harpoon missile" label="Harpoon missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330003" start="3498" end="3510" title="torpedo tube" label="torpedo tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="3616" end="3623" title="Trident (missile)" label="Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="3624" end="3660" title="submarine-launched ballistic missile" label="submarine-launched ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073517" start="3869" end="3890" title="Trident missile" label="Trident II D5 missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q521297" start="3928" end="3977" title="multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle" label="multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509410" start="4343" end="4361" title="Naval Base Kitsap" label="Bangor, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="4398" end="4416" title="Polaris missile" label="Polaris A3 missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790255" start="4518" end="4536" title="Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay" label="Kings Bay, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331175" start="4552" end="4560" title="Poseidon missile" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502874" start="4660" end="4682" title="Nuclear Posture Review" label="Nuclear Posture Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857862" start="4954" end="4965" title="Military strike" label="land attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="4970" end="4988" title="Special forces" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="5263" end="5286" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140509" start="6094" end="6117" title="vertical launching system" label="vertical launch systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="6172" end="6196" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk cruise missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="6413" end="6423" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="6428" end="6438" title="hypersonic" label="hypersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="6518" end="6541" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120516" start="6548" end="6560" title="ADM-160 MALD" label="ADM-160 MALD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671827" start="6698" end="6744" title="Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System" label="AN/BLQ-11 Long Term Mine Reconnaissance System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6754" end="6790" title="broaching universal buoyant launcher" label="broaching universal buoyant launcher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6795" end="6829" title="stealthy affordable capsule system" label="stealthy affordable capsule system"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052774" start="7079" end="7101" title="Dry Combat Submersible" label="Dry Combat Submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686272" start="7122" end="7151" title="Advanced SEAL Delivery System" label="Advanced SEAL Delivery System"/>
<link wikidata="Q466289" start="7169" end="7185" title="dry deck shelter" label="dry deck shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="7315" end="7324" title="Navy SEAL" label="Navy SEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="7330" end="7334" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495385" start="7335" end="7341" title="MARSOC" label="MARSOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325893" start="7551" end="7581" title="General Dynamics Electric Boat" label="General Dynamics Electric Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="7825" end="7836" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="8138" end="8146" title="drydock" label="dry-dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307618" start="8171" end="8212" title="Refueling and Overhaul" label="refueling and missile-conversion overhaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790255" start="8616" end="8625" title="Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay" label="Kings Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002064" start="8837" end="8846" title="New START" label="New START"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509410" start="9024" end="9041" title="Naval Base Kitsap" label="Naval Base Kitsap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="9043" end="9053" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="9074" end="9092" title="U.S. Pacific Fleet" label="U.S. Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790255" start="9115" end="9145" title="Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay" label="Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="9147" end="9154" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="9171" end="9196" title="U.S. Fleet Forces Command" label="U.S. Fleet Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="9255" end="9281" title="United States Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="9317" end="9350" title="Nuclear triad" label="sea-based strategic nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="10230" end="10252" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="U.S. Defense Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="10253" end="10268" title="Robert M. Gates" label="Robert M. Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q531247" start="10616" end="10625" title="Ray Mabus" label="Ray Mabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="10997" end="11009" title="Rear admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q107214908" start="11098" end="11114" title="Douglas G. Perry" label="Douglas G. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="11156" end="11181" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q105167" start="11600" end="11610" title="Tom Clancy" label="Tom Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259168" start="11689" end="11709" title="The Sum of All Fears" label="The Sum of All Fears"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11740" end="11763" title="List of fictional ships#Film" label="USS &amp;quot;Montana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q336517" start="11799" end="11808" title="The Abyss" label="The Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615638" start="11846" end="11860" title="submarine film" label="submarine film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140085" start="11861" end="11885" title="Crimson Tide (film)" label="&amp;quot;Crimson Tide&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="11998" end="12001" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321071" start="12026" end="12037" title="Last Resort (U.S. TV series)" label="Last Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q29981321" start="12123" end="12132" title="The Brave (TV series)" label="The Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853238" start="12156" end="12207" title="List of submarine classes of the United States Navy" label="List of submarine classes of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853250" start="12210" end="12254" title="List of submarines of the United States Navy" label="List of submarines of the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436962" start="12257" end="12293" title="List of submarine classes in service" label="List of submarine classes in service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631652" start="12296" end="12332" title="Submarines in the United States Navy" label="Submarines in the United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="12335" end="12371" title="Submarine-launched ballistic missile" label="Submarine-launched ballistic missile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22655" wikidata="Q15837802" url="?curid=22655" title="Ossian">
<text>Ossian (; Irish Gaelic/Scottish Gaelic: &quot;Oisean&quot;) is the narrator and purported author of a cycle of epic poems published by the Scottish poet James Macpherson, originally as &quot;Fingal&quot; (1761) and &quot;Temora&quot; (1763), and later combined under the title &quot;The Poems of Ossian&quot;. Macpherson claimed to have collected word-of-mouth material in Scottish Gaelic, said to be from ancient sources, and that the work was his translation of that material. Ossian is based on Oisín, son of Fionn mac Cumhaill (anglicised to Finn McCool), a legendary bard in Irish mythology. Contemporary critics were divided in their view of the work&#x27;s authenticity, but the current consensus is that Macpherson largely composed the poems himself, drawing in part on traditional Gaelic poetry he had collected.

The work was internationally popular, translated into all the literary languages of Europe, and was highly influential both in the development of the Romantic movement and the Gaelic revival. Macpherson&#x27;s fame was crowned by his burial among the literary giants in Westminster Abbey. W. P. Ker, in the &quot;Cambridge History of English Literature&quot;, observes that &quot;all Macpherson&#x27;s craft as a philological impostor would have been nothing without his literary skill.&quot;

==Poems==
In 1760, Macpherson published the English-language text &quot;Fragments of ancient poetry, collected in the Highlands of Scotland, and translated from the Gaelic or Erse language&quot;. Later that year, he claimed to have obtained further manuscripts and in 1761 he claimed to have found an epic on the subject of the hero Fingal (with Fingal or &quot;Fionnghall&quot; meaning &#x27;fair stranger&#x27; denoting hair or eye colour ), written by Ossian. According to Macpherson&#x27;s prefatory material, his publisher, claiming that there was no market for these works except in English, required that they be translated. Macpherson published these alleged translations during the next few years, culminating in a collected edition, &quot;The Works of Ossian&quot;, in 1765. The most famous of these Ossianic poems was &quot;Fingal&quot;, written in 1761 and dated 1762.

The supposed original poems are translated into poetic prose, with short and simple sentences. The mood is epic, but there is no single narrative, although the same characters reappear. The main characters are Ossian himself, relating the stories when old and blind, his father Fingal (very loosely based on the Irish hero Fionn mac Cumhaill), his dead son Oscar (also with an Irish counterpart), and Oscar&#x27;s lover Malvina (like Fiona a name invented by Macpherson), who looks after Ossian in his old age. Though the stories &quot;are of endless battles and unhappy loves&quot;, the enemies and causes of strife are given little explanation and context.

Characters are given to killing loved ones by mistake, and dying of grief, or of joy. There is very little information given on the religion, culture or society of the characters, and buildings are hardly mentioned. The landscape &quot;is more real than the people who inhabit it. Drowned in eternal mist, illuminated by a decrepit sun or by ephemeral meteors, it is a world of greyness.&quot; Fingal is king of a region of south-west Scotland perhaps similar to the historical kingdom of Dál Riata and the poems appear to be set around the 3rd century, with the &quot;king of the world&quot; mentioned being the Roman Emperor; Macpherson and his supporters detected references to Caracalla (d. 217, as &quot;Caracul&quot;) and Carausius (d. 293, as &quot;Caros&quot;, the &quot;king of ships&quot;).

==Reception and influence==
The poems achieved international success. Napoleon and Diderot were prominent admirers, and Voltaire was known to have written parodies of them. Thomas Jefferson thought Ossian &quot;the greatest poet that has ever existed&quot;, and planned to learn Gaelic so as to read his poems in the original. They were proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical writers such as Homer. &quot;The genuine remains of Ossian ... are in many respects of the same stamp as the &quot;Iliad&quot;&quot;, was Thoreau&#x27;s opinion. Many writers were influenced by the works, including Walter Scott, and painters and composers chose Ossianic subjects.

The Hungarian national poet Sándor Petőfi wrote a poem entitled &quot;Homer and Ossian&quot;, comparing the two authors, of which the first verse reads:
Despite its doubtful authenticity, the Ossian cycle popularized Celtic mythology across Europe, and became one of the earliest and most popular texts that inspired romantic nationalism over the following century. European historians agree that the Ossian poems and their vision of mythical Scotland spurred the emergence of enlightened patriotism on the continent and played a foundational role in the making of modern European nationalism.

The cycle had less impact in the British Isles. Samuel Johnson held it up as &quot;another proof of Scotch conspiracy in national falsehood&quot;, while the Irish objected to what they saw as Macpherson&#x27;s misappropriation of the Fenian Cycle of Irish mythology. David Hume eventually withdrew his initial support of Macpherson and quipped that he could not accept the claimed authenticity of the poems even if &quot;fifty bare-arsed Highlanders&quot; vouched for it. By the early 19th century, the cycle came to play a limited role in Scottish patriotic rhetoric.

==Authenticity debate==
There were immediate disputes of Macpherson&#x27;s claims on both literary and political grounds. Macpherson promoted a Scottish origin for the material, and was hotly opposed by Irish historians who felt that their heritage was being appropriated. However, both Scotland and Ireland shared a common Gaelic culture during the period in which the poems are set, and some Fenian literature common in both countries was composed in Scotland.

Samuel Johnson, English author, critic, and biographer, was convinced that Macpherson was &quot;a , a liar, and a fraud, and that the poems were forgeries&quot;. Johnson also dismissed the poems&#x27; quality. Upon being asked, &quot;But Doctor Johnson, do you really believe that any man today could write such poetry?&quot; he famously replied, &quot;Yes. Many men. Many women. And many children.&quot; Johnson is cited as calling the story of Ossian &quot;as gross an imposition as ever the world was troubled with&quot;. In support of his claim, Johnson also called Gaelic the rude speech of a barbarous people, and said there were no manuscripts in it more than 100 years old. In reply, it was proved that the Advocates&#x27; Library at Edinburgh contained Gaelic manuscripts 500 years old, and one of even greater antiquity.

In response, as his words were spoken during the 18th-century golden age of Scottish Gaelic literature, Dr Johnson swiftly found himself reviled in Gaelic satirical poetry by, among many others, James MacIntyre, the Clan MacIntyre Tacksman of Glen Noe near Ben Cruachan, in (, &quot;A Song to Dr Johnson&quot;). Raonuill Dubh MacDhòmhnuill, the eldest son of Gaelic national poet Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair and Clanranald tacksman of Laig, included MacIntyre&#x27;s satire in the Gaelic poetry anthology called &quot;The Eigg Collection&quot;, which was published at Edinburgh in 1776.

Scottish author Hugh Blair&#x27;s 1763 &quot;A Critical Dissertation on the Poems of Ossian&quot; upheld the work&#x27;s authenticity against Johnson&#x27;s scathing criticism and from 1765 was included in every edition of &quot;Ossian&quot; to lend the work credibility. The work also had a timely resonance for those swept away by the emerging Romantic movement and the theory of the &quot;noble savage&quot;, and it echoed the popularity of Burke&#x27;s seminal &quot;A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful&quot; (1757).

In 1766, antiquarian and Celticist Charles O&#x27;Conor, a descendant of the Gaelic nobility of Ireland, dismissed Ossian&#x27;s authenticity in a new chapter &quot;Remarks on Mr. Mac Pherson&#x27;s translation of Fingal and Temora&quot; that he added to the second edition of his seminal history. In 1775, he expanded his criticism in a new book, &quot;Dissertation on the origin and antiquities of the antient Scots&quot;.

Faced with the controversy, the Committee of the Highland Society enquired after the authenticity of Macpherson&#x27;s supposed original. It was because of these circumstances that the so-called Glenmasan manuscript (Adv. 72.2.3) came to light in the late 18th century, a compilation which contains the tale &quot;Oided mac n-Uisnig&quot;. This text is a version of the Irish &quot;Longes mac n-Uislenn&quot; and offers a tale which bears some comparison to Macpherson&#x27;s &quot;Darthula&quot;, although it is radically different in many respects. Donald Smith cited it in his report for the committee.

The controversy raged on into the early years of the 19th century, with disputes as to whether the poems were based on Irish sources, on sources in English, on Gaelic fragments woven into his own composition as Johnson concluded, or largely on Scots Gaelic oral traditions and manuscripts as Macpherson claimed. In the late 19th century, it was demonstrated that the only &quot;original&quot; Gaelic manuscripts that Macpherson produced for the poems were in fact translations of his work from English. During the same period, Peter Hately Waddell defended the authenticity of the poems, arguing in &quot;Ossian and the Clyde&quot; (1875) that the poems contained topographical references that could not have been known to Macpherson.

In 1952, the Scottish literary scholar Derick Thomson investigated the sources for Macpherson&#x27;s work and concluded that Macpherson had collected genuine Scottish Gaelic ballads, employing scribes to record those that were preserved orally and collating manuscripts, but, as a pioneer of mythopoeia, had adapted often contradictory accounts of the same legends into a coherent plotline by altering the original characters and ideas, and had also introduced a great deal of his own.

According to historians Colin Kidd and James Coleman, &quot;Fingal&quot; (1761, dated 1762) was indebted to traditional Gaelic poetry composed in the 15th and 16th centuries, as well as to Macpherson&#x27;s &quot;own creativity and editorial laxity&quot;, while the second epic &quot;Temora&quot; (1763) was largely his own creation.

==Translations and adaptations==

One poem was translated into French in 1762; by 1777, the whole corpus was translated. In the German-speaking states, Michael Denis made the first full translation in 1768–1769, inspiring the proto-nationalist poets Klopstock and Goethe, whose own German translation of a portion of Macpherson&#x27;s work figures prominently in a climactic scene of &quot;The Sorrows of Young Werther&quot; (1774). Goethe&#x27;s associate Johann Gottfried Herder wrote an essay titled &quot;Extract from a correspondence about Ossian and the Songs of Ancient Peoples&quot; (1773) in the early days of the &quot;Sturm und Drang&quot; movement.

Complete Danish translations were made in 1790, and Swedish ones in 1794–1800. In Scandinavia and Germany, the Celtic nature of the setting was ignored or not understood; instead, Ossian was regarded as a Nordic or Germanic figure who became a symbol for nationalist aspirations. In 1799, the French general Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte named his only son Oscar after the character from Ossian, at the suggestion of Napoleon, the child&#x27;s godfather and an admirer of Ossian. Bernadotte later was made King of Sweden and Norway. In 1844, his son became King Oscar I of Sweden and Norway, who was, in turn, succeeded by his sons Charles XV and Oscar II (d. 1907). &quot;Oscar&quot; being a royal name led to its becoming also a common male first name, especially in Scandinavia but also in other European countries.

Melchiore Cesarotti was an Italian clergyman whose translation into Italian is said by many to improve on the original, and was a tireless promoter of the poems, in Vienna and Warsaw as well as Italy. It was his translation that Napoleon especially admired, and among others it influenced Ugo Foscolo, who was Cesarotti&#x27;s pupil in the University of Padua.


British composer Harriet Wainwright premiered her opera &quot;Comala&quot;, based on text by Ossian, in London in 1792.

The first partial Polish translation of Ossian was made by Ignacy Krasicki in 1793. The complete translation appeared in 1838 by Seweryn Goszczyński.

By 1800, Ossian was translated into Spanish and Russian, with Dutch following in 1805, and Polish, Czech and Hungarian in 1827–1833. The poems were as much admired in Hungary as in France and Germany; Hungarian János Arany wrote &quot;Homer and Ossian&quot; in response, and several other Hungarian writers – Baróti Szabó, Csokonai, Sándor Kisfaludy, Kazinczy, Kölcsey, Ferenc Toldy, and Ágost Greguss, were also influenced by it.

The opera &quot;Ossian, ou Les bardes&quot; by Jean-François Le Sueur (with the famous, multimedial scene of &quot;Ossian&#x27;s Dream&quot;) was a sell-out at the Paris Opera in 1804, and transformed the composer&#x27;s career. The poems also exerted an influence on the burgeoning of Romantic music, and Franz Schubert in particular composed Lieder setting many of Ossian&#x27;s poems. In 1829 Felix Mendelssohn was inspired to visit the Hebrides and composed the &quot;Hebrides Overture&quot;, also known as &quot;Fingal&#x27;s Cave&quot;. His friend Niels Gade devoted his first published work, the concert overture &quot;Efterklange af Ossian&quot; (&quot;Echoes of Ossian&quot;) written in 1840, to the same subject.

==Gaelic studies==
Macpherson&#x27;s &quot;Ossian&quot; made a strong impression on Dugald Buchanan (1716–1768), a Perthshire poet whose celebrated &quot;Spiritual Hymns&quot; are written in a Scots Gaelic of a high quality that to some extent reflects the Classical Gaelic literary language once common to the bards of both Ireland and Scotland. Buchanan, taking the poems of &quot;Ossian&quot; to be authentic, was moved to revalue the genuine traditions and rich cultural heritage of the Gaels. At around the same time, he wrote to Sir James Clerk of Penicuik, the leading antiquary of the movement, proposing that someone should travel to the isles and western coast of Scotland and collect the work of the ancient and modern bards, in which alone he could find the language in its purity.

Much later, in the 19th and 20th centuries, this task was taken up by collectors such as Alexander Carmichael and Lady Evelyn Stewart Murray, and to be recorded and continued by the work of the School of Scottish Studies and the Scottish Gaelic Texts Society.

==In art==
Subjects from the Ossian poems were popular in the art of northern Europe, but at rather different periods depending on the country; by the time French artists began to depict Ossian, British artists had largely dropped him. Ossian was especially popular in Danish art, but also found in Germany and the rest of Scandinavia.

===Britain, Germany and Scandinavia===
British artists began to depict the Ossian poems early on, with the first major work a cycle of paintings decorating the ceiling the &quot;Grand Hall&quot; of Penicuik House in Midlothian, built by Sir James Clerk, who commissioned the paintings in 1772. These were by the Scottish painter Alexander Runciman but were lost when the house burnt down in 1899, though drawings and etchings survive, and two pamphlets describing them were published in the 18th century. A subject from Ossian by Angelica Kauffman was shown in the Royal Academy exhibition of 1773, and Ossian was depicted in &quot;Elysium&quot;, part of the Irish painter James Barry&#x27;s &quot;magnum opus&quot; decorating the Royal Society of Arts, at the Adelphi Buildings in London (still &quot;in situ&quot;).

Works on paper by Thomas Girtin and John Sell Cotman have survived, though the Ossianic landscapes by George Augustus Wallis, which the Ossian fan August Wilhelm Schlegel praised in a letter to Goethe, seem to have been lost, as has a picture by J. M. W. Turner exhibited in 1802. Henry Singleton exhibited paintings, some of which were engraved and used in editions of the poems.

A fragment by Novalis, written in 1789, refers to Ossian as an inspired, holy and poetical singer.

The Danish painter Nicolai Abildgaard, director of the Copenhagen Academy from 1789, painted several scenes from Ossian, as did his pupils, including Asmus Jacob Carstens. His friend Joseph Anton Koch painted a number of subjects, and two large series of illustrations for the poems, which never got properly into print; like many Ossianic works by Wallis, Carstens, Krafft and others, some of these were painted in Rome, perhaps not the best place to evoke the dim northern light of the poems. In Germany the request in 1804 to produce some drawings as illustrations so excited Philipp Otto Runge that he planned a series of 100, far more than asked for, in a style heavily influenced by the linear illustrations of John Flaxman; these remain as drawings only. Many other German works are recorded, some as late as the 1840s; word of the British scepticism over the Ossian poems was slow to penetrate the continent, or considered irrelevant.

===France===
In France, the enthusiasm of Napoleon for the poems accounts for most artistic depictions, and those by the most famous artists, but a painting exhibited in the Paris Salon in 1800 by Paul Duqueylar (now Musée Granet, Aix-en-Provence) excited &quot;Les Barbus&quot; (&quot;the Bearded Ones&quot;), a group of primitivist artists including Pierre-Maurice Quays (or Quaï) who promoted living in the style of &quot;early civilizations as described in Homer, Ossian, and the Bible&quot;. Quays is reported as saying: &quot;Homère? Ossian? ... le soleil? la lune? Voilà la question. En vérité, je crois que je préfère la lune. C&#x27;est plus simple, plus grand, plus &quot;primitif&quot;&quot;. (&quot;Homer? Ossian? ... the sun? the moon? That&#x27;s the question. Truthfully I think I prefer the moon. It&#x27;s more simple, more grand, more &quot;primitive&quot;&quot;). The same year, Napoleon was planning the renovation of the Château de Malmaison as a summer palace, and, though he does not seem to have suggested Ossianic subjects for his painters, two large and significant works were among those painted for the reception hall, for which six artists had been commissioned.


These were Girodet&#x27;s painting of 1801–02 &quot;Ossian receiving the Ghosts of the French Heroes&quot;, and &quot;Ossian Evoking ghosts on the Edge of the Lora&quot; (1801), by François Pascal Simon Gérard. Gérard&#x27;s original was lost in a shipwreck after being bought by the King of Sweden after the fall of Napoleon, but survives in three replicas by the artist (a further one in Berlin was lost in 1945). One is now at Malmaison (184.5 × 194.5 cm / 72.6 × 76.6 in), and the Kunsthalle Hamburg has another (180.5 × 198.5 cm). A watercolour copy by Jean-Baptiste Isabey was placed as frontispiece to Napoleon&#x27;s copy of the poems.

Duqueylar, Girodet and Gérard, like Johann Peter Krafft (above) and most of the &quot;Barbus&quot;, were all pupils of David, and the clearly unclassical subjects of the Ossian poems were useful for emergent French Romantic painting, marking a revolt against David&#x27;s Neoclassical choice of historical subject-matter. David&#x27;s recorded reactions to the paintings were guarded or hostile; he said of Girodet&#x27;s work: &quot;Either Girodet is mad or I no longer know anything of the art of painting&quot;.

Girodet&#x27;s painting (still at Malmaison; 192.5 × 184 cm) was a &quot;succès de scandale&quot; when exhibited in 1802, and remains a key work in the emergence of French Romantic painting, but the specific allusions to the political situation that he intended it to carry were largely lost on the public, and overtaken by the Peace of Amiens with Great Britain, signed in 1802 between the completion and exhibition of the work. He also produced &quot;Malvina dying in the arms of Fingal&quot; (c. 1802), and other works.

Another pupil of David, Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, was to depict Ossianic scenes over most of his long career. He made a drawing in 1809, when studying in Rome, and in 1810 or 1811 was commissioned to make two paintings, &quot;The Dream of Ossian&quot; and a classical scene, to decorate the bedroom Napoleon was to occupy in the Palazzo Quirinale on a visit to Rome. In fact the visit never came off and in 1835 Ingres repurchased the work, now in poor condition.

The American painter based in Paris Wilbur Winfield Woodward exhibited an Ossian at the 1880 Salon.

==Editions==
National Library of Scotland has 327 books and associated materials in its Ossian Collection. The collection was originally assembled by J. Norman Methven of Perth and includes different editions and translations of James Macpherson&#x27;s epic poem &#x27;Ossian&#x27;, some with a map of the &#x27;Kingdom of Connor&#x27;. It also contains secondary material relating to Ossianic poetry and the Ossian controversy. More than 200 items from the collection have been digitised.

Below are some other online editions of interest and recent works:
*1760: &quot;Fragments of Ancient Poetry collected in the Highlands of Scotland&quot;, Edinburgh second edition.
*1803: &quot;The Poems of Ossian in two volumes&quot;, an illustrated edition - Vol.I, Vol.II (London: Lackington, Allen and co.)
*1887: &quot;Poems of Ossian: Literally translated from the Gaelic, in the original measure of verse&quot; by Peter McNaughton (Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons).
*1888: &quot;Poems of Ossian translated by James Macpherson&quot;, a pocket reprint of the 1773 edition omitting the four last poems (London: Walter Scott) 
*1996: &quot;The Poems of Ossian and Related Works&quot;, ed. Howard Gaskill, with an Introduction by Fiona Stafford (Edinburgh University Press).
*2004: &quot;Ossian and Ossianism&quot;, Dafydd Moore, a 4-volume edition of Ossianic works and a collection of varied responses (London: Routledge). This includes facsimiles of the Ossian works, contemporary and later responses, contextual letters and reviews, and later adaptations.
*2011: &quot;Blind Ossian&#x27;s Fingal : fragments and controversy&quot;, a reprint of the first edition and abridgement of the follow-up with new material by Allan and Linda Burnett (Edinburgh: Luath Press Ltd).
*2021: &quot;Ossian: Warrior Poet&quot;, an edited and illustrated edition of the Poems with a new introduction and index by Scottish artist Eileen Budd (Windermere: Wide Open Sea Press).

==See also==
* Ossian&#x27;s Hall of Mirrors
* Folk process
* Romanticism
* Ossianic Society (Ireland)
*Vestiarium Scoticum
*Manuscripts of Dvůr Králové and of Zelená Hora
*Lord Dunsany

==Notes==
==References==
* Gaskill, Howard. (ed.) &quot;The reception of Ossian in Europe&quot; London: Continuum, 2004 
* 
* Kristmannsson, Gauti, &quot;Ossian, the European National Epic (1760-1810)&quot;, EGO - European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2015, retrieved: March 8, 2021 (pdf).
*Moore, Dafydd. &quot;Enlightenment and Romance in James Macpherson&#x27;s the Poems of Ossian: Myth, Genre and Cultural Change&quot; (Studies in Early Modern English Literature) (2003)

*Hanselaar, Saskia, &quot;La Mort de Malvina du musée Auguste Grasset à Varzy : une œuvre de jeunesse réattribuée à Ary Scheffer&quot;, La Revue des musées de France – Revue du Louvre, LXIe année, octobre 2011, n°4, p. 87–96.
*Thomson, Derick Smith. &quot;The Gaelic Sources of Macpherson&#x27;s &#x27;Ossian&#x27;&quot;, (1951), Aberdeen University Press
==Further reading==
*
;in French
*Collectif, &quot;La Légende d&#x27;Ossian illustrée par Girodet&quot;, catalogue de l&#x27;exposition du même nom organisée par les musées de Montargis, Montargis, Musée Girodet, 1988.
*Gluck, Denise, &quot;Ossian et l&#x27;ossianisme&quot;, dans &quot;Hier pour demain, Arts, Tradition et Patrimoine&quot;, catalogue de l&#x27;exposition du Grand Palais, Paris, Réunion des musées nationaux, 1980.
*Hanselaar, Saskia, &quot;Ossian ou l&#x27;Esthétique des Ombres : une génération d&#x27;artistes français à la veille du Romantisme (1793–1833),&quot; PhD, dir. S. Le Men, Université de Paris Ouest Nanterre la Défense, 2008.
*Soubigou, Gilles, &quot;Ossian et les Barbus: primitivisme et retirement du monde sous le Directoire&quot;, in &quot;Renoncer à l&#x27;art. Figures du romantisme et des années 1970&quot; (Julie Ramos, ed.), Paris, Roven, 2014, pp. 85–105.
*Van Thieghem, Paul, &quot;Ossian en France&quot;, Paris, Rieder, 1917.

==External links==


* Digitised version of Fragments of ancient poetry, collected in the Highlands of Scotland, and translated from the Galic or Erse language, published 1760 at National Library of Scotland
*The Poetical Works of Ossian Full text at Ex-Classics
*Selected Bibliography: James Macpherson and Ossian Excellent online bibliography; compiled by designated experts in the field; covering the most important scholarly monographs and articles on Ossian and Macpherson up to March 2004.
*Literary Encyclopedia: Ossian
*Popular Tales of the West Highlands by J. F. Campbell Volume IV (1890)
*A Vision of Britain Through Time James Boswell, &quot;The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides with Samuel Johnson&quot;, discussion in entries for 22 and 23 September 1773.
*Calum Colvin: &quot;Ossian: Fragments of Ancient Poetry&quot; Reproduction of the cycle of paintings &quot;Ossian: Fragments of Ancient Poetry&quot; (2002) by one of Scotland&#x27;s most renowned contemporary artists
* &quot;Le mythe d&#x27;Ossian&quot; (in French) in art in French public collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="0" end="6" title="Ossian" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="10" end="22" title="Irish Gaelic" label="Irish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="23" end="38" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="111" end="120" title="epic poem" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q312562" start="153" end="169" title="James Macpherson" label="James Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698210" start="221" end="227" title="Temora (poem)" label="Temora"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="347" end="360" title="word-of-mouth" label="word-of-mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="373" end="388" title="Scottish Gaelic language" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016937" start="498" end="503" title="Oisín" label="Oisín"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="512" end="530" title="Fionn mac Cumhaill" label="Fionn mac Cumhaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="572" end="576" title="bard" label="bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="580" end="595" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="973" end="990" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153218" start="999" end="1013" title="Gaelic revival" label="Gaelic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="1093" end="1110" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219472" start="1112" end="1121" title="William Paton Ker" label="W. P. Ker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="1236" end="1248" title="Philology" label="philological"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="1618" end="1622" title="Epic poetry" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="2522" end="2540" title="Fionn mac Cumhaill" label="Fionn mac Cumhaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032632" start="2576" end="2593" title="Oscar (Irish mythology)" label="Irish counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887958" start="2619" end="2626" title="Malvina" label="Malvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q662373" start="2633" end="2638" title="Fiona" label="Fiona"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="3348" end="3357" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="3472" end="3485" title="Roman Emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="3540" end="3549" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q317232" start="3587" end="3596" title="Carausius" label="Carausius"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="3731" end="3739" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="3744" end="3751" title="Denis Diderot" label="Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="3781" end="3789" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3834" end="3850" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="4039" end="4048" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="4065" end="4070" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="4187" end="4194" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4264" end="4276" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q81219" start="4359" end="4372" title="Sándor Petőfi" label="Sándor Petőfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="4548" end="4564" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="4648" end="4668" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="4959" end="4972" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="4974" end="4988" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382460" start="5160" end="5172" title="Fenian Cycle" label="Fenian Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="5176" end="5191" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="5193" end="5203" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="5820" end="5826" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894514" start="6868" end="6894" title="Scottish Gaelic literature" label="Scottish Gaelic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="6947" end="6963" title="satirical poetry" label="satirical poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222914" start="7008" end="7022" title="Clan MacIntyre" label="Clan MacIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673946" start="7023" end="7031" title="Tacksman" label="Tacksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395413" start="7049" end="7061" title="Ben Cruachan" label="Ben Cruachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q381062" start="7158" end="7171" title="national poet" label="national poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708451" start="7172" end="7204" title="Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair" label="Alasdair Mac Mhaighstir Alasdair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094972" start="7209" end="7219" title="Clanranald" label="Clanranald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7232" end="7236" title="Laig" label="Laig"/>
<link wikidata="Q514481" start="7319" end="7323" title="Eigg" label="Eigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="7365" end="7374" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q924515" start="7401" end="7411" title="Hugh Blair" label="Hugh Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="7731" end="7748" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q829689" start="7777" end="7789" title="noble savage" label="noble savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="7829" end="7841" title="Edmund Burke" label="Burke&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q947972" start="7856" end="7937" title="A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful" label="A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="7962" end="7973" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27997" start="7978" end="7987" title="Celticist" label="Celticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081303" start="7988" end="8008" title="Charles O&amp;#x27;Conor (historian)" label="Charles O&amp;#x27;Conor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516638" start="8030" end="8056" title="Gaelic nobility of Ireland" label="Gaelic nobility of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759126" start="8428" end="8444" title="Highland Society of London" label="Highland Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287104" start="8574" end="8594" title="Glenmasan manuscript" label="Glenmasan manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174578" start="9513" end="9533" title="Peter Hately Waddell" label="Peter Hately Waddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772379" start="9761" end="9775" title="Derick Thomson" label="Derick Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="9896" end="9903" title="ballads" label="ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331891" start="10014" end="10024" title="mythopoeia" label="mythopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145260" start="10233" end="10243" title="Colin Kidd" label="Colin Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q494586" start="10696" end="10709" title="Michael Denis" label="Michael Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154367" start="10794" end="10803" title="Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock" label="Klopstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="10808" end="10814" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151883" start="10934" end="10962" title="The Sorrows of Young Werther" label="The Sorrows of Young Werther"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="11001" end="11024" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q207741" start="11173" end="11188" title="Sturm und Drang" label="Sturm und Drang"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="11288" end="11299" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="11514" end="11538" title="Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte" label="Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="11618" end="11626" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="11715" end="11721" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11726" end="11732" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52926" start="11763" end="11791" title="Oscar I of Sweden and Norway" label="Oscar I of Sweden and Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52925" start="11833" end="11843" title="Charles XV of Sweden" label="Charles XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q52924" start="11848" end="11856" title="Oscar II" label="Oscar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q919900" start="12021" end="12040" title="Melchiore Cesarotti" label="Melchiore Cesarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="12186" end="12192" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="12197" end="12203" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q166234" start="12310" end="12321" title="Ugo Foscolo" label="Ugo Foscolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="12361" end="12380" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q104772862" start="12401" end="12419" title="Harriet Wainwright" label="Harriet Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="12523" end="12529" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q380545" start="12564" end="12579" title="Ignacy Krasicki" label="Ignacy Krasicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254858" start="12634" end="12653" title="Seweryn Goszczyński" label="Seweryn Goszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="12823" end="12830" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q316556" start="12867" end="12878" title="János Arany" label="János Arany"/>
<link wikidata="Q716135" start="12965" end="12977" title="Dávid Baróti Szabó" label="Baróti Szabó"/>
<link wikidata="Q713545" start="12979" end="12987" title="Mihály Csokonai Vitéz" label="Csokonai"/>
<link wikidata="Q670247" start="12989" end="13005" title="Sándor Kisfaludy" label="Sándor Kisfaludy"/>
<link wikidata="Q381865" start="13007" end="13015" title="Ferenc Kazinczy" label="Kazinczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q440057" start="13017" end="13024" title="Kölcsey" label="Kölcsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79045" start="13026" end="13038" title="Ferenc Toldy" label="Ferenc Toldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107454" start="13104" end="13125" title="Ossian, ou Les bardes" label="Ossian, ou Les bardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q559659" start="13135" end="13157" title="Jean-François Le Sueur" label="Jean-François Le Sueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q283339" start="13252" end="13263" title="Paris Opera" label="Paris Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="13374" end="13388" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="13394" end="13408" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q216860" start="13432" end="13438" title="Lieder" label="Lieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="13484" end="13501" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q946777" start="13560" end="13577" title="Hebrides Overture" label="Hebrides Overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q154632" start="13642" end="13652" title="Niels Gade" label="Niels Gade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312444" start="13896" end="13911" title="Dugald Buchanan" label="Dugald Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="13927" end="13937" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="14069" end="14085" title="Classical Gaelic" label="Classical Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="14086" end="14103" title="literary language" label="literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131857" start="14347" end="14374" title="Sir James Clerk, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir James Clerk of Penicuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641917" start="14696" end="14716" title="Alexander Carmichael" label="Alexander Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470146" start="14721" end="14747" title="Lady Evelyn Stewart Murray" label="Lady Evelyn Stewart Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432567" start="14801" end="14827" title="School of Scottish Studies" label="School of Scottish Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450228" start="15137" end="15147" title="Danish art" label="Danish art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162873" start="15403" end="15417" title="Penicuik House" label="Penicuik House"/>
<link wikidata="Q206934" start="15421" end="15431" title="Midlothian" label="Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131857" start="15442" end="15457" title="Clerk Baronets" label="Sir James Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719989" start="15534" end="15552" title="Alexander Runciman" label="Alexander Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="15622" end="15629" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q123098" start="15735" end="15752" title="Angelica Kauffman" label="Angelica Kauffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="15770" end="15783" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042892" start="15878" end="15889" title="James Barry (painter)" label="James Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="15936" end="15957" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579847" start="15966" end="15983" title="Adelphi Buildings" label="Adelphi Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q714243" start="16042" end="16055" title="Thomas Girtin" label="Thomas Girtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288248" start="16060" end="16076" title="John Sell Cotman" label="John Sell Cotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57281" start="16171" end="16194" title="August Wilhelm Schlegel" label="August Wilhelm Schlegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="16270" end="16285" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452884" start="16305" end="16320" title="Henry Singleton (painter)" label="Henry Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684" start="16420" end="16427" title="Novalis" label="Novalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q319854" start="16525" end="16543" title="Nicolai Abildgaard" label="Nicolai Abildgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641001" start="16561" end="16579" title="Copenhagen Academy" label="Copenhagen Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q819197" start="16656" end="16676" title="Asmus Jacob Carstens" label="Asmus Jacob Carstens"/>
<link wikidata="Q263569" start="16689" end="16706" title="Joseph Anton Koch" label="Joseph Anton Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q166585" start="17085" end="17103" title="Philipp Otto Runge" label="Philipp Otto Runge"/>
<link wikidata="Q366066" start="17223" end="17235" title="John Flaxman" label="John Flaxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="17624" end="17635" title="Paris Salon" label="Paris Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371144" start="17647" end="17661" title="Paul Duqueylar" label="Paul Duqueylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q965780" start="17667" end="17679" title="Musée Granet" label="Musée Granet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="17681" end="17696" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383380" start="17802" end="17822" title="Pierre-Maurice Quays" label="Pierre-Maurice Quays"/>
<link wikidata="Q684846" start="18392" end="18412" title="Château de Malmaison" label="Château de Malmaison"/>
<link wikidata="Q433434" start="18655" end="18662" title="Anne-Louis Girodet de Roussy-Trioson" label="Girodet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163543" start="18825" end="18853" title="François Gérard" label="François Pascal Simon Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q169542" start="19129" end="19147" title="Kunsthalle Hamburg" label="Kunsthalle Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="19182" end="19193" title="watercolour" label="watercolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q551132" start="19202" end="19222" title="Jean-Baptiste Isabey" label="Jean-Baptiste Isabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q583866" start="19237" end="19249" title="Book frontispiece" label="frontispiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q324683" start="19325" end="19344" title="Johann Peter Krafft" label="Johann Peter Krafft"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="19408" end="19413" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="19561" end="19573" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632742" start="19878" end="19896" title="succès de scandale" label="succès de scandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="20133" end="20148" title="Peace of Amiens" label="Peace of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q23380" start="20353" end="20382" title="Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres" label="Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres"/>
<link wikidata="Q33255228" start="20560" end="20579" title="The Dream of Ossian" label="The Dream of Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="20663" end="20680" title="Palazzo Quirinale" label="Palazzo Quirinale"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231084" start="20835" end="20859" title="Wilbur Winfield Woodward" label="Wilbur Winfield Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="20913" end="20941" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107452" start="22876" end="22905" title="Ossian&amp;#x27;s Hall of Mirrors" label="Ossian&amp;#x27;s Hall of Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464472" start="22908" end="22920" title="Folk process" label="Folk process"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="22923" end="22934" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107463" start="22937" end="22953" title="Ossianic Society" label="Ossianic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556383" start="22965" end="22984" title="Vestiarium Scoticum" label="Vestiarium Scoticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19513021" start="22986" end="23032" title="Manuscripts of Dvůr Králové and of Zelená Hora" label="Manuscripts of Dvůr Králové and of Zelená Hora"/>
<link wikidata="Q458658" start="23034" end="23046" title="Lord Dunsany" label="Lord Dunsany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="25057" end="25085" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
