<doc id="22483" wikidata="Q14620" url="?curid=22483" title="Optics">
<text>Optics is the branch of physics that studies the behaviour and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it. Optics usually describes the behaviour of visible, ultraviolet, and infrared light. Light is a type of electromagnetic radiation, and other forms of electromagnetic radiation such as X-rays, microwaves, and radio waves exhibit similar properties.

Most optical phenomena can be accounted for by using the classical electromagnetic description of light, however complete electromagnetic descriptions of light are often difficult to apply in practice. Practical optics is usually done using simplified models. The most common of these, geometric optics, treats light as a collection of rays that travel in straight lines and bend when they pass through or reflect from surfaces. Physical optics is a more comprehensive model of light, which includes wave effects such as diffraction and interference that cannot be accounted for in geometric optics. Historically, the ray-based model of light was developed first, followed by the wave model of light. Progress in electromagnetic theory in the 19th century led to the discovery that light waves were in fact electromagnetic radiation.

Some phenomena depend on light having both wave-like and particle-like properties. Explanation of these effects requires quantum mechanics. When considering light&#x27;s particle-like properties, the light is modelled as a collection of particles called &quot;photons&quot;. Quantum optics deals with the application of quantum mechanics to optical systems.

Optical science is relevant to and studied in many related disciplines including astronomy, various engineering fields, photography, and medicine (particularly ophthalmology and optometry, in which it is called physiological optics). Practical applications of optics are found in a variety of technologies and everyday objects, including mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes, lasers, and fibre optics.

==History==

Optics began with the development of lenses by the ancient Egyptians and Mesopotamians. The earliest known lenses, made from polished crystal, often quartz, date from as early as 2000 BC from Crete (Archaeological Museum of Heraclion, Greece). Lenses from Rhodes date around 700 BC, as do Assyrian lenses such as the Nimrud lens. The ancient Romans and Greeks filled glass spheres with water to make lenses. These practical developments were followed by the development of theories of light and vision by ancient Greek and Indian philosophers, and the development of geometrical optics in the Greco-Roman world. The word &quot;optics&quot; comes from the ancient Greek word , .

Greek philosophy on optics broke down into two opposing theories on how vision worked, the intromission theory and the emission theory. The intromission approach saw vision as coming from objects casting off copies of themselves (called eidola) that were captured by the eye. With many propagators including Democritus, Epicurus, Aristotle and their followers, this theory seems to have some contact with modern theories of what vision really is, but it remained only speculation lacking any experimental foundation.

Plato first articulated the emission theory, the idea that visual perception is accomplished by rays emitted by the eyes. He also commented on the parity reversal of mirrors in &quot;Timaeus&quot;. Some hundred years later, Euclid (4th–3rd century BC) wrote a treatise entitled &quot;Optics&quot; where he linked vision to geometry, creating &quot;geometrical optics&quot;. He based his work on Plato&#x27;s emission theory wherein he described the mathematical rules of perspective and described the effects of refraction qualitatively, although he questioned that a beam of light from the eye could instantaneously light up the stars every time someone blinked. Euclid stated the principle of shortest trajectory of light, and considered multiple reflections on flat and spherical mirrors.
Ptolemy, in his treatise &quot;Optics&quot;, held an extramission-intromission theory of vision: the rays (or flux) from the eye formed a cone, the vertex being within the eye, and the base defining the visual field. The rays were sensitive, and conveyed information back to the observer&#x27;s intellect about the distance and orientation of surfaces. He summarized much of Euclid and went on to describe a way to measure the angle of refraction, though he failed to notice the empirical relationship between it and the angle of incidence. Plutarch (1st–2nd century AD) described multiple reflections on spherical mirrors and discussed the creation of magnified and reduced images, both real and imaginary, including the case of chirality of the images.

During the Middle Ages, Greek ideas about optics were resurrected and extended by writers in the Muslim world. One of the earliest of these was Al-Kindi (–873) who wrote on the merits of Aristotelian and Euclidean ideas of optics, favouring the emission theory since it could better quantify optical phenomena. In 984, the Persian mathematician Ibn Sahl wrote the treatise &quot;On burning mirrors and lenses&quot;, correctly describing a law of refraction equivalent to Snell&#x27;s law. He used this law to compute optimum shapes for lenses and curved mirrors. In the early 11th century, Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham) wrote the &quot;Book of Optics&quot; (&quot;Kitab al-manazir&quot;) in which he explored reflection and refraction and proposed a new system for explaining vision and light based on observation and experiment. He rejected the &quot;emission theory&quot; of Ptolemaic optics with its rays being emitted by the eye, and instead put forward the idea that light reflected in all directions in straight lines from all points of the objects being viewed and then entered the eye, although he was unable to correctly explain how the eye captured the rays. Alhazen&#x27;s work was largely ignored in the Arabic world but it was anonymously translated into Latin around 1200 A.D. and further summarised and expanded on by the Polish monk Witelo making it a standard text on optics in Europe for the next 400 years.

In the 13th century in medieval Europe, English bishop Robert Grosseteste wrote on a wide range of scientific topics, and discussed light from four different perspectives: an epistemology of light, a metaphysics or cosmogony of light, an etiology or physics of light, and a theology of light, basing it on the works of Aristotle and Platonism. Grosseteste&#x27;s most famous disciple, Roger Bacon, wrote works citing a wide range of recently translated optical and philosophical works, including those of Alhazen, Aristotle, Avicenna, Averroes, Euclid, al-Kindi, Ptolemy, Tideus, and Constantine the African. Bacon was able to use parts of glass spheres as magnifying glasses to demonstrate that light reflects from objects rather than being released from them.

The first wearable eyeglasses were invented in Italy around 1286.
This was the start of the optical industry of grinding and polishing lenses for these &quot;spectacles&quot;, first in Venice and Florence in the thirteenth century, and later in the spectacle making centres in both the Netherlands and Germany. Spectacle makers created improved types of lenses for the correction of vision based more on empirical knowledge gained from observing the effects of the lenses rather than using the rudimentary optical theory of the day (theory which for the most part could not even adequately explain how spectacles worked). This practical development, mastery, and experimentation with lenses led directly to the invention of the compound optical microscope around 1595, and the refracting telescope in 1608, both of which appeared in the spectacle making centres in the Netherlands.


In the early 17th century, Johannes Kepler expanded on geometric optics in his writings, covering lenses, reflection by flat and curved mirrors, the principles of pinhole cameras, inverse-square law governing the intensity of light, and the optical explanations of astronomical phenomena such as lunar and solar eclipses and astronomical parallax. He was also able to correctly deduce the role of the retina as the actual organ that recorded images, finally being able to scientifically quantify the effects of different types of lenses that spectacle makers had been observing over the previous 300 years. After the invention of the telescope, Kepler set out the theoretical basis on how they worked and described an improved version, known as the &quot;Keplerian telescope&quot;, using two convex lenses to produce higher magnification.

Optical theory progressed in the mid-17th century with treatises written by philosopher René Descartes, which explained a variety of optical phenomena including reflection and refraction by assuming that light was emitted by objects which produced it. This differed substantively from the ancient Greek emission theory. In the late 1660s and early 1670s, Isaac Newton expanded Descartes&#x27;s ideas into a corpuscle theory of light, famously determining that white light was a mix of colours that can be separated into its component parts with a prism. In 1690, Christiaan Huygens proposed a wave theory for light based on suggestions that had been made by Robert Hooke in 1664. Hooke himself publicly criticised Newton&#x27;s theories of light and the feud between the two lasted until Hooke&#x27;s death. In 1704, Newton published &quot;Opticks&quot; and, at the time, partly because of his success in other areas of physics, he was generally considered to be the victor in the debate over the nature of light.

Newtonian optics was generally accepted until the early 19th century when Thomas Young and Augustin-Jean Fresnel conducted experiments on the interference of light that firmly established light&#x27;s wave nature. Young&#x27;s famous double slit experiment showed that light followed the superposition principle, which is a wave-like property not predicted by Newton&#x27;s corpuscle theory. This work led to a theory of diffraction for light and opened an entire area of study in physical optics. Wave optics was successfully unified with electromagnetic theory by James Clerk Maxwell in the 1860s.

The next development in optical theory came in 1899 when Max Planck correctly modelled blackbody radiation by assuming that the exchange of energy between light and matter only occurred in discrete amounts he called &quot;quanta&quot;. In 1905, Albert Einstein published the theory of the photoelectric effect that firmly established the quantization of light itself. In 1913, Niels Bohr showed that atoms could only emit discrete amounts of energy, thus explaining the discrete lines seen in emission and absorption spectra. The understanding of the interaction between light and matter that followed from these developments not only formed the basis of quantum optics but also was crucial for the development of quantum mechanics as a whole. The ultimate culmination, the theory of quantum electrodynamics, explains all optics and electromagnetic processes in general as the result of the exchange of real and virtual photons. Quantum optics gained practical importance with the inventions of the maser in 1953 and of the laser in 1960.

Following the work of Paul Dirac in quantum field theory, George Sudarshan, Roy J. Glauber, and Leonard Mandel applied quantum theory to the electromagnetic field in the 1950s and 1960s to gain a more detailed understanding of photodetection and the statistics of light.

==Classical optics==

Classical optics is divided into two main branches: geometrical (or ray) optics and physical (or wave) optics. In geometrical optics, light is considered to travel in straight lines, while in physical optics, light is considered as an electromagnetic wave.

Geometrical optics can be viewed as an approximation of physical optics that applies when the wavelength of the light used is much smaller than the size of the optical elements in the system being modelled.

===Geometrical optics===

&quot;Geometrical optics&quot;, or &quot;ray optics&quot;, describes the propagation of light in terms of &quot;rays&quot; which travel in straight lines, and whose paths are governed by the laws of reflection and refraction at interfaces between different media. These laws were discovered empirically as far back as 984 AD and have been used in the design of optical components and instruments from then until the present day. They can be summarised as follows:

When a ray of light hits the boundary between two transparent materials, it is divided into a reflected and a refracted ray.

* The law of reflection says that the reflected ray lies in the plane of incidence, and the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
* The law of refraction says that the refracted ray lies in the plane of incidence, and the sine of the angle of incidence divided by the sine of the angle of refraction is a constant: formula_1 where is a constant for any two materials and a given colour of light. If the first material is air or vacuum, is the refractive index of the second material.

The laws of reflection and refraction can be derived from Fermat&#x27;s principle which states that &quot;the path taken between two points by a ray of light is the path that can be traversed in the least time.&quot;

====Approximations====
Geometric optics is often simplified by making the paraxial approximation, or &quot;small angle approximation&quot;. The mathematical behaviour then becomes linear, allowing optical components and systems to be described by simple matrices. This leads to the techniques of Gaussian optics and &quot;paraxial ray tracing&quot;, which are used to find basic properties of optical systems, such as approximate image and object positions and magnifications.

====Reflections====
Reflections can be divided into two types: specular reflection and diffuse reflection. Specular reflection describes the gloss of surfaces such as mirrors, which reflect light in a simple, predictable way. This allows for the production of reflected images that can be associated with an actual (real) or extrapolated (virtual) location in space. Diffuse reflection describes non-glossy materials, such as paper or rock. The reflections from these surfaces can only be described statistically, with the exact distribution of the reflected light depending on the microscopic structure of the material. Many diffuse reflectors are described or can be approximated by Lambert&#x27;s cosine law, which describes surfaces that have equal luminance when viewed from any angle. Glossy surfaces can give both specular and diffuse reflection.

In specular reflection, the direction of the reflected ray is determined by the angle the incident ray makes with the surface normal, a line perpendicular to the surface at the point where the ray hits. The incident and reflected rays and the normal lie in a single plane, and the angle between the reflected ray and the surface normal is the same as that between the incident ray and the normal. This is known as the Law of Reflection.

For flat mirrors, the law of reflection implies that images of objects are upright and the same distance behind the mirror as the objects are in front of the mirror. The image size is the same as the object size. The law also implies that mirror images are parity inverted, which we perceive as a left-right inversion. Images formed from reflection in two (or any even number of) mirrors are not parity inverted. Corner reflectors produce reflected rays that travel back in the direction from which the incident rays came. This is called retroreflection.

Mirrors with curved surfaces can be modelled by ray tracing and using the law of reflection at each point on the surface. For mirrors with parabolic surfaces, parallel rays incident on the mirror produce reflected rays that converge at a common focus. Other curved surfaces may also focus light, but with aberrations due to the diverging shape causing the focus to be smeared out in space. In particular, spherical mirrors exhibit spherical aberration. Curved mirrors can form images with a magnification greater than or less than one, and the magnification can be negative, indicating that the image is inverted. An upright image formed by reflection in a mirror is always virtual, while an inverted image is real and can be projected onto a screen.

====Refractions====
Refraction occurs when light travels through an area of space that has a changing index of refraction; this principle allows for lenses and the focusing of light. The simplest case of refraction occurs when there is an interface between a uniform medium with index of refraction and another medium with index of refraction . In such situations, Snell&#x27;s Law describes the resulting deflection of the light ray:

formula_2

where and are the angles between the normal (to the interface) and the incident and refracted waves, respectively.

The index of refraction of a medium is related to the speed, , of light in that medium by
formula_3
where is the speed of light in vacuum.

Snell&#x27;s Law can be used to predict the deflection of light rays as they pass through linear media as long as the indexes of refraction and the geometry of the media are known. For example, the propagation of light through a prism results in the light ray being deflected depending on the shape and orientation of the prism. In most materials, the index of refraction varies with the frequency of the light, known as dispersion. Taking this into account, Snell&#x27;s Law can be used to predict how a prism will disperse light into a spectrum. The discovery of this phenomenon when passing light through a prism is famously attributed to Isaac Newton.

Some media have an index of refraction which varies gradually with position and, therefore, light rays in the medium are curved. This effect is responsible for mirages seen on hot days: a change in index of refraction air with height causes light rays to bend, creating the appearance of specular reflections in the distance (as if on the surface of a pool of water). Optical materials with varying indexes of refraction are called gradient-index (GRIN) materials. Such materials are used to make gradient-index optics.

For light rays travelling from a material with a high index of refraction to a material with a low index of refraction, Snell&#x27;s law predicts that there is no when is large. In this case, no transmission occurs; all the light is reflected. This phenomenon is called total internal reflection and allows for fibre optics technology. As light travels down an optical fibre, it undergoes total internal reflection allowing for essentially no light to be lost over the length of the cable.

=====Lenses=====
A device that produces converging or diverging light rays due to refraction is known as a &quot;lens&quot;. Lenses are characterized by their focal length: a converging lens has positive focal length, while a diverging lens has negative focal length. Smaller focal length indicates that the lens has a stronger converging or diverging effect. The focal length of a simple lens in air is given by the lensmaker&#x27;s equation.

Ray tracing can be used to show how images are formed by a lens. For a thin lens in air, the location of the image is given by the simple equation

formula_4

where is the distance from the object to the lens, is the distance from the lens to the image, and is the focal length of the lens. In the sign convention used here, the object and image distances are positive if the object and image are on opposite sides of the lens.
Incoming parallel rays are focused by a converging lens onto a spot one focal length from the lens, on the far side of the lens. This is called the rear focal point of the lens. Rays from an object at a finite distance are focused further from the lens than the focal distance; the closer the object is to the lens, the further the image is from the lens.

With diverging lenses, incoming parallel rays diverge after going through the lens, in such a way that they seem to have originated at a spot one focal length in front of the lens. This is the lens&#x27;s front focal point. Rays from an object at a finite distance are associated with a virtual image that is closer to the lens than the focal point, and on the same side of the lens as the object. The closer the object is to the lens, the closer the virtual image is to the lens. As with mirrors, upright images produced by a single lens are virtual, while inverted images are real.

Lenses suffer from aberrations that distort images. &quot;Monochromatic aberrations&quot; occur because the geometry of the lens does not perfectly direct rays from each object point to a single point on the image, while chromatic aberration occurs because the index of refraction of the lens varies with the wavelength of the light.

===Physical optics===

In physical optics, light is considered to propagate as waves. This model predicts phenomena such as interference and diffraction, which are not explained by geometric optics. The speed of light waves in air is approximately 3.0×108 m/s (exactly 299,792,458 m/s in vacuum). The wavelength of visible light waves varies between 400 and 700 nm, but the term &quot;light&quot; is also often applied to infrared (0.7–300 μm) and ultraviolet radiation (10–400 nm).

The wave model can be used to make predictions about how an optical system will behave without requiring an explanation of what is &quot;waving&quot; in what medium. Until the middle of the 19th century, most physicists believed in an &quot;ethereal&quot; medium in which the light disturbance propagated. The existence of electromagnetic waves was predicted in 1865 by Maxwell&#x27;s equations. These waves propagate at the speed of light and have varying electric and magnetic fields which are orthogonal to one another, and also to the direction of propagation of the waves. Light waves are now generally treated as electromagnetic waves except when quantum mechanical effects have to be considered.

====Modelling and design of optical systems using physical optics====

Many simplified approximations are available for analysing and designing optical systems. Most of these use a single scalar quantity to represent the electric field of the light wave, rather than using a vector model with orthogonal electric and magnetic vectors.
The Huygens–Fresnel equation is one such model. This was derived empirically by Fresnel in 1815, based on Huygens&#x27; hypothesis that each point on a wavefront generates a secondary spherical wavefront, which Fresnel combined with the principle of superposition of waves. The Kirchhoff diffraction equation, which is derived using Maxwell&#x27;s equations, puts the Huygens-Fresnel equation on a firmer physical foundation. Examples of the application of Huygens–Fresnel principle can be found in the articles on diffraction and Fraunhofer diffraction.

More rigorous models, involving the modelling of both electric and magnetic fields of the light wave, are required when dealing with materials whose electric and magnetic properties affect the interaction of light with the material. For instance, the behaviour of a light wave interacting with a metal surface is quite different from what happens when it interacts with a dielectric material. A vector model must also be used to model polarised light.

Numerical modeling techniques such as the finite element method, the boundary element method and the transmission-line matrix method can be used to model the propagation of light in systems which cannot be solved analytically. Such models are computationally demanding and are normally only used to solve small-scale problems that require accuracy beyond that which can be achieved with analytical solutions.

All of the results from geometrical optics can be recovered using the techniques of Fourier optics which apply many of the same mathematical and analytical techniques used in acoustic engineering and signal processing.

Gaussian beam propagation is a simple paraxial physical optics model for the propagation of coherent radiation such as laser beams. This technique partially accounts for diffraction, allowing accurate calculations of the rate at which a laser beam expands with distance, and the minimum size to which the beam can be focused. Gaussian beam propagation thus bridges the gap between geometric and physical optics.

====Superposition and interference====
In the absence of nonlinear effects, the superposition principle can be used to predict the shape of interacting waveforms through the simple addition of the disturbances. This interaction of waves to produce a resulting pattern is generally termed &quot;interference&quot; and can result in a variety of outcomes. If two waves of the same wavelength and frequency are &quot;in phase&quot;, both the wave crests and wave troughs align. This results in constructive interference and an increase in the amplitude of the wave, which for light is associated with a brightening of the waveform in that location. Alternatively, if the two waves of the same wavelength and frequency are out of phase, then the wave crests will align with wave troughs and vice versa. This results in destructive interference and a decrease in the amplitude of the wave, which for light is associated with a dimming of the waveform at that location. See below for an illustration of this effect.


Since the Huygens–Fresnel principle states that every point of a wavefront is associated with the production of a new disturbance, it is possible for a wavefront to interfere with itself constructively or destructively at different locations producing bright and dark fringes in regular and predictable patterns. Interferometry is the science of measuring these patterns, usually as a means of making precise determinations of distances or angular resolutions. The Michelson interferometer was a famous instrument which used interference effects to accurately measure the speed of light.

The appearance of thin films and coatings is directly affected by interference effects. Antireflective coatings use destructive interference to reduce the reflectivity of the surfaces they coat, and can be used to minimise glare and unwanted reflections. The simplest case is a single layer with a thickness of one-fourth the wavelength of incident light. The reflected wave from the top of the film and the reflected wave from the film/material interface are then exactly 180° out of phase, causing destructive interference. The waves are only exactly out of phase for one wavelength, which would typically be chosen to be near the centre of the visible spectrum, around 550 nm. More complex designs using multiple layers can achieve low reflectivity over a broad band, or extremely low reflectivity at a single wavelength.

Constructive interference in thin films can create a strong reflection of light in a range of wavelengths, which can be narrow or broad depending on the design of the coating. These films are used to make dielectric mirrors, interference filters, heat reflectors, and filters for colour separation in colour television cameras. This interference effect is also what causes the colourful rainbow patterns seen in oil slicks.

====Diffraction and optical resolution====

Diffraction is the process by which light interference is most commonly observed. The effect was first described in 1665 by Francesco Maria Grimaldi, who also coined the term from the Latin . Later that century, Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton also described phenomena now known to be diffraction in Newton&#x27;s rings while James Gregory recorded his observations of diffraction patterns from bird feathers.

The first physical optics model of diffraction that relied on the Huygens–Fresnel principle was developed in 1803 by Thomas Young in his interference experiments with the interference patterns of two closely spaced slits. Young showed that his results could only be explained if the two slits acted as two unique sources of waves rather than corpuscles. In 1815 and 1818, Augustin-Jean Fresnel firmly established the mathematics of how wave interference can account for diffraction.

The simplest physical models of diffraction use equations that describe the angular separation of light and dark fringes due to light of a particular wavelength (). In general, the equation takes the form
formula_5 where is the separation between two wavefront sources (in the case of Young&#x27;s experiments, it was two slits), is the angular separation between the central fringe and the order fringe, where the central maximum is .

This equation is modified slightly to take into account a variety of situations such as diffraction through a single gap, diffraction through multiple slits, or diffraction through a diffraction grating that contains a large number of slits at equal spacing. More complicated models of diffraction require working with the mathematics of Fresnel or Fraunhofer diffraction.

X-ray diffraction makes use of the fact that atoms in a crystal have regular spacing at distances that are on the order of one angstrom. To see diffraction patterns, x-rays with similar wavelengths to that spacing are passed through the crystal. Since crystals are three-dimensional objects rather than two-dimensional gratings, the associated diffraction pattern varies in two directions according to Bragg reflection, with the associated bright spots occurring in unique patterns and being twice the spacing between atoms.

Diffraction effects limit the ability of an optical detector to optically resolve separate light sources. In general, light that is passing through an aperture will experience diffraction and the best images that can be created (as described in diffraction-limited optics) appear as a central spot with surrounding bright rings, separated by dark nulls; this pattern is known as an Airy pattern, and the central bright lobe as an Airy disk. The size of such a disk is given by formula_6 where is the angular resolution, is the wavelength of the light, and is the diameter of the lens aperture. If the angular separation of the two points is significantly less than the Airy disk angular radius, then the two points cannot be resolved in the image, but if their angular separation is much greater than this, distinct images of the two points are formed and they can therefore be resolved. Rayleigh defined the somewhat arbitrary &quot;Rayleigh criterion&quot; that two points whose angular separation is equal to the Airy disk radius (measured to first null, that is, to the first place where no light is seen) can be considered to be resolved. It can be seen that the greater the diameter of the lens or its aperture, the finer the resolution. Interferometry, with its ability to mimic extremely large baseline apertures, allows for the greatest angular resolution possible.

For astronomical imaging, the atmosphere prevents optimal resolution from being achieved in the visible spectrum due to the atmospheric scattering and dispersion which cause stars to twinkle. Astronomers refer to this effect as the quality of astronomical seeing. Techniques known as adaptive optics have been used to eliminate the atmospheric disruption of images and achieve results that approach the diffraction limit.

====Dispersion and scattering====


Refractive processes take place in the physical optics limit, where the wavelength of light is similar to other distances, as a kind of scattering. The simplest type of scattering is Thomson scattering which occurs when electromagnetic waves are deflected by single particles. In the limit of Thomson scattering, in which the wavelike nature of light is evident, light is dispersed independent of the frequency, in contrast to Compton scattering which is frequency-dependent and strictly a quantum mechanical process, involving the nature of light as particles. In a statistical sense, elastic scattering of light by numerous particles much smaller than the wavelength of the light is a process known as Rayleigh scattering while the similar process for scattering by particles that are similar or larger in wavelength is known as Mie scattering with the Tyndall effect being a commonly observed result. A small proportion of light scattering from atoms or molecules may undergo Raman scattering, wherein the frequency changes due to excitation of the atoms and molecules. Brillouin scattering occurs when the frequency of light changes due to local changes with time and movements of a dense material.

Dispersion occurs when different frequencies of light have different phase velocities, due either to material properties (&quot;material dispersion&quot;) or to the geometry of an optical waveguide (&quot;waveguide dispersion&quot;). The most familiar form of dispersion is a decrease in index of refraction with increasing wavelength, which is seen in most transparent materials. This is called &quot;normal dispersion&quot;. It occurs in all dielectric materials, in wavelength ranges where the material does not absorb light. In wavelength ranges where a medium has significant absorption, the index of refraction can increase with wavelength. This is called &quot;anomalous dispersion&quot;.

The separation of colours by a prism is an example of normal dispersion. At the surfaces of the prism, Snell&#x27;s law predicts that light incident at an angle to the normal will be refracted at an angle . Thus, blue light, with its higher refractive index, is bent more strongly than red light, resulting in the well-known rainbow pattern.

Material dispersion is often characterised by the Abbe number, which gives a simple measure of dispersion based on the index of refraction at three specific wavelengths. Waveguide dispersion is dependent on the propagation constant. Both kinds of dispersion cause changes in the group characteristics of the wave, the features of the wave packet that change with the same frequency as the amplitude of the electromagnetic wave. &quot;Group velocity dispersion&quot; manifests as a spreading-out of the signal &quot;envelope&quot; of the radiation and can be quantified with a group dispersion delay parameter:

formula_7

where is the group velocity. For a uniform medium, the group velocity is

formula_8

where is the index of refraction and is the speed of light in a vacuum. This gives a simpler form for the dispersion delay parameter:

formula_9

If is less than zero, the medium is said to have &quot;positive dispersion&quot; or normal dispersion. If is greater than zero, the medium has &quot;negative dispersion&quot;. If a light pulse is propagated through a normally dispersive medium, the result is the higher frequency components slow down more than the lower frequency components. The pulse therefore becomes &quot;positively chirped&quot;, or &quot;up-chirped&quot;, increasing in frequency with time. This causes the spectrum coming out of a prism to appear with red light the least refracted and blue/violet light the most refracted. Conversely, if a pulse travels through an anomalously (negatively) dispersive medium, high-frequency components travel faster than the lower ones, and the pulse becomes &quot;negatively chirped&quot;, or &quot;down-chirped&quot;, decreasing in frequency with time.

The result of group velocity dispersion, whether negative or positive, is ultimately temporal spreading of the pulse. This makes dispersion management extremely important in optical communications systems based on optical fibres, since if dispersion is too high, a group of pulses representing information will each spread in time and merge, making it impossible to extract the signal.

====Polarisation ====
Polarisation is a general property of waves that describes the orientation of their oscillations. For transverse waves such as many electromagnetic waves, it describes the orientation of the oscillations in the plane perpendicular to the wave&#x27;s direction of travel. The oscillations may be oriented in a single direction (linear polarisation), or the oscillation direction may rotate as the wave travels (circular or elliptical polarisation). Circularly polarised waves can rotate rightward or leftward in the direction of travel, and which of those two rotations is present in a wave is called the wave&#x27;s chirality.

The typical way to consider polarisation is to keep track of the orientation of the electric field vector as the electromagnetic wave propagates. The electric field vector of a plane wave may be arbitrarily divided into two perpendicular components labeled and (with indicating the direction of travel). The shape traced out in the x-y plane by the electric field vector is a Lissajous figure that describes the &quot;polarisation state&quot;. The following figures show some examples of the evolution of the electric field vector (blue), with time (the vertical axes), at a particular point in space, along with its and components (red/left and green/right), and the path traced by the vector in the plane (purple): The same evolution would occur when looking at the electric field at a particular time while evolving the point in space, along the direction opposite to propagation.





In the leftmost figure above, the and components of the light wave are in phase. In this case, the ratio of their strengths is constant, so the direction of the electric vector (the vector sum of these two components) is constant. Since the tip of the vector traces out a single line in the plane, this special case is called linear polarisation. The direction of this line depends on the relative amplitudes of the two components.

In the middle figure, the two orthogonal components have the same amplitudes and are 90° out of phase. In this case, one component is zero when the other component is at maximum or minimum amplitude. There are two possible phase relationships that satisfy this requirement: the component can be 90° ahead of the component or it can be 90° behind the component. In this special case, the electric vector traces out a circle in the plane, so this polarisation is called circular polarisation. The rotation direction in the circle depends on which of the two-phase relationships exists and corresponds to &quot;right-hand circular polarisation&quot; and &quot;left-hand circular polarisation&quot;.

In all other cases, where the two components either do not have the same amplitudes and/or their phase difference is neither zero nor a multiple of 90°, the polarisation is called elliptical polarisation because the electric vector traces out an ellipse in the plane (the &quot;polarisation ellipse&quot;). This is shown in the above figure on the right. Detailed mathematics of polarisation is done using Jones calculus and is characterised by the Stokes parameters.

=====Changing polarisation=====
Media that have different indexes of refraction for different polarisation modes are called &quot;birefringent&quot;. Well known manifestations of this effect appear in optical wave plates/retarders (linear modes) and in Faraday rotation/optical rotation (circular modes). If the path length in the birefringent medium is sufficient, plane waves will exit the material with a significantly different propagation direction, due to refraction. For example, this is the case with macroscopic crystals of calcite, which present the viewer with two offset, orthogonally polarised images of whatever is viewed through them. It was this effect that provided the first discovery of polarisation, by Erasmus Bartholinus in 1669. In addition, the phase shift, and thus the change in polarisation state, is usually frequency dependent, which, in combination with dichroism, often gives rise to bright colours and rainbow-like effects. In mineralogy, such properties, known as pleochroism, are frequently exploited for the purpose of identifying minerals using polarisation microscopes. Additionally, many plastics that are not normally birefringent will become so when subject to mechanical stress, a phenomenon which is the basis of photoelasticity. Non-birefringent methods, to rotate the linear polarisation of light beams, include the use of prismatic polarisation rotators which use total internal reflection in a prism set designed for efficient collinear transmission.

Media that reduce the amplitude of certain polarisation modes are called &quot;dichroic&quot;, with devices that block nearly all of the radiation in one mode known as &quot;polarising filters&quot; or simply &quot;polarisers&quot;. Malus&#x27; law, which is named after Étienne-Louis Malus, says that when a perfect polariser is placed in a linear polarised beam of light, the intensity, , of the light that passes through is given by

formula_10
where is the initial intensity, and is the angle between the light&#x27;s initial polarisation direction and the axis of the polariser.

A beam of unpolarised light can be thought of as containing a uniform mixture of linear polarisations at all possible angles. Since the average value of is 1/2, the transmission coefficient becomes

formula_11

In practice, some light is lost in the polariser and the actual transmission of unpolarised light will be somewhat lower than this, around 38% for Polaroid-type polarisers but considerably higher (&gt;49.9%) for some birefringent prism types.

In addition to birefringence and dichroism in extended media, polarisation effects can also occur at the (reflective) interface between two materials of different refractive index. These effects are treated by the Fresnel equations. Part of the wave is transmitted and part is reflected, with the ratio depending on the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction. In this way, physical optics recovers Brewster&#x27;s angle. When light reflects from a thin film on a surface, interference between the reflections from the film&#x27;s surfaces can produce polarisation in the reflected and transmitted light.

=====Natural light=====

Most sources of electromagnetic radiation contain a large number of atoms or molecules that emit light. The orientation of the electric fields produced by these emitters may not be correlated, in which case the light is said to be &quot;unpolarised&quot;. If there is partial correlation between the emitters, the light is &quot;partially polarised&quot;. If the polarisation is consistent across the spectrum of the source, partially polarised light can be described as a superposition of a completely unpolarised component, and a completely polarised one. One may then describe the light in terms of the degree of polarisation, and the parameters of the polarisation ellipse.

Light reflected by shiny transparent materials is partly or fully polarised, except when the light is normal (perpendicular) to the surface. It was this effect that allowed the mathematician Étienne-Louis Malus to make the measurements that allowed for his development of the first mathematical models for polarised light. Polarisation occurs when light is scattered in the atmosphere. The scattered light produces the brightness and colour in clear skies. This partial polarisation of scattered light can be taken advantage of using polarising filters to darken the sky in photographs. Optical polarisation is principally of importance in chemistry due to circular dichroism and optical rotation (&quot;circular birefringence&quot;) exhibited by optically active (chiral) molecules.

==Modern optics==
&quot;Modern optics&quot; encompasses the areas of optical science and engineering that became popular in the 20th century. These areas of optical science typically relate to the electromagnetic or quantum properties of light but do include other topics. A major subfield of modern optics, quantum optics, deals with specifically quantum mechanical properties of light. Quantum optics is not just theoretical; some modern devices, such as lasers, have principles of operation that depend on quantum mechanics. Light detectors, such as photomultipliers and channeltrons, respond to individual photons. Electronic image sensors, such as CCDs, exhibit shot noise corresponding to the statistics of individual photon events. Light-emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells, too, cannot be understood without quantum mechanics. In the study of these devices, quantum optics often overlaps with quantum electronics.

Specialty areas of optics research include the study of how light interacts with specific materials as in crystal optics and metamaterials. Other research focuses on the phenomenology of electromagnetic waves as in singular optics, non-imaging optics, non-linear optics, statistical optics, and radiometry. Additionally, computer engineers have taken an interest in integrated optics, machine vision, and photonic computing as possible components of the &quot;next generation&quot; of computers.

Today, the pure science of optics is called optical science or optical physics to distinguish it from applied optical sciences, which are referred to as optical engineering. Prominent subfields of optical engineering include illumination engineering, photonics, and optoelectronics with practical applications like lens design, fabrication and testing of optical components, and image processing. Some of these fields overlap, with nebulous boundaries between the subjects&#x27; terms that mean slightly different things in different parts of the world and in different areas of industry. A professional community of researchers in nonlinear optics has developed in the last several decades due to advances in laser technology.

===Lasers===
A laser is a device that emits light, a kind of electromagnetic radiation, through a process called &quot;stimulated emission&quot;. The term &quot;laser&quot; is an acronym for . Laser light is usually spatially coherent, which means that the light either is emitted in a narrow, low-divergence beam, or can be converted into one with the help of optical components such as lenses. Because the microwave equivalent of the laser, the &quot;maser&quot;, was developed first, devices that emit microwave and radio frequencies are usually called &quot;masers&quot;.

The first working laser was demonstrated on 16 May 1960 by Theodore Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratories. When first invented, they were called &quot;a solution looking for a problem&quot;. Since then, lasers have become a multibillion-dollar industry, finding utility in thousands of highly varied applications. The first application of lasers visible in the daily lives of the general population was the supermarket barcode scanner, introduced in 1974. The laserdisc player, introduced in 1978, was the first successful consumer product to include a laser, but the compact disc player was the first laser-equipped device to become truly common in consumers&#x27; homes, beginning in 1982. These optical storage devices use a semiconductor laser less than a millimetre wide to scan the surface of the disc for data retrieval. Fibre-optic communication relies on lasers to transmit large amounts of information at the speed of light. Other common applications of lasers include laser printers and laser pointers. Lasers are used in medicine in areas such as bloodless surgery, laser eye surgery, and laser capture microdissection and in military applications such as missile defence systems, electro-optical countermeasures (EOCM), and lidar. Lasers are also used in holograms, bubblegrams, laser light shows, and laser hair removal.

===Kapitsa–Dirac effect===
The Kapitsa–Dirac effect causes beams of particles to diffract as the result of meeting a standing wave of light. Light can be used to position matter using various phenomena (see optical tweezers).

==Applications==
Optics is part of everyday life. The ubiquity of visual systems in biology indicates the central role optics plays as the science of one of the five senses. Many people benefit from eyeglasses or contact lenses, and optics are integral to the functioning of many consumer goods including cameras. Rainbows and mirages are examples of optical phenomena. Optical communication provides the backbone for both the Internet and modern telephony.

===Human eye===

The human eye functions by focusing light onto a layer of photoreceptor cells called the retina, which forms the inner lining of the back of the eye. The focusing is accomplished by a series of transparent media. Light entering the eye passes first through the cornea, which provides much of the eye&#x27;s optical power. The light then continues through the fluid just behind the cornea—the anterior chamber, then passes through the pupil. The light then passes through the lens, which focuses the light further and allows adjustment of focus. The light then passes through the main body of fluid in the eye—the vitreous humour, and reaches the retina. The cells in the retina line the back of the eye, except for where the optic nerve exits; this results in a blind spot.

There are two types of photoreceptor cells, rods and cones, which are sensitive to different aspects of light. Rod cells are sensitive to the intensity of light over a wide frequency range, thus are responsible for black-and-white vision. Rod cells are not present on the fovea, the area of the retina responsible for central vision, and are not as responsive as cone cells to spatial and temporal changes in light. There are, however, twenty times more rod cells than cone cells in the retina because the rod cells are present across a wider area. Because of their wider distribution, rods are responsible for peripheral vision.

In contrast, cone cells are less sensitive to the overall intensity of light, but come in three varieties that are sensitive to different frequency-ranges and thus are used in the perception of colour and photopic vision. Cone cells are highly concentrated in the fovea and have a high visual acuity meaning that they are better at spatial resolution than rod cells. Since cone cells are not as sensitive to dim light as rod cells, most night vision is limited to rod cells. Likewise, since cone cells are in the fovea, central vision (including the vision needed to do most reading, fine detail work such as sewing, or careful examination of objects) is done by cone cells.

Ciliary muscles around the lens allow the eye&#x27;s focus to be adjusted. This process is known as accommodation. The near point and far point define the nearest and farthest distances from the eye at which an object can be brought into sharp focus. For a person with normal vision, the far point is located at infinity. The near point&#x27;s location depends on how much the muscles can increase the curvature of the lens, and how inflexible the lens has become with age. Optometrists, ophthalmologists, and opticians usually consider an appropriate near point to be closer than normal reading distance—approximately 25 cm.

Defects in vision can be explained using optical principles. As people age, the lens becomes less flexible and the near point recedes from the eye, a condition known as presbyopia. Similarly, people suffering from hyperopia cannot decrease the focal length of their lens enough to allow for nearby objects to be imaged on their retina. Conversely, people who cannot increase the focal length of their lens enough to allow for distant objects to be imaged on the retina suffer from myopia and have a far point that is considerably closer than infinity. A condition known as astigmatism results when the cornea is not spherical but instead is more curved in one direction. This causes horizontally extended objects to be focused on different parts of the retina than vertically extended objects, and results in distorted images.

All of these conditions can be corrected using corrective lenses. For presbyopia and hyperopia, a converging lens provides the extra curvature necessary to bring the near point closer to the eye while for myopia a diverging lens provides the curvature necessary to send the far point to infinity. Astigmatism is corrected with a cylindrical surface lens that curves more strongly in one direction than in another, compensating for the non-uniformity of the cornea.

The optical power of corrective lenses is measured in diopters, a value equal to the reciprocal of the focal length measured in metres; with a positive focal length corresponding to a converging lens and a negative focal length corresponding to a diverging lens. For lenses that correct for astigmatism as well, three numbers are given: one for the spherical power, one for the cylindrical power, and one for the angle of orientation of the astigmatism.

====Visual effects====

Optical illusions (also called visual illusions) are characterized by visually perceived images that differ from objective reality. The information gathered by the eye is processed in the brain to give a percept that differs from the object being imaged. Optical illusions can be the result of a variety of phenomena including physical effects that create images that are different from the objects that make them, the physiological effects on the eyes and brain of excessive stimulation (e.g. brightness, tilt, colour, movement), and cognitive illusions where the eye and brain make unconscious inferences.

Cognitive illusions include some which result from the unconscious misapplication of certain optical principles. For example, the Ames room, Hering, Müller-Lyer, Orbison, Ponzo, Sander, and Wundt illusions all rely on the suggestion of the appearance of distance by using converging and diverging lines, in the same way that parallel light rays (or indeed any set of parallel lines) appear to converge at a vanishing point at infinity in two-dimensionally rendered images with artistic perspective. This suggestion is also responsible for the famous moon illusion where the moon, despite having essentially the same angular size, appears much larger near the horizon than it does at zenith. This illusion so confounded Ptolemy that he incorrectly attributed it to atmospheric refraction when he described it in his treatise, &quot;Optics&quot;.

Another type of optical illusion exploits broken patterns to trick the mind into perceiving symmetries or asymmetries that are not present. Examples include the café wall, Ehrenstein, Fraser spiral, Poggendorff, and Zöllner illusions. Related, but not strictly illusions, are patterns that occur due to the superimposition of periodic structures. For example, transparent tissues with a grid structure produce shapes known as moiré patterns, while the superimposition of periodic transparent patterns comprising parallel opaque lines or curves produces line moiré patterns.

====Optical instruments====

Single lenses have a variety of applications including photographic lenses, corrective lenses, and magnifying glasses while single mirrors are used in parabolic reflectors and rear-view mirrors. Combining a number of mirrors, prisms, and lenses produces compound optical instruments which have practical uses. For example, a periscope is simply two plane mirrors aligned to allow for viewing around obstructions. The most famous compound optical instruments in science are the microscope and the telescope which were both invented by the Dutch in the late 16th century.

Microscopes were first developed with just two lenses: an objective lens and an eyepiece. The objective lens is essentially a magnifying glass and was designed with a very small focal length while the eyepiece generally has a longer focal length. This has the effect of producing magnified images of close objects. Generally, an additional source of illumination is used since magnified images are dimmer due to the conservation of energy and the spreading of light rays over a larger surface area. Modern microscopes, known as &quot;compound microscopes&quot; have many lenses in them (typically four) to optimize the functionality and enhance image stability. A slightly different variety of microscope, the comparison microscope, looks at side-by-side images to produce a stereoscopic binocular view that appears three dimensional when used by humans.

The first telescopes, called refracting telescopes, were also developed with a single objective and eyepiece lens. In contrast to the microscope, the objective lens of the telescope was designed with a large focal length to avoid optical aberrations. The objective focuses an image of a distant object at its focal point which is adjusted to be at the focal point of an eyepiece of a much smaller focal length. The main goal of a telescope is not necessarily magnification, but rather the collection of light which is determined by the physical size of the objective lens. Thus, telescopes are normally indicated by the diameters of their objectives rather than by the magnification which can be changed by switching eyepieces. Because the magnification of a telescope is equal to the focal length of the objective divided by the focal length of the eyepiece, smaller focal-length eyepieces cause greater magnification.

Since crafting large lenses is much more difficult than crafting large mirrors, most modern telescopes are &quot;reflecting telescopes&quot;, that is, telescopes that use a primary mirror rather than an objective lens. The same general optical considerations apply to reflecting telescopes that applied to refracting telescopes, namely, the larger the primary mirror, the more light collected, and the magnification is still equal to the focal length of the primary mirror divided by the focal length of the eyepiece. Professional telescopes generally do not have eyepieces and instead place an instrument (often a charge-coupled device) at the focal point instead.

===Photography===

The optics of photography involves both lenses and the medium in which the electromagnetic radiation is recorded, whether it be a plate, film, or charge-coupled device. Photographers must consider the reciprocity of the camera and the shot which is summarized by the relation

:Exposure ∝ ApertureArea × ExposureTime × SceneLuminance

In other words, the smaller the aperture (giving greater depth of focus), the less light coming in, so the length of time has to be increased (leading to possible blurriness if motion occurs). An example of the use of the law of reciprocity is the Sunny 16 rule which gives a rough estimate for the settings needed to estimate the proper exposure in daylight.

A camera&#x27;s aperture is measured by a unitless number called the f-number or f-stop, #, often notated as formula_12, and given by
:formula_13
where formula_14 is the focal length, and formula_15 is the diameter of the entrance pupil. By convention, &quot;#&quot; is treated as a single symbol, and specific values of # are written by replacing the number sign with the value. The two ways to increase the f-stop are to either decrease the diameter of the entrance pupil or change to a longer focal length (in the case of a zoom lens, this can be done by simply adjusting the lens). Higher f-numbers also have a larger depth of field due to the lens approaching the limit of a pinhole camera which is able to focus all images perfectly, regardless of distance, but requires very long exposure times.

The field of view that the lens will provide changes with the focal length of the lens. There are three basic classifications based on the relationship to the diagonal size of the film or sensor size of the camera to the focal length of the lens:
* Normal lens: angle of view of about 50° (called &quot;normal&quot; because this angle considered roughly equivalent to human vision) and a focal length approximately equal to the diagonal of the film or sensor. 
* Wide-angle lens: angle of view wider than 60° and focal length shorter than a normal lens.
* Long focus lens: angle of view narrower than a normal lens. This is any lens with a focal length longer than the diagonal measure of the film or sensor. The most common type of long focus lens is the telephoto lens, a design that uses a special &quot;telephoto group&quot; to be physically shorter than its focal length.

Modern zoom lenses may have some or all of these attributes.

The absolute value for the exposure time required depends on how sensitive to light the medium being used is (measured by the film speed, or, for digital media, by the quantum efficiency). Early photography used media that had very low light sensitivity, and so exposure times had to be long even for very bright shots. As technology has improved, so has the sensitivity through film cameras and digital cameras.

Other results from physical and geometrical optics apply to camera optics. For example, the maximum resolution capability of a particular camera set-up is determined by the diffraction limit associated with the pupil size and given, roughly, by the Rayleigh criterion.

===Atmospheric optics===


The unique optical properties of the atmosphere cause a wide range of spectacular optical phenomena. The blue colour of the sky is a direct result of Rayleigh scattering which redirects higher frequency (blue) sunlight back into the field of view of the observer. Because blue light is scattered more easily than red light, the sun takes on a reddish hue when it is observed through a thick atmosphere, as during a sunrise or sunset. Additional particulate matter in the sky can scatter different colours at different angles creating colourful glowing skies at dusk and dawn. Scattering off of ice crystals and other particles in the atmosphere are responsible for halos, afterglows, coronas, rays of sunlight, and sun dogs. The variation in these kinds of phenomena is due to different particle sizes and geometries.

Mirages are optical phenomena in which light rays are bent due to thermal variations in the refraction index of air, producing displaced or heavily distorted images of distant objects. Other dramatic optical phenomena associated with this include the Novaya Zemlya effect where the sun appears to rise earlier than predicted with a distorted shape. A spectacular form of refraction occurs with a temperature inversion called the Fata Morgana where objects on the horizon or even beyond the horizon, such as islands, cliffs, ships or icebergs, appear elongated and elevated, like &quot;fairy tale castles&quot;.

Rainbows are the result of a combination of internal reflection and dispersive refraction of light in raindrops. A single reflection off the backs of an array of raindrops produces a rainbow with an angular size on the sky that ranges from 40° to 42° with red on the outside. Double rainbows are produced by two internal reflections with angular size of 50.5° to 54° with violet on the outside. Because rainbows are seen with the sun 180° away from the centre of the rainbow, rainbows are more prominent the closer the sun is to the horizon.

==See also==

*Ion optics
*Important publications in optics
*List of optical topics
*List of textbooks in electromagnetism

==References==
===Works cited===
* 
===Further reading===
* 
* 

==External links==


;Relevant discussions
;Textbooks and tutorials
* Light and Matter – an open-source textbook, containing a treatment of optics in ch. 28–32
* Optics2001 – Optics library and community
* Fundamental Optics – Melles Griot Technical Guide
* Physics of Light and Optics – Brigham Young University Undergraduate Book
* Optics for PV – a step-by-step introduction to classical optics

;Further reading
* Optics and photonics: Physics enhancing our lives by Institute of Physics publications

;Societies
* European Optical Society – link
* The Optical Society (OSA) – link
* SPIE – link

* European Photonics Industry Consortium – link</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="0" end="6" title="Optics" label="Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="24" end="31" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="77" end="82" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="116" end="122" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751850" start="147" end="158" title="optical instruments" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="171" end="177" title="Photodetector" label="detect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="224" end="231" title="visible light" label="visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="233" end="244" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="250" end="258" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="285" end="310" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="365" end="370" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="373" end="382" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="389" end="399" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q377930" start="487" end="512" title="Classical electromagnetism" label="classical electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467980" start="716" end="732" title="geometric optics" label="geometric optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q633620" start="766" end="770" title="Ray (optics)" label="rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q942347" start="859" end="874" title="Physical optics" label="Physical optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="930" end="934" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="951" end="962" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="967" end="979" title="Interference (optics)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q193068" start="1308" end="1346" title="wave–particle duality" label="wave-like and particle-like properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1386" end="1403" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="1525" end="1531" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q735602" start="1540" end="1554" title="Quantum optics" label="Quantum optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1705" end="1714" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="1724" end="1735" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="1744" end="1755" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="1761" end="1769" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="1784" end="1797" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q618211" start="1802" end="1811" title="optometry" label="optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="1962" end="1968" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="1971" end="1977" title="Lens (optics)" label="lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q35273" start="1979" end="1989" title="optical telescope" label="telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="1991" end="2001" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="2004" end="2009" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="2016" end="2028" title="fibre optics" label="fibre optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2095" end="2108" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2117" end="2128" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="2178" end="2185" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2193" end="2199" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2236" end="2241" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="2300" end="2306" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="2333" end="2340" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205286" start="2361" end="2372" title="Nimrud lens" label="Nimrud lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2378" end="2391" title="ancient Roman" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2397" end="2403" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="2557" end="2562" title="Greek philosophy" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="2567" end="2573" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q467980" start="2611" end="2629" title="geometrical optics" label="geometrical optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="2637" end="2654" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman world"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2699" end="2712" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="2814" end="2833" title="intromission theory" label="intromission theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372632" start="2842" end="2857" title="emission theory (vision)" label="emission theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="3031" end="3041" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43216" start="3043" end="3051" title="Epicurus" label="Epicurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3053" end="3062" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="3241" end="3246" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372632" start="3269" end="3284" title="Emission theory (vision)" label="emission theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="3300" end="3317" title="visual perception" label="visual perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="3388" end="3394" title="parity (physics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="3424" end="3431" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="3465" end="3471" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3525" end="3531" title="Euclid#Other works" label="Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3564" end="3572" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="3712" end="3723" title="perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="3753" end="3763" title="refraction" label="refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="4033" end="4040" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4064" end="4070" title="Ptolemy#Optics" label="Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208391" start="4460" end="4479" title="angle of refraction" label="angle of refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="4574" end="4582" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="4763" end="4772" title="chirality" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4800" end="4811" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="4886" end="4898" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="4933" end="4941" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5112" end="5118" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335292" start="5134" end="5142" title="Ibn Sahl (mathematician)" label="Ibn Sahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506584" start="5336" end="5349" title="curved mirror" label="curved mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="5379" end="5403" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham)"/>
<link wikidata="Q264562" start="5420" end="5434" title="Book of Optics" label="Book of Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q710858" start="6133" end="6139" title="Witelo" label="Witelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q256541" start="6266" end="6284" title="Robert Grosseteste" label="Robert Grosseteste"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="6386" end="6398" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="6411" end="6422" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="6426" end="6435" title="cosmogony" label="cosmogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="6449" end="6457" title="etiology" label="etiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="6485" end="6493" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="6596" end="6607" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="6736" end="6744" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="6746" end="6754" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q468641" start="6795" end="6818" title="Constantine the African" label="Constantine the African"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="6868" end="6884" title="magnifying glass" label="magnifying glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q912313" start="7711" end="7729" title="optical microscope" label="optical microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q216778" start="7751" end="7771" title="refracting telescope" label="refracting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="7885" end="7900" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q313742" start="8021" end="8035" title="pinhole camera" label="pinhole camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="8154" end="8159" title="Lunar eclipse" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="8164" end="8177" title="solar eclipse" label="solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="8196" end="8204" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="8259" end="8265" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q216778" start="8613" end="8632" title="Keplerian telescope" label="Keplerian telescope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8753" end="8762" title="The World (Descartes)#Cartesian theory on light" label="treatises"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="8786" end="8800" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="9053" end="9065" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q456954" start="9105" end="9130" title="corpuscle theory of light" label="corpuscle theory of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q165896" start="9245" end="9250" title="Prism (optics)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="9261" end="9279" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="9356" end="9368" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q74263" start="9538" end="9545" title="Opticks" label="Opticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="9787" end="9799" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Thomas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q187241" start="9804" end="9825" title="Augustin-Jean Fresnel" label="Augustin-Jean Fresnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="9855" end="9867" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q573947" start="9947" end="9969" title="Young&amp;#x27;s interference experiment" label="double slit experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="10001" end="10024" title="superposition principle" label="superposition principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="10253" end="10275" title="electromagnetic theory" label="electromagnetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="10279" end="10298" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="10371" end="10381" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="10401" end="10420" title="blackbody radiation" label="blackbody radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="10559" end="10574" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="10603" end="10623" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="10691" end="10701" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="10807" end="10815" title="emission spectrum" label="emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="10820" end="10838" title="absorption spectrum" label="absorption spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358974" start="11013" end="11024" title="history of quantum mechanics" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="11098" end="11121" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849940" start="11226" end="11233" title="virtual particles" label="virtual"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="11313" end="11318" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="11376" end="11386" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="11390" end="11410" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384866" start="11412" end="11428" title="George Sudarshan" label="George Sudarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64188" start="11430" end="11444" title="Roy J. Glauber" label="Roy J. Glauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q462083" start="11450" end="11464" title="Leonard Mandel" label="Leonard Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="11604" end="11614" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="12213" end="12224" title="Wave propagation" label="propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="13187" end="13203" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q331041" start="13287" end="13310" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071734" start="13521" end="13543" title="paraxial approximation" label="paraxial approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527843" start="13743" end="13758" title="Gaussian optics" label="Gaussian optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298343" start="13778" end="13789" title="ray tracing (physics)" label="ray tracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q478798" start="13877" end="13882" title="image" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q675287" start="13908" end="13921" title="magnification" label="magnification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="13988" end="14007" title="specular reflection" label="specular reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154504" start="14012" end="14030" title="diffuse reflection" label="diffuse reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142240" start="14241" end="14245" title="real image" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q44415" start="14264" end="14271" title="virtual image" label="virtual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190146" start="14610" end="14635" title="Lambert&amp;#x27;s cosine law" label="Lambert&amp;#x27;s cosine law"/>
<link wikidata="Q355386" start="14678" end="14687" title="luminance" label="luminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="14898" end="14912" title="surface normal" label="surface normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="15198" end="15215" title="Law of Reflection" label="Law of Reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q964338" start="15222" end="15234" title="Plane mirror" label="flat mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703478" start="15457" end="15469" title="mirror image" label="mirror image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249999" start="15631" end="15647" title="Corner reflector" label="Corner reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835" start="15756" end="15771" title="retroreflector" label="retroreflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="15900" end="15931" title="Parabolic reflector" label="mirrors with parabolic surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="16019" end="16024" title="focus (optics)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913798" start="16205" end="16225" title="spherical aberration" label="spherical aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q901882" start="16765" end="16774" title="Interface (chemistry)" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q208391" start="16891" end="16907" title="Snell&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Snell&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="17202" end="17226" title="speed of light in vacuum" label="speed of light in vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="17650" end="17660" title="dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q308762" start="18046" end="18052" title="mirage" label="mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541210" start="18383" end="18404" title="gradient-index optics" label="gradient-index optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q234943" start="18677" end="18702" title="total internal reflection" label="total internal reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q193540" start="19057" end="19069" title="focal length" label="focal length"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="19315" end="19340" title="lensmaker&amp;#x27;s equation" label="lensmaker&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q283724" start="19414" end="19423" title="thin lens" label="thin lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829907" start="19641" end="19656" title="sign convention" label="sign convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q639" start="20732" end="20743" title="optical aberration" label="aberrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="20934" end="20954" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="21251" end="21265" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="21275" end="21278" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="21336" end="21342" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="21349" end="21359" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21902" end="21926" title="Electromagnetic waves#Derivation from electromagnetic theory" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22185" end="22211" title="Optics#Modern optics" label="quantum mechanical effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q181175" start="22424" end="22430" title="Scalar (physics)" label="scalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="22511" end="22517" title="Euclidean vector" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q188321" start="22575" end="22590" title="Huygens–Fresnel principle" label="Huygens–Fresnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="22821" end="22834" title="Superposition principle" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408338" start="22849" end="22879" title="Kirchhoff&amp;#x27;s diffraction formula" label="Kirchhoff diffraction equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q851014" start="23102" end="23124" title="Fraunhofer diffraction" label="Fraunhofer diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="23580" end="23598" title="Computer simulation" label="Numerical modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="23622" end="23643" title="finite element method" label="finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935004" start="23649" end="23672" title="boundary element method" label="boundary element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q639896" start="23681" end="23712" title="transmission-line matrix method" label="transmission-line matrix method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003236" start="24074" end="24088" title="Fourier optics" label="Fourier optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q859044" start="24165" end="24185" title="acoustic engineering" label="acoustic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="24190" end="24207" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q944873" start="24210" end="24235" title="Gaussian beam" label="Gaussian beam propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="24680" end="24689" title="nonlinear optics" label="nonlinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="25040" end="25045" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="25114" end="25139" title="constructive interference" label="constructive interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="25438" end="25462" title="destructive interference" label="destructive interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="25948" end="25962" title="Interferometry" label="Interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="26075" end="26093" title="angular resolution" label="angular resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q733088" start="26100" end="26124" title="Michelson interferometer" label="Michelson interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q647589" start="26242" end="26265" title="Thin film optics" label="thin films and coatings"/>
<link wikidata="Q583040" start="26312" end="26334" title="Antireflective coating" label="Antireflective coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115665" start="27255" end="27272" title="dielectric mirror" label="dielectric mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q904883" start="27275" end="27294" title="interference filter" label="interference filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6855491" start="27297" end="27311" title="heat reflector" label="heat reflector"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="27351" end="27368" title="colour television" label="colour television"/>
<link wikidata="Q315411" start="27643" end="27667" title="Francesco Maria Grimaldi" label="Francesco Maria Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q824547" start="27817" end="27836" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s rings" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="27843" end="27856" title="James Gregory (astronomer and mathematician)" label="James Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217785" start="28730" end="28739" title="Double-slit experiment" label="two slits"/>
<link wikidata="Q653294" start="29032" end="29051" title="diffraction grating" label="diffraction grating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286895" start="29187" end="29194" title="Fresnel diffraction" label="Fresnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q851014" start="29198" end="29220" title="Fraunhofer diffraction" label="Fraunhofer diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="29223" end="29240" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="29350" end="29358" title="angstrom" label="angstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q847354" start="29625" end="29641" title="Bragg reflection" label="Bragg reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275402" start="29689" end="29704" title="Diffraction topography" label="unique patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424908" start="29813" end="29830" title="optical resolution" label="optically resolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="29900" end="29908" title="aperture" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707396" start="29994" end="30020" title="Diffraction-limited system" label="diffraction-limited optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q851016" start="30131" end="30143" title="Airy pattern" label="Airy pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q851016" start="30179" end="30188" title="Airy disk" label="Airy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="30312" end="30320" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83297" start="30637" end="30645" title="John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh" label="Rayleigh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30683" end="30701" title="Angular resolution#The Rayleigh criterion" label="Rayleigh criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004698" start="30993" end="31007" title="Astronomical interferometer" label="Interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q210028" start="31261" end="31271" title="scattering" label="scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q538992" start="31308" end="31315" title="Scintillation (astronomy)" label="twinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057006" start="31368" end="31387" title="astronomical seeing" label="astronomical seeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q506922" start="31409" end="31424" title="adaptive optics" label="adaptive optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477639" start="31767" end="31785" title="Thomson scattering" label="Thomson scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424022" start="32011" end="32029" title="Compton scattering" label="Compton scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="32074" end="32092" title="quantum mechanical" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="32288" end="32307" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q901737" start="32415" end="32429" title="Mie scattering" label="Mie scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q244040" start="32439" end="32453" title="Tyndall effect" label="Tyndall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="32563" end="32579" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q578741" start="32657" end="32677" title="Brillouin scattering" label="Brillouin scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13824" start="32857" end="32873" title="phase velocity" label="phase velocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191702" start="32968" end="32985" title="optical waveguide" label="optical waveguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="33232" end="33252" title="dielectric" label="dielectric materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="33810" end="33817" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q306259" start="33878" end="33889" title="Abbe number" label="Abbe number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434913" start="34039" end="34059" title="propagation constant" label="propagation constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27304" start="35069" end="35074" title="chirp" label="chirp"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="35760" end="35773" title="optical fibre" label="optical fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q691978" start="36057" end="36072" title="transverse wave" label="transverse wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553479" start="36282" end="36301" title="linear polarisation" label="linear polarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121676" start="36365" end="36373" title="circular polarisation" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953420" start="36377" end="36400" title="elliptical polarisation" label="elliptical polarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899381" start="36571" end="36580" title="polarimetry" label="chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="36682" end="36688" title="vector (geometry)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="36821" end="36831" title="vector components" label="components"/>
<link wikidata="Q594135" start="36959" end="36975" title="Lissajous curve" label="Lissajous figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="38848" end="38855" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323967" start="39008" end="39022" title="Jones calculus" label="Jones calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192058" start="39051" end="39068" title="Stokes parameters" label="Stokes parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q108779" start="39201" end="39213" title="birefringence" label="birefringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192014" start="39280" end="39290" title="wave plate" label="wave plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q848501" start="39324" end="39340" title="Faraday rotation" label="Faraday rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q530648" start="39341" end="39357" title="optical rotation" label="optical rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="39604" end="39611" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q504352" start="39794" end="39813" title="Erasmus Bartholinus" label="Erasmus Bartholinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195643" start="39955" end="39964" title="dichroism" label="dichroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="40030" end="40040" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112895" start="40068" end="40079" title="pleochroism" label="pleochroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="40272" end="40289" title="mechanical stress" label="mechanical stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140269" start="40326" end="40341" title="photoelasticity" label="photoelasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209161" start="40448" end="40468" title="polarisation rotator" label="polarisation rotator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942175" start="40784" end="40793" title="polariser" label="polariser"/>
<link wikidata="Q315391" start="40840" end="40859" title="Étienne-Louis Malus" label="Étienne-Louis Malus"/>
<link wikidata="Q838055" start="41823" end="41840" title="Fresnel equations" label="Fresnel equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q662790" start="42015" end="42036" title="Brewster&amp;#x27;s angle" label="Brewster&amp;#x27;s angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q647589" start="42065" end="42074" title="Thin-film optics" label="thin film"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="42428" end="42438" title="statistical correlation" label="correlated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42853" end="42875" title="degree of polarisation" label="degree of polarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="43300" end="43310" title="earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="43376" end="43381" title="sky" label="skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433710" start="43500" end="43511" title="science of photography" label="photographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="43566" end="43575" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q899102" start="43583" end="43601" title="circular dichroism" label="circular dichroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q530648" start="43673" end="43689" title="optical activity" label="optically active"/>
<link wikidata="Q214514" start="43691" end="43697" title="chirality (chemistry)" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="43699" end="43708" title="molecules" label="molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q735602" start="44019" end="44033" title="quantum optics" label="quantum optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="44264" end="44279" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q902750" start="44285" end="44296" title="channeltron" label="channeltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="44341" end="44353" title="image sensor" label="image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="44364" end="44368" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503574" start="44378" end="44388" title="shot noise" label="shot noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="44450" end="44470" title="Light-emitting diode" label="Light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="44476" end="44493" title="photovoltaic cell" label="photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q735602" start="44615" end="44634" title="quantum electronics" label="quantum electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q430909" start="44743" end="44757" title="crystal optics" label="crystal optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q497166" start="44762" end="44774" title="metamaterial" label="metamaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077002" start="44852" end="44867" title="optical vortex" label="singular optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656807" start="44869" end="44887" title="non-imaging optics" label="non-imaging optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="44889" end="44906" title="non-linear optics" label="non-linear optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q247760" start="44932" end="44942" title="radiometry" label="radiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q428691" start="44958" end="44975" title="computer engineer" label="computer engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q523846" start="45003" end="45020" title="integrated optics" label="integrated optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425977" start="45022" end="45036" title="machine vision" label="machine vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q176541" start="45042" end="45060" title="photonic computing" label="photonic computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151533" start="45197" end="45212" title="optical physics" label="optical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q640621" start="45287" end="45306" title="optical engineering" label="optical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q210064" start="45359" end="45383" title="lighting" label="illumination engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q467054" start="45385" end="45394" title="photonics" label="photonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193091" start="45400" end="45415" title="optoelectronics" label="optoelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098863" start="45449" end="45460" title="Optical lens design" label="lens design"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428142" start="45462" end="45507" title="Fabrication and testing (optical components)" label="fabrication and testing of optical components"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="45513" end="45529" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="45982" end="46001" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="46042" end="46049" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="46089" end="46097" title="coherence (physics)" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230543" start="46157" end="46176" title="Beam divergence" label="low-divergence beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="46382" end="46387" title="Radio frequency" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="46499" end="46514" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635801" start="46518" end="46546" title="Hughes Research Laboratories" label="Hughes Research Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="46860" end="46867" title="barcode" label="barcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="46901" end="46910" title="laserdisc" label="laserdisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="47009" end="47021" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248059" start="47139" end="47154" title="optical storage" label="optical storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="47169" end="47188" title="semiconductor laser" label="semiconductor laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="47269" end="47294" title="Fibre-optic communication" label="Fibre-optic communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="47420" end="47434" title="laser printers" label="laser printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365018" start="47439" end="47452" title="laser pointer" label="laser pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453724" start="47500" end="47517" title="bloodless surgery" label="bloodless surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q760348" start="47519" end="47536" title="laser eye surgery" label="laser eye surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516595" start="47542" end="47571" title="laser capture microdissection" label="laser capture microdissection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055827" start="47609" end="47632" title="Airborne Laser" label="missile defence systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945239" start="47634" end="47672" title="DIRCM" label="electro-optical countermeasures (EOCM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="47678" end="47683" title="lidar" label="lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="47709" end="47718" title="holograms" label="holograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529623" start="47720" end="47730" title="bubblegram" label="bubblegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q380051" start="47733" end="47750" title="laser lighting display" label="laser light shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q783007" start="47756" end="47774" title="laser hair removal" label="laser hair removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720173" start="47808" end="47828" title="Kapitsa–Dirac effect" label="Kapitsa–Dirac effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066633" start="47984" end="48000" title="optical tweezers" label="optical tweezers"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="48070" end="48083" title="visual system" label="visual system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="48165" end="48176" title="sense" label="five senses"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="48203" end="48213" title="eyeglasses" label="eyeglasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q23797" start="48217" end="48231" title="contact lenses" label="contact lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="48309" end="48316" title="cameras" label="cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469765" start="48374" end="48395" title="Optical communication" label="Optical communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="48431" end="48439" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="48451" end="48460" title="telephony" label="telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="48538" end="48556" title="photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptor cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911033" start="48872" end="48888" title="anterior chamber" label="anterior chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q173318" start="48914" end="48919" title="pupil" label="pupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146701" start="48955" end="48959" title="lens (anatomy)" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q326710" start="49093" end="49108" title="vitreous humour" label="vitreous humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q371090" start="49242" end="49252" title="Blind spot (vision)" label="blind spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343133" start="49470" end="49492" title="scotopic vision" label="black-and-white vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431287" start="49866" end="49883" title="peripheral vision" label="peripheral vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="50080" end="50086" title="colour" label="colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474732" start="50091" end="50106" title="photopic vision" label="photopic vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="50323" end="50335" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q419793" start="50662" end="50675" title="Accommodation (eye)" label="accommodation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85788096" start="50681" end="50691" title="near point" label="near point"/>
<link wikidata="Q390397" start="50696" end="50705" title="far point" label="far point"/>
<link wikidata="Q618211" start="51036" end="51047" title="Optometrist" label="Optometrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="51050" end="51065" title="ophthalmologist" label="ophthalmologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996635" start="51072" end="51080" title="optician" label="optician"/>
<link wikidata="Q319595" start="51358" end="51368" title="presbyopia" label="presbyopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177254" start="51403" end="51412" title="hyperopia" label="hyperopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="51670" end="51676" title="myopia" label="myopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177895" start="51762" end="51773" title="Astigmatism (eye)" label="astigmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143661" start="52064" end="52079" title="corrective lens" label="corrective lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="52115" end="52130" title="converging lens" label="converging lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="52231" end="52245" title="diverging lens" label="diverging lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="52346" end="52365" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylindrical surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q193933" start="52537" end="52544" title="diopter" label="diopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="52568" end="52578" title="multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="53166" end="53173" title="percept" label="percept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341011" start="53546" end="53567" title="unconscious inference" label="unconscious inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q470228" start="53701" end="53710" title="Ames room" label="Ames room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035662" start="53712" end="53718" title="Hering illusion" label="Hering"/>
<link wikidata="Q926299" start="53720" end="53731" title="Müller-Lyer illusion" label="Müller-Lyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661088" start="53733" end="53740" title="Orbison&amp;#x27;s illusion" label="Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190645" start="53742" end="53747" title="Ponzo illusion" label="Ponzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641583" start="53749" end="53755" title="Sander illusion" label="Sander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206122" start="53761" end="53775" title="Wundt illusion" label="Wundt illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163362" start="53978" end="53993" title="vanishing point" label="vanishing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q741976" start="54121" end="54134" title="moon illusion" label="moon illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="54230" end="54237" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="54254" end="54260" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="54290" end="54297" title="Ptolemy of Alexandria" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995887" start="54402" end="54408" title="Optics (Ptolemy)" label="Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915442" start="54578" end="54587" title="Café wall illusion" label="café wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622748" start="54589" end="54599" title="Ehrenstein illusion" label="Ehrenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451327" start="54601" end="54614" title="Fraser spiral illusion" label="Fraser spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542758" start="54616" end="54627" title="Poggendorff illusion" label="Poggendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q655333" start="54633" end="54649" title="Zöllner illusion" label="Zöllner illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="54777" end="54788" title="Transparency (optics)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26468" start="54843" end="54856" title="moiré pattern" label="moiré pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553272" start="54970" end="54980" title="line moiré" label="line moiré"/>
<link wikidata="Q192234" start="55076" end="55093" title="photographic lens" label="photographic lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334379" start="55197" end="55213" title="rear-view mirror" label="rear-view mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q183122" start="55346" end="55355" title="periscope" label="periscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880557" start="55650" end="55664" title="objective lens" label="objective lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193516" start="55672" end="55680" title="eyepiece" label="eyepiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="56008" end="56030" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908020" start="56302" end="56323" title="comparison microscope" label="comparison microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="56367" end="56379" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q609543" start="56380" end="56389" title="binocular vision" label="binocular"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="57482" end="57502" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="58185" end="58190" title="photographic plates" label="plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="58192" end="58196" title="photographic film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q904761" start="58256" end="58267" title="Reciprocity (photography)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575733" start="58638" end="58651" title="Sunny 16 rule" label="Sunny 16 rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q271960" start="58728" end="58736" title="exposure (photography)" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q862169" start="58820" end="58828" title="f-number" label="f-number"/>
<link wikidata="Q175743" start="59103" end="59114" title="number sign" label="number sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q220310" start="59278" end="59287" title="zoom lens" label="zoom lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q215932" start="59373" end="59387" title="depth of field" label="depth of field"/>
<link wikidata="Q626557" start="59804" end="59815" title="Normal lens" label="Normal lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q632867" start="60018" end="60033" title="Wide-angle lens" label="Wide-angle lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022034" start="60111" end="60126" title="Long focus lens" label="Long focus lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q516461" start="60311" end="60325" title="telephoto lens" label="telephoto lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935780" start="60560" end="60569" title="sensitometry" label="sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q24613" start="60621" end="60631" title="film speed" label="film speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q900625" start="60663" end="60681" title="quantum efficiency" label="quantum efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707396" start="61082" end="61099" title="diffraction limit" label="diffraction limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193294" start="61621" end="61628" title="sunrise" label="sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q166564" start="61632" end="61638" title="sunset" label="sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q186310" start="61871" end="61876" title="halo (optical phenomenon)" label="halos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141780" start="61878" end="61887" title="afterglow" label="afterglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550781" start="61890" end="61897" title="Corona (meteorology)" label="coronas"/>
<link wikidata="Q875322" start="61899" end="61915" title="Crepuscular rays" label="rays of sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q208589" start="61921" end="61928" title="sun dog" label="sun dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066340" start="62276" end="62296" title="Novaya Zemlya effect" label="Novaya Zemlya effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="62421" end="62442" title="inversion (meteorology)" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q210659" start="62454" end="62466" title="Fata Morgana (mirage)" label="Fata Morgana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980681" start="63195" end="63205" title="Ion optics" label="Ion optics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63207" end="63239" title="List of publications in physics#Optics" label="Important publications in optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018950" start="63241" end="63263" title="List of optical topics" label="List of optical topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016066" start="63265" end="63302" title="List of textbooks in electromagnetism" label="List of textbooks in electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="63657" end="63681" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376851" start="63888" end="63912" title="European Optical Society" label="European Optical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027280" start="63922" end="63941" title="The Optical Society" label="The Optical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140443" start="63957" end="63961" title="SPIE" label="SPIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412997" start="63972" end="64010" title="European Photonics Industry Consortium" label="European Photonics Industry Consortium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22484" wikidata="Q207915" url="?curid=22484" title="OS">
<text>OS, O.S., Os, O&#x27;s, or os may refer to:
== Computing ==
* Operating system, computer system software that manages the hardware and software of a computer
* Open source (disambiguation)
* OpenStack, a software platform for cloud computing

== Medicine ==
* os, a bone in french
* os or ostium, a mouth or mouth-like opening
** &quot;external os&quot;, the external orifice of the uterus
** &quot;internal os&quot;, the internal orifice of the uterus
** &quot;per os&quot;, meaning &quot;ingestion by mouth&quot;
** &quot;os&quot; or &quot;ostium&quot;, the opening of a coronary artery
* &quot;O.S.&quot; or &quot;OS&quot;, &quot;oculus sinister&quot;, meaning &quot;left eye&quot; in general ophthalmologic or optometric usage, particularly in eyeglass prescriptions (deprecated abbreviation)
* Ohtahara syndrome, a brain disorder
* Overall survival rate, a cancer survival statistic
* Oneiroid syndrome, a dreamlike fantastic delusional state

== People ==
* Alexander Os (born 1980), a Norwegian biathlete
* Os du Randt (born 1972), a South African rugby player
* Os Guinness (born 1941), an English author and social critic

== Places ==
=== Norway ===
* Os, Innlandet, a municipality in Innlandet county, Norway
* Os, Hordaland, a former municipality in Hordaland county, Norway
* Os, Østfold, a parish in Rakkestad municipality in Østfold county, Norway
* Os Church, a name for several churches in Norway

=== Poland ===
* Oś, Kluczbork County, a village in Kluczbork County, Opole Voivodeship, Poland
* Osiedle (Os.), a Polish term used for housing subdivisions in Poland

=== Germany ===
* Opavian Silesia or &quot;Upper Silesia&quot;, a portion of Silesia in the German Empire that opted to remain in Germany&#x27;s Weimar Republic and Nazi Germany until World War II. After the War, it was divided between Czechoslovakia and Poland.

=== Other places ===
* Os, Värnamo, a village in Värnamo Municipality, Småland province, Sweden
* OS, ICAO code for airports in Syria
* OS, WMO country code for Austria

== Religion ==
* Ōs, an Old English word denoting a god in Anglo-Saxon paganism, related to &quot;æsir&quot;
* O.S., Order of Santiago, a Spanish order dedicated to St James the Greater
* O.S., Order of Sikatuna, the national order of diplomatic merit of the Philippines

== Science ==
* &quot;Ocean Science&quot; (journal), an oceanographic journal
* Osmium, symbol Os, a chemical element

== Businesses ==
* Ordnance Survey, national mapping agency of Great Britain
* Austrian Airlines (IATA code OS based on its original name: &quot;Österreichische Luftverkehrs AG&quot;)
* O.S. Engines, a Japanese manufacturer of model aircraft engines

== Entertainment ==
* &quot;Os&quot; (&quot;Fringe&quot;), an episode of the television show &quot;Fringe&quot;
* &quot;Outlaw Star&quot;, a manga and anime series
* OS, opposite prompt or stage right in a theatre

== Sport ==
* Ohio State Buckeyes, a group of collegiate teams representing The Ohio State University
* Os TF, a sports club in Os, Norway
* On-sight climbing, an ascent of a rock climbing route on the first attempt
* Baltimore Orioles, an American baseball team nicknamed &quot;O&#x27;s&quot;
* Leyton Orient, an English football (soccer) team nicknamed &quot;O&#x27;s&quot;

== Titles ==
* Ordinary seaman, an unlicensed member of the deck department of a merchant ship
* Ordnance sergeant, an enlisted rank in the U.S. and Confederate armies during the American Civil War era
* Old Shirburnian, used by alumni of Sherborne School
* Old Stonyhurst, used by alumni of Stonyhurst College

== Other uses ==
* Esker, also os, a long, winding ridge of sand and gravel in (formerly) glaciated regions
* Ōs (rune) (ᚩ), a rune of the Anglo-Saxon fuþorc
* Old Style (O.S.) date, indicating use of an earlier calendar (in Anglophone countries, the Julian Calendar), as opposed to &quot;N.S.&quot; (new style), usually indicating use of the Gregorian Calendar
* Ossetic language (ISO 639-1 abbreviation OS)
* Object sexuality, sexual attraction to inanimate objects
* Oral sex
* On Sheet, a record of a train passing a location

== See also ==
* 0S (disambiguation)
* ÖS (disambiguation)
* Oz (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207915" start="0" end="2" title="OS" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q207915" start="4" end="8" title="OS" label="O.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q207915" start="10" end="12" title="OS" label="Os"/>
<link wikidata="Q207915" start="14" end="22" title="OS" label="O&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q207915" start="27" end="29" title="OS" label="os"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="62" end="78" title="Operating system" label="Operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q59553713" start="160" end="188" title="Open source (disambiguation)" label="Open source (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470293" start="191" end="200" title="OpenStack" label="OpenStack"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="266" end="270" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="274" end="280" title="French language" label="french"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="299" end="304" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q785307" start="359" end="389" title="external orifice of the uterus" label="external orifice of the uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q785307" start="422" end="452" title="internal orifice of the uterus" label="internal orifice of the uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="462" end="468" title="per os" label="per os"/>
<link wikidata="Q497232" start="573" end="588" title="Coronary circulation" label="coronary artery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="748" end="770" title="Eyeglass prescription#Abbreviations and terms" label="eyeglass prescriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q649602" start="799" end="816" title="Ohtahara syndrome" label="Ohtahara syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q332823" start="837" end="858" title="Overall survival rate" label="Overall survival rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544517" start="890" end="907" title="Oneiroid syndrome" label="Oneiroid syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q260129" start="964" end="976" title="Alexander Os" label="Alexander Os"/>
<link wikidata="Q726173" start="1014" end="1025" title="Os du Randt" label="Os du Randt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105466" start="1070" end="1081" title="Os Guinness" label="Os Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q507562" start="1162" end="1175" title="Os, Innlandet" label="Os, Innlandet"/>
<link wikidata="Q493936" start="1222" end="1235" title="Os, Hordaland" label="Os, Hordaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105452" start="1289" end="1300" title="Os, Østfold" label="Os, Østfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914264" start="1365" end="1374" title="Os Church (disambiguation)" label="Os Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q984474" start="1432" end="1452" title="Oś, Kluczbork County" label="Oś, Kluczbork County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277441" start="1513" end="1520" title="Osiedle" label="Osiedle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395519" start="1601" end="1616" title="Opavian Silesia" label="Opavian Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472268" start="1870" end="1881" title="Os, Värnamo" label="Os, Värnamo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1949" end="1958" title="List of airports by ICAO code: O#OS - Syria" label="ICAO code"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2008" end="2015" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="2034" end="2036" title="Ōs" label="Ōs"/>
<link wikidata="Q757097" start="2134" end="2151" title="Order of Santiago" label="Order of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q980578" start="2211" end="2228" title="Order of Sikatuna" label="Order of Sikatuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076065" start="2305" end="2340" title="Ocean Science (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Ocean Science&amp;quot; (journal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="2369" end="2375" title="Osmium" label="Osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="2427" end="2442" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q781770" start="2487" end="2504" title="Austrian Airlines" label="Austrian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700050" start="2594" end="2606" title="O.S. Engines" label="O.S. Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105455" start="2681" end="2716" title="Os (Fringe)" label="&amp;quot;Os&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Fringe&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470001" start="2779" end="2790" title="Outlaw Star" label="Outlaw Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115316" start="2825" end="2827" title="Prompt corner" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630964" start="2848" end="2859" title="Blocking (stage)" label="stage right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927468" start="2888" end="2907" title="Ohio State Buckeyes" label="Ohio State Buckeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783649" start="2978" end="2983" title="Os TF" label="Os TF"/>
<link wikidata="Q827331" start="3015" end="3032" title="On-sight climbing" label="On-sight climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="3092" end="3109" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595" start="3170" end="3183" title="Leyton Orient" label="Leyton Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685095" start="3266" end="3281" title="Ordinary seaman" label="Ordinary seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100887" start="3348" end="3365" title="Ordnance sergeant" label="Ordnance sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084971" start="3480" end="3506" title="List of Old Shirburnians" label="alumni of Sherborne School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632191" start="3533" end="3561" title="List of Old Stonyhursts" label="alumni of Stonyhurst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="3582" end="3587" title="Esker" label="Esker"/>
<link wikidata="Q570438" start="3673" end="3682" title="Ōs (rune)" label="Ōs (rune)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="3723" end="3732" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="3927" end="3943" title="Ossetic language" label="Ossetic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q447482" start="3974" end="3990" title="Object sexuality" label="Object sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122" start="4033" end="4041" title="Oral sex" label="Oral sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545609" start="4111" end="4130" title="0S (disambiguation)" label="0S (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078906" start="4133" end="4152" title="ÖS (disambiguation)" label="ÖS (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217893" start="4155" end="4174" title="Oz (disambiguation)" label="Oz (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22486" wikidata="Q33558" url="?curid=22486" title="Olbers's paradox">
<text>Olbers&#x27;s paradox, also known as the dark night paradox or Olbers and Cheseaux&#x27;s paradox, is an argument in astrophysics and physical cosmology that says the darkness of the night sky conflicts with the assumption of an infinite and eternal static universe. In the hypothetical case that the universe is static, homogeneous at a large scale, and populated by an infinite number of stars, any line of sight from Earth must end at the surface of a star and hence the night sky should be completely illuminated and very bright. This contradicts the observed darkness and non-uniformity of the night sky. 

The darkness of the night sky is one piece of evidence for a dynamic universe, such as the Big Bang model. That model explains the observed non-uniformity of brightness by invoking expansion of the universe, which increases the wavelength of visible light originating from the Big Bang to microwave scale via a process known as redshift. The resulting microwave radiation background has wavelengths much longer (millimeters instead of nanometers), which appear dark to the naked eye and bright for a radio receiver. 

Other explanations for the paradox have been offered, but none have wide acceptance in cosmology. Although he was not the first to describe it, the paradox is popularly named after the German astronomer Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers (1758–1840).

== History ==

The first one to address the problem of an infinite number of stars and the resulting heat in the Cosmos was Cosmas Indicopleustes, a 6th-century Greek monk from Alexandria, who states in his &quot;Topographia Christiana&quot;: &quot;The crystal-made sky sustains the heat of the Sun, the moon, and the infinite number of stars; otherwise, it would have been full of fire, and it could melt or set on fire.&quot;

Edward Robert Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Darkness at Night: A Riddle of the Universe&quot; (1987) gives an account of the dark night sky paradox, seen as a problem in the history of science. According to Harrison, the first to conceive of anything like the paradox was Thomas Digges, who was also the first to expound the Copernican system in English and also postulated an infinite universe with infinitely many stars. Kepler also posed the problem in 1610, and the paradox took its mature form in the 18th-century work of Halley and Cheseaux. The paradox is commonly attributed to the German amateur astronomer Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers, who described it in 1823, but Harrison shows convincingly that Olbers was far from the first to pose the problem, nor was his thinking about it particularly valuable. Harrison argues that the first to set out a satisfactory resolution of the paradox was Lord Kelvin, in a little known 1901 paper, and that Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s essay &quot;&quot; (1848) curiously anticipated some qualitative aspects of Kelvin&#x27;s argument:
==The paradox==
The paradox is that a static, infinitely old universe with an infinite number of stars distributed in an infinitely large space would be bright rather than dark.
To show this, we divide the universe into a series of concentric shells, 1 light year thick. A certain number of stars will be in the shell, say, 1,000,000,000 to 1,000,000,001 light years away. If the universe is homogeneous at a large scale, then there would be four times as many stars in a second shell between 2,000,000,000 and 2,000,000,001 light years away. However, the second shell is twice as far away, so each star in it would appear one quarter as bright as the stars in the first shell. Thus the total light received from the second shell is the same as the total light received from the first shell.

Thus each shell of a given thickness will produce the same net amount of light regardless of how far away it is. That is, the light of each shell adds to the total amount. Thus the more shells, the more light; and with infinitely many shells, there would be a bright night sky.

While dark clouds could obstruct the light, these clouds would heat up, until they were as hot as the stars, and then radiate the same amount of light.

Kepler saw this as an argument for a finite observable universe, or at least for a finite number of stars. In general relativity theory, it is still possible for the paradox to hold in a finite universe: Though the sky would not be infinitely bright, every point in the sky would still be like the surface of a star.

==Explanation==

The poet Edgar Allan Poe suggested in &quot;&quot; that the finite age of the observable universe resolves the apparent paradox. More specifically, because the universe is finitely old (more precisely the Stelliferous Era is only finitely old) and the speed of light is finite, only finitely many stars can be observed from Earth (although the whole universe can be infinite in space). The density of stars within this finite volume is sufficiently low that any line of sight from Earth is unlikely to reach a star.

However, the Big Bang theory seems to introduce a new problem: it states that the sky was much brighter in the past, especially at the end of the recombination era, when it first became transparent. All points of the local sky at that era were comparable in brightness to the surface of the Sun, due to the high temperature of the universe in that era; and most light rays will originate not from a star but the relic of the Big Bang.

This problem is addressed by the fact that the Big Bang theory also involves the expansion of the universe, which can cause the energy of emitted light to be reduced via redshift. More specifically, the extremely energetic radiation from the Big Bang has been redshifted to microwave wavelengths (1100 times the length of its original wavelength) as a result of the cosmic expansion, and thus forms the cosmic microwave background radiation. This explains the relatively low light densities and energy levels present in most of our sky today despite the assumed bright nature of the Big Bang. The redshift also affects light from distant galaxies.

==Other factors==

===Steady state===
The redshift hypothesised in the Big Bang model would by itself explain the darkness of the night sky even if the universe were infinitely old. In the Steady state theory the universe is infinitely old and uniform in time as well as space. There is no Big Bang in this model, but there are stars and quasars at arbitrarily great distances. The expansion of the universe causes the light from these distant stars and quasars to redshift, so that the total light flux from the sky remains finite. Thus the observed radiation density (the sky brightness of extragalactic background light) can be independent of finiteness of the universe. Mathematically, the total electromagnetic energy density (radiation energy density) in thermodynamic equilibrium from Planck&#x27;s law is

formula_1

e.g. for temperature 2.7 K it is 40 fJ/m3 ... 4.5×10−31 kg/m3 and for visible temperature 6000 K we get 1 J/m3 ... 1.1×10−17 kg/m3. But the total radiation emitted by a star (or other cosmic object) is at most equal to the total nuclear binding energy of isotopes in the star. For the density of the observable universe of about 4.6×10−28 kg/m3 and given the known abundance of the chemical elements, the corresponding maximal radiation energy density of 9.2×10−31 kg/m3, i.e. temperature 3.2 K (matching the value observed for the optical radiation temperature by Arthur Eddington). This is close to the summed energy density of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) and the cosmic neutrino background. However, the steady-state model does not predict the angular distribution of the microwave background temperature accurately (as the standard ΛCDM paradigm does).

===Brightness===
Suppose that the universe were not expanding, and always had the same stellar density; then the temperature of the universe would continually increase as the stars put out more radiation. Eventually, it would reach 3000 K (corresponding to a typical photon energy of 0.3 eV and so a frequency of 7.5×1013 Hz), and the photons would begin to be absorbed by the hydrogen plasma filling most of the universe, rendering outer space opaque. This maximal radiation density corresponds to about eV/m3 = , which is much greater than the observed value of . So the sky is about five hundred billion times darker than it would be if the universe was neither expanding nor too young to have reached equilibrium yet. However, recent observations increasing the lower bound on the number of galaxies suggest UV absorption by hydrogen and reemission in near-IR (not visible) wavelengths also plays a role.

===Fractal star distribution===
A different resolution, which does not rely on the Big Bang theory, was first proposed by Carl Charlier in 1908 and later rediscovered by Benoît Mandelbrot in 1974. They both postulated that if the stars in the universe were distributed in a hierarchical fractal cosmology (e.g., similar to Cantor dust)—the average density of any region diminishes as the region considered increases—it would not be necessary to rely on the Big Bang theory to explain Olbers&#x27;s paradox. This model would not rule out a Big Bang, but would allow for a dark sky even if the Big Bang had not occurred.

Mathematically, the light received from stars as a function of star distance in a hypothetical fractal cosmos is

formula_2

where:

* &quot;r&quot;0 = the distance of the nearest star, &quot;r&quot;0 &gt; 0;
* &quot;r&quot; = the variable measuring distance from the Earth;
* &quot;L&quot;(&quot;r&quot;) = average luminosity per star at distance &quot;r&quot;;
* &quot;N&quot;(&quot;r&quot;) = number of stars at distance &quot;r&quot;.

The function of luminosity from a given distance &quot;L&quot;(&quot;r&quot;)&quot;N&quot;(&quot;r&quot;) determines whether the light received is finite or infinite. For any luminosity from a given distance proportional to &quot;r&quot;&quot;a&quot;, formula_3 is infinite for &quot;a&quot; ≥ −1 but finite for &quot;a&quot; &lt; −1. So if is proportional to &quot;r&quot;−2, then for formula_3 to be finite, must be proportional to &quot;r&quot;&quot;b&quot;, where &quot;b&quot; &lt; 1. For &quot;b&quot; = 1, the numbers of stars at a given radius is proportional to that radius. When integrated over the radius, this implies that for &quot;b&quot; = 1, the &quot;total&quot; number of stars is proportional to &quot;r&quot;2. This would correspond to a fractal dimension of 2. Thus the fractal dimension of the universe would need to be less than 2 for this explanation to work.

This explanation is not widely accepted among cosmologists, since the evidence suggests that the fractal dimension of the universe is at least 2. Moreover, the majority of cosmologists accept the cosmological principle, which assumes that matter at the scale of billions of light years is distributed isotropically. Contrarily, fractal cosmology requires anisotropic matter distribution at the largest scales.

== See also ==
* Heat death paradox
* List of paradoxes
* Horizon problem

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
* Relativity FAQ about Olbers&#x27;s paradox
* Astronomy FAQ about Olbers&#x27;s paradox
* Cosmology FAQ about Olbers&#x27;s paradox
* Why is the sky dark? physics.org page about Olbers&#x27;s paradox
* Why is it dark at night? A 60-second animation from the Perimeter Institute exploring the question with Alice and Bob in Wonderland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33558" start="0" end="21" title="Olbers&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Olbers&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33558" start="41" end="59" title="Olbers&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="dark night paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q33558" start="63" end="97" title="Olbers&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Olbers and Cheseaux&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="117" end="129" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="134" end="152" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q204170" start="167" end="175" title="darkness" label="darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="183" end="192" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190516" start="250" end="265" title="static universe" label="static universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="321" end="332" title="homogeneous" label="homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="390" end="394" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="420" end="425" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="703" end="717" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Big Bang model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="793" end="818" title="expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="840" end="850" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="854" end="867" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="901" end="910" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="940" end="948" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="964" end="994" title="Microwave background" label="microwave radiation background"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="1333" end="1356" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q355633" start="1495" end="1516" title="Cosmas Indicopleustes" label="Cosmas Indicopleustes"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1548" end="1558" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216330" start="1584" end="1606" title="Topographia Christiana" label="Topographia Christiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480253" start="1800" end="1822" title="Edward Robert Harrison" label="Edward Robert Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q531345" start="2064" end="2077" title="Thomas Digges" label="Thomas Digges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984081" start="2117" end="2134" title="Copernican heliocentrism" label="Copernican system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="2215" end="2221" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="2319" end="2325" title="Edmond Halley" label="Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q123931" start="2330" end="2338" title="Jean-Philippe de Cheseaux" label="Cheseaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2382" end="2388" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="2397" end="2407" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="2408" end="2431" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="2687" end="2698" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="2739" end="2754" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="4131" end="4150" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="4197" end="4222" title="general relativity theory" label="general relativity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="4431" end="4446" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="4594" end="4606" title="Age of the universe" label="finitely old"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214042" start="4627" end="4643" title="Stelliferous Era" label="Stelliferous Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="4952" end="4967" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373825" start="5085" end="5098" title="recombination (cosmology)" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="5456" end="5481" title="expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="5545" end="5553" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="5617" end="5625" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="5778" end="5815" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="6013" end="6021" title="galaxies" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="6213" end="6232" title="Steady state theory" label="Steady state theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="6406" end="6431" title="expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q647084" start="6616" end="6646" title="extragalactic background light" label="extragalactic background light"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="6785" end="6810" title="thermodynamic equilibrium" label="thermodynamic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q212986" start="6816" end="6833" title="Planck&amp;#x27;s law" label="Planck&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750062" start="7078" end="7100" title="nuclear binding energy" label="nuclear binding energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="7104" end="7111" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="7149" end="7168" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q428867" start="7214" end="7248" title="abundance of the chemical elements" label="abundance of the chemical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="7414" end="7430" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Arthur Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="7483" end="7510" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075329" start="7525" end="7551" title="cosmic neutrino background" label="cosmic neutrino background"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="8005" end="8007" title="electron-volts" label="eV"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="8039" end="8041" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q478599" start="8749" end="8762" title="Carl Charlier" label="Carl Charlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q101740" start="8797" end="8814" title="Benoit Mandelbrot" label="Benoît Mandelbrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551267" start="8914" end="8931" title="fractal cosmology" label="fractal cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="8950" end="8961" title="Cantor dust" label="Cantor dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="9563" end="9573" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412452" start="10445" end="10462" title="fractal dimension" label="fractal dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412452" start="10669" end="10686" title="fractal dimension" label="fractal dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q319903" start="10768" end="10790" title="cosmological principle" label="cosmological principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="10873" end="10882" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="10927" end="10938" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693265" start="11000" end="11018" title="Heat death paradox" label="Heat death paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509345" start="11021" end="11038" title="List of paradoxes" label="List of paradoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q590581" start="11041" end="11056" title="Horizon problem" label="Horizon problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004561" start="11376" end="11395" title="Perimeter Institute" label="Perimeter Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22487" wikidata="Q178934" url="?curid=22487" title="Occult">
<text>The occult () is a category of esoteric or supernatural beliefs and practices which generally fall outside the scope of organized religion and science, encompassing phenomena involving a &#x27;hidden&#x27; or &#x27;secret&#x27; agency, such as magic and mysticism. It can also refer to paranormal ideas such as extra-sensory perception and parapsychology.

The term occult sciences was used in 16th-century Europe to refer to astrology, alchemy, and natural magic. The term occultism emerged in 19th-century France, among figures such as Antoine Court de Gébelin. It came to be associated with various French esoteric groups connected to Éliphas Lévi and Papus, and in 1875 was introduced into the English language by the esotericist Helena Blavatsky.

Throughout the 20th century, the term &#x27;occult&#x27; was used idiosyncratically by a range of different authors. By the 21st century the term &#x27;occultism&#x27; was commonly employed –including by academic scholars in the field of Western esotericism studies– to refer to a range of esoteric currents that developed in the mid-19th century and their descendants. Occultism is thus often used to categorise such esoteric traditions as Qabalah, Spiritualism, Theosophy, Anthroposophy, Wicca, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, New Age, and the left-hand path and right-hand path.

Use of the term as a nominalized adjective (&#x27;the occult&#x27;) has developed especially since the late twentieth century. In that same period, &quot;occult&quot; and &quot;culture&quot; were combined to form the neologism &quot;occulture&quot;.

==Etymology==
The occult (from the Latin word &quot;occultus&quot;; &#x27;clandestine&#x27;, &#x27;hidden&#x27;, &#x27;secret&#x27;) is &quot;knowledge of the hidden&quot;. In common usage, &quot;occult&quot; refers to &quot;knowledge of the paranormal&quot;, as opposed to &quot;knowledge of the measurable&quot;, usually referred to as science. The terms &quot;esoteric&quot; and &quot;&quot; can also be used to describe the occult, in addition to their meanings unrelated to the supernatural. The term &quot;occult sciences&quot; was used in the 16th century to refer to astrology, alchemy, and natural magic.

The earliest known usage of the term &quot;occultism&quot; is in the French language, as &quot;l&#x27;occultisme&quot;. In this form it appears in A. de Lestrange&#x27;s article that was published in &quot;Dictionnaire des mots nouveaux&quot; (&quot;Dictionary of new words&quot;) by in 1842. However, it was not related, at this point, to the notion of &quot;Ésotérisme chrétien&quot;, as has been claimed by Hanegraaff, but to describe a political &quot;system of occulticity&quot; that was directed against priests and aristocrats.

In 1853, the Freemasonic author Jean-Marie Ragon had already used &quot;occultisme&quot; in his popular work &quot;Maçonnerie occulte&quot;, relating it to earlier practices that, since the Renaissance, had been termed &quot;occult sciences&quot; or &quot;occult philosophy&quot;, but also to the recent socialist teachings of Charles Fourier. The French esotericist Éliphas Lévi then used the term in his influential book on ritual magic, &quot;Dogme et rituel de la haute magie&quot;, first published in 1856. Lévi was familiar with that work and might have borrowed the term from there. In any case, Lévi also claimed to be a representative of an older tradition of occult science or occult philosophy. It was from his usage of the term &quot;occultisme&quot; that it gained wider usage; according to Faivre, Lévi was &quot;the principal exponent of esotericism in Europe and the United States&quot; at that time. The term &quot;occultism&quot; emerged in 19th-century France, where it came to be associated with various French esoteric groups connected to Éliphas Lévi and Papus,

The earliest use of the term &quot;occultism&quot; in the English language appears to be in &quot;A Few Questions to &#x27;Hiraf&#x27;&quot;, an 1875 article by Helena Blavatsky, a Russian émigré living in the United States who founded the religion of Theosophy. The article was published in the American Spiritualist magazine, &quot;Spiritual Scientist&quot;.

Various twentieth-century writers on the subject used the term &quot;occultism&quot; in different ways. Some writers, such as the German philosopher Theodor W. Adorno in his &quot;Theses Against Occultism&quot;, employed the term as a broad synonym for irrationality. In his 1950 book &quot;L&#x27;occultisme&quot;, used the term as a synonym for esotericism, an approach that the later scholar of esotericism Marco Pasi suggested left the term superfluous. Unlike Amadou, other writers saw occultism and esotericism as different, albeit related, phenomena. In the 1970s, the sociologist Edward A. Tiryakian distinguished between occultism, which he used in reference to practices, techniques, and procedures, and esotericism, which he defined as the religious or philosophical belief systems on which such practices are based. This division was initially adopted by the early academic scholar of esotericism, Antoine Faivre, although he later abandoned it; it has been rejected by most scholars who study esotericism.

By the 21st century the term was commonly employed – including by academic scholars of esotericism – to refer to a range of esoteric currents that developed in the mid-19th century and their descendants. Occultism is thus often used to categorise such esoteric traditions as Spiritualism, Theosophy, Anthroposophy, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, and New Age.

A different division was used by the Traditionalist author René Guénon, who used esotericism to describe what he believed was the Traditionalist, inner teaching at the heart of most religions, while occultism was used pejoratively to describe new religions and movements that he disapproved of, such as Spiritualism, Theosophy, and various secret societies. Guénon&#x27;s use of this terminology was adopted by later writers like Serge Hutin and Luc Benoist. As noted by Hanegraaff, Guénon&#x27;s use of these terms are rooted in his Traditionalist beliefs and &quot;cannot be accepted as scholarly valid&quot;.

The term &quot;occultism&quot; derives from the older term &quot;occult&quot;, much as the term &quot;esotericism&quot; derives from the older term &quot;esoteric&quot;. However, the historian of esotericism Wouter Hanegraaff stated that it was important to distinguish between the meanings of the term &quot;occult&quot; and &quot;occultism&quot;. Occultism is not a homogenous movement and is widely diverse.

Over the course of its history, the term &quot;occultism&quot; has been used in various different ways. However, in contemporary uses, occultism commonly refers to forms of esotericism that developed in the nineteenth century and their twentieth-century derivations. In a descriptive sense, it has been used to describe forms of esotericism which developed in nineteenth-century France, especially in the Neo-Martinist environment. According to the historian of esotericism Antoine Faivre, it is with the esotericist Éliphas Lévi that &quot;the occultist current properly so-called&quot; first appears. Other prominent French esotericists involved in developing occultism included Papus, Stanislas de Guaita, Joséphin Péladan, Georges-Albert Puyou de Pouvourville, and Jean Bricaud.

==Occult sciences==
The idea of occult sciences developed in the sixteenth century. The term usually encompassed three practicesastrology, alchemy, and natural magicalthough sometimes various forms of divination were also included rather than being subsumed under natural magic. These were grouped together because, according to the Dutch scholar of hermeticism Wouter Hanegraaff, &quot;each one of them engaged in a systematic investigation of nature and natural processes, in the context of theoretical frameworks that relied heavily on a belief in occult qualities, virtues or forces.&quot; Although there are areas of overlap between these different occult sciences, they are separate and in some cases practitioners of one would reject the others as being illegitimate.

During the Age of Enlightenment, occultism increasingly came to be seen as intrinsically incompatible with the concept of science. From that point on, use of &quot;occult science(s)&quot; implied a conscious polemic against mainstream science. Nevertheless, the philosopher and card game historian Michael Dummett, whose analysis of the historical evidence suggested that fortune-telling and occult interpretations using cards were unknown before the 18th century, said that the term &quot;occult science&quot; was not misplaced because &quot;people who believe in the possibility of unveiling the future or of exercising supernormal powers do so because the efficacy of the methods they employ coheres with some systematic conception which they hold of the way the universe functions...however flimsy its empirical basis.&quot;

In his 1871 book &quot;Primitive Culture&quot;, the anthropologist Edward Tylor used the term &quot;occult science&quot; as a synonym for magic.

==Occult qualities==
Occult qualities are properties that have no known rational explanation; in the Middle Ages, for example, magnetism was considered an occult quality. Aether is another such element. Newton&#x27;s contemporaries severely criticized his theory that gravity was effected through &quot;action at a distance&quot;, as occult.

==Occultism==

In the English-speaking world, notable figures in the development of occultism included Helena Blavatsky and other figures associated with her Theosophical Society, senior figures in the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn like William Wynn Westcott and Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers, as well as other individuals such as Paschal Beverly Randolph, Emma Hardinge Britten, Arthur Edward Waite, andin the early twentieth centuryAleister Crowley, Dion Fortune, and Israel Regardie. By the end of the nineteenth century, occultist ideas had also spread into other parts of Europe, such as the German Empire, Austria-Hungary, and the Kingdom of Italy.

Unlike older forms of esotericism, occultism does not necessarily reject &quot;scientific progress or modernity&quot;. Lévi had stressed the need to solve the conflict between science and religion, something that he believed could be achieved by turning to what he thought was the ancient wisdom found in magic. The French scholar of Western esotericism Antoine Faivre noted that rather than outright accepting &quot;the triumph of scientism&quot;, occultists sought &quot;an alternative solution&quot;, trying to integrate &quot;scientific progress or modernity&quot; with &quot;a global vision that will serve to make the vacuousness of materialism more apparent&quot;. The Dutch scholar of hermeticism Wouter Hanegraaff remarked that occultism was &quot;essentially an attempt to adapt esotericism&quot; to the &quot;disenchanted world&quot;, a post-Enlightenment society in which growing scientific discovery had eradicated the &quot;dimension of irreducible mystery&quot; previously present. In doing so, he noted, occultism distanced itself from the &quot;traditional esotericism&quot; which accepted the premise of an &quot;enchanted&quot; world. According to the British historian of Western esotericism Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, occultist groups typically seek &quot;proofs and demonstrations by recourse to scientific tests or terminology&quot;.

In his work about Lévi, the German historian of religion Julian Strube has argued that the occultist wish for a &quot;synthesis&quot; of religion, science, and philosophy directly resulted from the context of contemporary socialism and progressive Catholicism. Similar to spiritualism, but in declared opposition to it, the emergence of occultism should thus be seen within the context of radical social reform, which was often concerned with establishing new forms of &quot;scientific religion&quot; while at the same time propagating the revival of an ancient tradition of &quot;true religion&quot;. Indeed, the emergence of both modern esotericism and socialism in July Monarchy France have been inherently intertwined.

Another feature of occultists is thatunlike earlier esotericiststhey often openly distanced themselves from Christianity, in some cases (like that of Crowley) even adopting explicitly anti-Christian stances. This reflected how pervasive the influence of secularisation had been on all areas of European society. In rejecting Christianity, these occultists sometimes turned towards pre-Christian belief systems and embraced forms of Modern Paganism, while others instead took influence from the religions of Asia, such as Hinduism and Buddhism. In various cases, certain occultists did both. Another characteristic of these occultists was the emphasis that they placed on &quot;the spiritual realization of the individual&quot;, an idea that would strongly influence the twentieth-century New Age and Human Potential Movement. This spiritual realization was encouraged both through traditional Western &#x27;occult sciences&#x27; like alchemy and ceremonial magic, but by the start of the twentieth century had also begun to include practices drawn from non-Western contexts, such as yoga.

Although occultism is distinguished from earlier forms of esotericism, many occultists have also been involved in older esoteric currents. For instance, occultists like and Rudolf Steiner were also theosophers, adhering to the ideas of the early modern Lutheran thinker Jakob Bohme, and seeking to integrate ideas from Bohmian theosophy and occultism. It has been noted, however, that this distancing from the Theosophical Society should be understood in the light of polemical identity formations among esotericists towards the end of the nineteenth century.

===Etic uses of the term===
In the mid-1990s, a new definition of &quot;occultism&quot; was put forth by Wouter Hanegraaff. According to Hanegraaff, the term &quot;occultism&quot; can be used not only for the nineteenth-century groups which openly self-described using that term but can also be used in reference to &quot;the &quot;type&quot; of esotericism that they represent&quot;.

Seeking to define occultism so that the term would be suitable &quot;as an etic category&quot; for scholars, Hanegraaff devised the following definition: &quot;a category in the study of religions, which comprises &quot;all attempts by esotericists to come to terms with a disenchanted world or, alternatively, by people in general to make sense of esotericism from the perspective of a disenchanted secular world&quot;. Hanegraaff noted that this etic usage of the term would be independent of emic usages of the term employed by occultists and other esotericists themselves.

In this definition, occultism covers many esoteric currents that have developed from the mid-nineteenth century onward, including Spiritualism, Theosophy, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, and the New Age. Employing this etic understanding of &quot;occultism&quot;, Hanegraaff argued that its development could begin to be seen in the work of the Swedish esotericist Emanuel Swedenborg and in the Mesmerist movement of the eighteenth century, although added that occultism only emerged in &quot;fully-developed form&quot; as Spiritualism, a movement that developed in the United States during the mid-nineteenth century.

Marco Pasi suggested that the use of Hanegraaff&#x27;s definition might cause confusion by presenting a group of nineteenth-century esotericists who called themselves &quot;occultists&quot; as just one part of a broader category of esotericists whom scholars would call &quot;occultists&quot;.

Following these discussions, Julian Strube argued that Lévi and other contemporary authors who would now be regarded as esotericists developed their ideas not against the background of an esoteric tradition in the first place. Rather, Lévi&#x27;s notion of occultism emerged in the context of highly influential radical socialist movements and widespread progressive, so-called neo-Catholic ideas. This further complicates Hanegraaff&#x27;s characteristics of occultism, since, throughout the nineteenth century, they apply to these reformist movements rather than to a supposed group of esotericists.

==Modern usage==
The term &quot;occult&quot; has also been used as a substantivized adjective as &quot;the occult&quot;, a term that has been particularly widely used among journalists and sociologists. This term was popularised by the publication of Colin Wilson&#x27;s 1971 book &quot;The Occult&quot;. This term has been used as an &quot;intellectual waste-basket&quot; into which a wide array of beliefs and practices have been placed because they do not fit readily into the categories of religion or science. According to Hanegraaff, &quot;the occult&quot; is a category into which gets placed a range of beliefs from &quot;spirits or fairies to parapsychological experiments, from UFO-abductions to Oriental mysticism, from vampire legends to channelling, and so on&quot;.

===Occulture===
The neologism &quot;occulture&quot; used within the industrial music scene of the late twentieth century was probably coined by one of its central figures, the musician and occultist Genesis P-Orridge. The scholar of religion Christopher Partridge used the term in an academic sense, stating that occulture was &quot;the new spiritual environment in the West; the reservoir feeding new spiritual springs; the soil in which new spiritualities are growing&quot;.

==Occultism and technology==
Recently scholars have offered perspectives on the occult as intertwined with media and technology. Examples include the work of film and media theorist Jeffrey Sconce and religious studies scholar John Durham Peters, both of whom suggest that occult movements historically utilize media and apparatuses as tools to reveal hidden aspects of reality or laws of nature. Erik Davis in his book &quot;Techgnosis&quot; gives an overview of occultism both ancient and modern from the perspective of cybernetics and information technologies. Philosopher Eugene Thacker discusses Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa&#x27;s &quot;Three Books of Occult Philosophy&quot; in his book &quot;In The Dust Of This Planet&quot;, where he shows how the horror genre utilizes occult themes to reveal hidden realities.

==See also==
* List of occult symbols
* List of occult terms
* List of occult writers
* List of occultists
* Magical organization
==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* University of Exeter Centre for the Study of Esotericism (EXESESO)
* ESSWE European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism, with many links to associated organizations, libraries, scholars etc.
* Joseph H. Peterson, Twilit Grotto: Archives of Western Esoterica (Esoteric Archives: Occult Literature)
* &quot;Occult Science and Philosophy of the Renaissance&quot;. Online exhibition from the Louisiana State University Libraries Special Collections.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="4" end="10" title="Occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="31" end="39" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="43" end="55" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="120" end="138" title="organized religion" label="organized religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="244" end="249" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="254" end="263" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q790024" start="311" end="335" title="extra-sensory perception" label="extra-sensory perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="340" end="354" title="parapsychology" label="parapsychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="366" end="381" title="Occult" label="occult sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483107" start="394" end="413" title="Early modern Europe" label="16th-century Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="426" end="435" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="437" end="444" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980728" start="450" end="463" title="natural magic" label="natural magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="474" end="483" title="Occult" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204760" start="495" end="514" title="France in the long nineteenth century" label="19th-century France"/>
<link wikidata="Q585905" start="538" end="562" title="Antoine Court de Gébelin" label="Antoine Court de Gébelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="638" end="650" title="Éliphas Lévi" label="Éliphas Lévi"/>
<link wikidata="Q472671" start="655" end="660" title="Papus" label="Papus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="734" end="750" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q171841" start="819" end="836" title="idiosyncrasy" label="idiosyncratically"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988481" start="991" end="1018" title="Western esotericism studies" label="Western esotericism studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="1171" end="1190" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613576" start="1194" end="1201" title="Qabalah" label="Qabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="1203" end="1215" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="Spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="1217" end="1226" title="Theosophy" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184719" start="1228" end="1241" title="Anthroposophy" label="Anthroposophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="1243" end="1248" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="1254" end="1287" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="1289" end="1296" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q794819" start="1306" end="1340" title="left-hand path and right-hand path" label="left-hand path and right-hand path"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683152" start="1364" end="1385" title="nominalized adjective" label="nominalized adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="1560" end="1569" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1629" end="1634" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="1836" end="1846" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="1891" end="1901" title="measurable" label="measurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="1957" end="1965" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="2169" end="2178" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="2180" end="2187" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980728" start="2193" end="2206" title="natural magic" label="natural magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2758" end="2769" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838795" start="2777" end="2793" title="Jean-Marie Ragon" label="Jean-Marie Ragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2935" end="2946" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q181707" start="3072" end="3087" title="Charles Fourier" label="Charles Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="3112" end="3124" title="Éliphas Lévi" label="Éliphas Lévi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="3171" end="3183" title="ritual magic" label="ritual magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501457" start="3191" end="3224" title="Dogme et rituel de la haute magie" label="Dogme et rituel de la haute magie"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="3805" end="3817" title="Éliphas Lévi" label="Éliphas Lévi"/>
<link wikidata="Q472671" start="3822" end="3827" title="Papus" label="Papus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="3991" end="4007" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="4082" end="4091" title="Theosophy" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="4341" end="4358" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412340" start="4445" end="4458" title="irrationality" label="irrationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q50685643" start="5617" end="5631" title="Traditionalist School (perennialism)" label="Traditionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="5639" end="5650" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="5920" end="5936" title="secret societies" label="secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q371154" start="6010" end="6021" title="Serge Hutin" label="Serge Hutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264732" start="6026" end="6037" title="Luc Benoist" label="Luc Benoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594320" start="6401" end="6418" title="Wouter Hanegraaff" label="Wouter Hanegraaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="6778" end="6789" title="Western esotericism" label="esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544389" start="7010" end="7023" title="Martinism" label="Neo-Martinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q586126" start="7079" end="7093" title="Antoine Faivre" label="Antoine Faivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="7122" end="7134" title="Éliphas Lévi" label="Éliphas Lévi"/>
<link wikidata="Q472671" start="7286" end="7291" title="Papus" label="Papus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725721" start="7293" end="7312" title="Stanislas de Guaita" label="Stanislas de Guaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q710019" start="7314" end="7330" title="Joséphin Péladan" label="Joséphin Péladan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102042" start="7332" end="7368" title="Georges-Albert Puyou de Pouvourville" label="Georges-Albert Puyou de Pouvourville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482675" start="7374" end="7386" title="Jean Bricaud" label="Jean Bricaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="7590" end="7600" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="7739" end="7750" title="hermeticism" label="hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594320" start="7751" end="7768" title="Wouter Hanegraaff" label="Wouter Hanegraaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="8176" end="8196" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q27406" start="8373" end="8380" title="polemic" label="polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q342646" start="8463" end="8478" title="Michael Dummett" label="Michael Dummett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011595" start="8537" end="8552" title="fortune-telling" label="fortune-telling"/>
<link wikidata="Q141037" start="9062" end="9074" title="Edward Tylor" label="Edward Tylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="9133" end="9138" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="9242" end="9253" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="9268" end="9277" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="9312" end="9318" title="Aether (classical element)" label="Aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="9344" end="9350" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q540538" start="9725" end="9746" title="William Wynn Westcott" label="William Wynn Westcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q705702" start="9751" end="9783" title="Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers" label="Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065146" start="9822" end="9846" title="Paschal Beverly Randolph" label="Paschal Beverly Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q444830" start="9848" end="9869" title="Emma Hardinge Britten" label="Emma Hardinge Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="9871" end="9890" title="Arthur Edward Waite" label="Arthur Edward Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="9925" end="9941" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q260670" start="9943" end="9955" title="Dion Fortune" label="Dion Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q980338" start="9961" end="9976" title="Israel Regardie" label="Israel Regardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="10088" end="10101" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="10103" end="10118" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="10128" end="10144" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q586126" start="10501" end="10515" title="Antoine Faivre" label="Antoine Faivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594320" start="10852" end="10869" title="Wouter Hanegraaff" label="Wouter Hanegraaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345803" start="10967" end="10985" title="Disenchantment" label="disenchanted world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366669" start="11359" end="11383" title="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke" label="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="11713" end="11735" title="Utopian socialism" label="contemporary socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q334973" start="11740" end="11763" title="Félicité de La Mennais" label="progressive Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="12172" end="12185" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="12412" end="12426" title="anti-Christian" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="12482" end="12496" title="secularisation" label="secularisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="12660" end="12675" title="Modern Paganism" label="Modern Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="12749" end="12757" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="12762" end="12770" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q567981" start="13028" end="13052" title="Human Potential Movement" label="Human Potential Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="13174" end="13190" title="ceremonial magic" label="ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="13311" end="13315" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="13491" end="13505" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635660" start="13516" end="13527" title="Christian theosophy" label="theosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q77017" start="13588" end="13599" title="Jakob Bohme" label="Jakob Bohme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337916" start="14340" end="14344" title="etic" label="etic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337916" start="14760" end="14764" title="emic" label="emic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185832" start="15215" end="15233" title="Emanuel Swedenborg" label="Emanuel Swedenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q547546" start="15245" end="15254" title="Mesmerism" label="Mesmerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="16557" end="16569" title="sociology" label="sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q368831" start="16619" end="16631" title="Colin Wilson" label="Colin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16655" end="16665" title="The Occult: A History" label="The Occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="17217" end="17233" title="industrial music" label="industrial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q740036" start="17348" end="17365" title="Genesis P-Orridge" label="Genesis P-Orridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113029" start="17391" end="17412" title="Christopher Partridge" label="Christopher Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23901573" start="17809" end="17823" title="Jeffrey Sconce" label="Jeffrey Sconce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230528" start="17854" end="17872" title="John Durham Peters" label="John Durham Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388552" start="18024" end="18034" title="Erik Davis" label="Erik Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154156" start="18203" end="18217" title="Eugene Thacker" label="Eugene Thacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="18228" end="18254" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939470" start="18268" end="18300" title="Three Books of Occult Philosophy" label="Three Books of Occult Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097703" start="18462" end="18484" title="List of occult symbols" label="List of occult symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631571" start="18487" end="18507" title="List of occult terms" label="List of occult terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631568" start="18510" end="18532" title="List of occult writers" label="List of occult writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441630" start="18535" end="18553" title="List of occultists" label="List of occultists"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946195" start="18556" end="18576" title="Magical organization" label="Magical organization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22489" wikidata="Q1649" url="?curid=22489" title="Oklahoma">
<text>Oklahoma ( ; Choctaw: , ) is a landlocked state in the South Central region of the United States. It borders Texas to the south and west, Kansas to the north, Missouri to the northeast, Arkansas to the east, New Mexico to the west, and Colorado to the northwest. Partially in the western extreme of the Upland South, it is the 20th-most extensive and the 28th-most populous of the 50 United States. Its residents are known as Oklahomans and its capital and largest city is Oklahoma City.

The state&#x27;s name is derived from the Choctaw words , &#x27;people&#x27; and , which translates as &#x27;red&#x27;. Oklahoma is also known informally by its nickname, &quot;The Sooner State&quot;, in reference to the Sooners, American settlers who staked their claims in formerly American Indian-owned lands until the Indian Appropriations Act of 1889 authorized the Land Rush of 1889 opening the land to settlement.

With ancient mountain ranges, prairie, mesas, and eastern forests, most of Oklahoma lies in the Great Plains, Cross Timbers, and the U.S. Interior Highlands, all regions prone to severe weather. Oklahoma is at a confluence of three major American cultural regions. Historically, it served as a government-sanctioned territory for American Indians moved from east of the Mississippi River, a route for cattle drives from Texas and related regions, and a destination for Southern settlers. There are currently 26 Indigenous languages spoken in Oklahoma. According to the 2020 U.S. census, 14.2 percent of Oklahomans identify as American Indians, the highest indigenous population by percentage in any state.

A major producer of natural gas, oil, and agricultural products, Oklahoma relies on an economic base of aviation, energy, telecommunications, and biotechnology. Oklahoma City and Tulsa serve as Oklahoma&#x27;s primary economic anchors, with nearly two-thirds of Oklahomans living within their metropolitan statistical areas.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Oklahoma&quot; comes from the Choctaw language phrase , &#x27;people&#x27;, and , translated as &#x27;red&#x27;. Choctaw Nation Chief Allen Wright suggested the name in 1866 during treaty negotiations with the federal US government on the use of Indian Territory. He envisioned an all exclusive American Indian state controlled by the United States bureau of Indian Affairs. &quot;Oklahoma&quot; later became the de facto name for Oklahoma Territory, and it was officially approved in 1890, two years after that area was opened to American settlers.

==History==
=== Pre-Columbian ===
Indigenous peoples were present in what is now Oklahoma by the last ice age. Ancestors of the Wichita and Affiliated Tribes (including Teyas and Escanjaques and Tawakoni), Tonkawa, and Caddo (including Kichai) lived in what is now Oklahoma. Southern Plains villagers lived in the central and west of the state, with a subgroup, the Panhandle culture people, living in the panhandle region. Caddoan Mississippian culture peoples lived in the eastern part of the state. Spiro Mounds, in what is now Spiro, Oklahoma, was a major Mississippian mound complex that flourished between AD 850 and 1450. Plains Apache people settled in the Southern Plains and in Oklahoma between 1300 and 1500.

=== European exploration and colonization ===

The expedition of Spaniard Francisco Vázquez de Coronado traveled through the area in 1541, but French explorers claimed the area in the early 18th century. By the 18th century, Comanche and Kiowa entered the region from the west and Quapaw and Osage peoples moved into what is now eastern Oklahoma. French colonists claimed the region until 1803, when all the French territory west of the Mississippi River was acquired by the United States in the Louisiana Purchase. The territory was a part of the Arkansas Territory from 1819 until 1828.

=== 19th century ===

During the 19th century, the U.S. federal government forcibly removed tens of thousands of American Indians from their ancestral homelands from across North America and transported them to the area including and surrounding present-day Oklahoma. The Choctaw was the first of the Five Civilized Tribes to be removed from the Southeastern United States. The phrase &quot;Trail of Tears&quot; originated from a description of the removal of the Choctaw Nation in 1831, although the term is usually used for the Cherokee removal.

Seventeen thousand Cherokees and 2,000 of their black slaves were deported. The area, already occupied by Osage and Quapaw tribes, was called for the Choctaw Nation until revised Native American and then later American policy redefined the boundaries to include other Native Americans. By 1890, more than 30 Native American nations and tribes had been concentrated on land within Indian Territory or &quot;Indian Country&quot;.

All Five Civilized Tribes signed treaties with the Confederate military during the American Civil War. The Cherokee Nation had an internal civil war. Slavery in Indian Territory was not abolished until 1866.

In the period between 1866 and 1899, cattle ranches in Texas strove to meet the demands for food in eastern cities and railroads in Kansas promised to deliver in a timely manner. Cattle trails and cattle ranches developed as cowboys either drove their product north or settled illegally in Indian Territory. In 1881, four of five major cattle trails on the western frontier traveled through Indian Territory.

Increased presence of white settlers in Indian Territory and their demand for land owned and guaranteed to Indian tribes by treaties with the U.S. government prompted the United States to enact the Dawes Act in 1887 and the Curtis Act of 1898. The acts abolished tribal governments, eliminated tribal ownership of land, and allotted of land to each head of an Indian family. An objective of the acts was the forced assimilation of Indians into white society. Land not allotted to individual Indians was owned by the U.S. government and sold or distributed to settlers and railroads. The proceeds of the land sales were used to educate Indian children and advance the policy of assimilation. As a result of the two acts about one-half of land previously owned by Indian tribes was owned by whites by 1900. Moreover, much of the land allotted to individual Indian heads of families became white-owned. Allottees often sold or were fraudulently deprived of their land.
The acquisition of tribal lands by the U.S. government led to land runs, also called &quot;land rushes,&quot; from 1887 and 1895. Major land runs, including the Land Rush of 1889, opened up millions of acres of formerly tribal lands to white settlement. The &quot;rushes&quot; began at a precise times as each prospective settler literally raced with other prospective settlers to claim ownership of of land under the Homestead Act of 1862. Usually land was claimed by settlers on a first come, first served basis. Those who broke the rules by crossing the border into the territory before the official opening time were said to have been crossing the border &quot;sooner&quot;, leading to the term &quot;sooners&quot;, which eventually became the state&#x27;s official nickname. George Washington Steele was appointed the first governor of the territory of Oklahoma in 1890.

===20th century ===

Attempts to create an all-Indian state named &quot;Oklahoma&quot; and a later attempt to create an all-Indian state named &quot;Sequoyah&quot; failed but the Sequoyah Statehood Convention of 1905 eventually laid the groundwork for the Oklahoma Statehood Convention, which took place two years later. On June 16, 1906, Congress enacted a statute authorizing the people of the Oklahoma and Indian Territories (as well what would become the states of Arizona and New Mexico) to form a constitution and state government in order to be admitted as a state. On November 16, 1907, President Theodore Roosevelt issued Presidential Proclamation no. , establishing Oklahoma as the 46th state in the Union.

The new state became a focal point for the emerging oil industry, as discoveries of oil pools prompted towns to grow rapidly in population and wealth. Tulsa eventually became known as the &quot;Oil Capital of the World&quot; for most of the 20th century and oil investments fueled much of the state&#x27;s early economy. In 1927, Oklahoman businessman Cyrus Avery, known as the &quot;Father of Route 66&quot;, began the campaign to create U.S. Route 66. Using a stretch of highway from Amarillo, Texas to Tulsa, Oklahoma to form the original portion of Highway 66, Avery spearheaded the creation of the U.S. Highway 66 Association to oversee the planning of Route 66, based in his hometown of Tulsa.

In late September 1918, the first cases of the Spanish flu appeared in Oklahoma. Though public health authorities statewide had some indication that the pandemic was westward, the turmoil caused by the rapid advancement of the disease quickly overwhelmed both health workers and local governing bodies. In Oklahoma City, shortages of both supplies and personnel were mitigated, in part, by the mobilization of the American Red Cross. Rough estimates based on contemporary reports indicate that approximately 100,000 people fell ill with the disease before the pandemic ebbed in 1919. Of those 100,000 cases, it is assumed that around 7,500 proved fatal, placing total mortality rates for the state in the area of 7.5%.

Oklahoma also has a rich African-American history. Many Black towns, founded by the Freedmen of the Five Tribes during Reconstruction, thrived in the early 20th century with the arrival of Black Exodusters who migrated from neighboring states, especially Kansas. The politician Edward P. McCabe encouraged Black settlers to come to what was then Indian Territory. McCabe discussed with President Theodore Roosevelt the possibility of making Oklahoma a majority-Black state.

By the early 20th century, the Greenwood district of Tulsa was one of the most prosperous African-American communities in the United States. Jim Crow laws had established racial segregation since before the start of the 20th century, but Tulsa&#x27;s Black residents had created a thriving area.

Social tensions were exacerbated by the revival of the Ku Klux Klan after 1915. The Tulsa race massacre broke out in 1921, with White mobs attacking Black people and carrying out a pogrom in Greenwood. In one of the costliest episodes of racist violence in American history, sixteen hours of rioting resulted in the destruction of 35 city blocks, $1.8 million in property damage, and an estimated death toll of between 75 and 300 people. By the late 1920s, the Ku Klux Klan had declined to negligible influence within the state.

During the 1930s, parts of the state began to suffer from the consequences of poor farming practices. This period was known as the Dust Bowl, throughout which areas of Kansas, Texas, New Mexico, and northwestern Oklahoma were hampered by long periods of little rainfall, strong winds, abnormally high temperatures, and most notably, severe dust storms sending thousands of farmers into poverty and forcing them to relocate to more fertile areas of the western United States. Over a twenty-year period ending in 1950, the state saw its only historical decline in population, dropping 6.9 percent as impoverished families migrated out of the state after the Dust Bowl.

Soil and water conservation projects markedly changed practices in the state, leading to the construction of massive flood control systems and dams to supply water for domestic needs and agricultural irrigation. As of 2024, Oklahoma had more than 4,700 dams, about 20% of all dams in the U.S.

In 1995, Oklahoma City was the site of the most destructive act of domestic terrorism in American history. The Oklahoma City bombing of April 19, 1995, in which Timothy McVeigh detonated a large, crude explosive device outside the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, killed 168 people, including 19 children. For his crime, McVeigh was executed by the federal government on June 11, 2001. His accomplice, Terry Nichols, is serving life in prison without parole for helping plan the attack and prepare the explosive.

=== 21st century ===

On May 31, 2016, several cities experienced record setting flooding.

On July 9, 2020, the Supreme Court of the United States determined in &quot;McGirt v. Oklahoma&quot; that the reservations of the Five Tribes, comprising much of Eastern Oklahoma, were never disestablished by Congress and thus are still &quot;Indian Country&quot; for the purposes of criminal law.

Later decisions by the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals also found the Quapaw Nation, Ottawa Tribe, Peoria Tribe, and Miami Tribe also had existing reservations. The Osage Nation is awaiting for a possible appellate decision after a district judge had ruled that the Osage reservation was disestablished.

==Geography==


Oklahoma is the 20th-largest state in the United States, covering an area of , with of land and of water. It lies partly in the Great Plains near the geographical center of the 48 contiguous states. It is bordered on the east by Arkansas and Missouri, on the north by Kansas, on the northwest by Colorado, on the far west by New Mexico, and on the south and near-west by Texas.

=== Borders ===
Oklahoma&#x27;s border with Kansas was defined as the 37th Parallel in the 1854 Kansas-Nebraska Act. This was disputed with the Cherokee and Osage Nations, which claimed their border extended North of this line and could not be part of the Kansas Territory. This was resolved in 1870 with the Drum Creek Treaty, which reestablished Kansas&#x27;s southern border as the 37th parallel. This also applied to the then No-Man&#x27;s Land that became the Oklahoma Panhandle.

The Oklahoma-Texas border consists of the Red River of the South in the south and the 100th meridian west as the western border between Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandle. These were first established in the 1819 Adams–Onís Treaty between the United States and Spain.

The Oklahoma panhandle was originally part of the Panhandle of the Republic of Texas, but when Texas joined the Union as a slave state, it could not retain any lands north of 36 degrees 30 minutes, as specified in the Missouri Compromise. The Panhandle existed as a no-man&#x27;s land until 1907 when Oklahoma acquired the territory upon gaining statehood.

Oklahoma&#x27;s Eastern border is divided between Missouri and Arkansas. The Missouri-Oklahoma border is defined as the Meridian passing through the Kawsmouth, where the Kansas River meets the Missouri River. This is the same Meridian as the Kansas-Missouri border.

The Oklahoma-Arkansas border was originally defined by two lines: the borders between Arkansas and the Cherokee and Choctaw Reservations. This formed two diagonal lines meeting at the western edge of Fort Smith Arkansas, with one line running northeast from the Red River and the other running southeast from the Oklahoma-Arkansas-Missouri border. The Choctaw-Arkansas border was established in the 1820 Treaty of Doak&#x27;s Sand, and later refined in the 1830 Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek. These treaties left a 57-acre exclave of the Choctaw reservation bounded by Arkansas, the Arkansas River and the Poteau River. This became the site of a smuggling camp called &quot;Coke Hill&quot;, noted mostly for its importance in cocaine smuggling.

After Petitioning congress to hand over jurisdiction, the 57 acres was given to Arkansas in 1905. The 1985 US Supreme Court Case Oklahoma v. Arkansas decided the land would remain Arkansas, even though the Choctaw had not been notified or asked about the territory being handed over. Therefore, the Poteau River serves as the Oklahoma-Arkansas boundary for approximately 1 mile, reducing the Choctaw Reservation and later Oklahoma by 57 acres as established in the treaties of the early 1800s.

===Topography===

Oklahoma is between the Great Plains and the Ozark Plateau in the Gulf of Mexico watershed, generally sloping from the high plains of its western boundary to the low wetlands of its southeastern boundary. Its highest and lowest points follow this trend, with its highest peak, Black Mesa, at above sea level, situated near its far northwest corner in the Oklahoma Panhandle. The state&#x27;s lowest point is on the Little River near its far southeastern boundary near the town of Idabel, which dips to above sea level.

Among the most geographically diverse states, Oklahoma is one of four to harbor more than 10 distinct ecological regions, with 11 in its borders—more per square mile than in any other state. Its western and eastern halves, however, are marked by extreme differences in geographical diversity: Eastern Oklahoma touches eight ecological regions and its western half contains three. Although having fewer ecological regions Western Oklahoma contains many rare, relic species.

Oklahoma has four primary mountain ranges: the Ouachita Mountains, the Arbuckle Mountains, the Wichita Mountains, and the Ozark Mountains. Contained within the U.S. Interior Highlands region, the Ozark and Ouachita Mountains are the only major mountainous region between the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachians. A portion of the Flint Hills stretches into north-central Oklahoma, and near the state&#x27;s eastern border, The Oklahoma Tourism &amp; Recreation Department regards Cavanal Hill as the world&#x27;s tallest hill; at , it fails their definition of a mountain by one foot.

The semi-arid high plains in the state&#x27;s northwestern corner harbor few natural forests; the region has a rolling to flat landscape with intermittent canyons and mesa ranges like the Glass Mountains. Partial plains interrupted by small, sky island mountain ranges like the Antelope Hills and the Wichita Mountains dot southwestern Oklahoma; transitional prairie and oak savannas cover the central portion of the state. The Ozark and Ouachita Mountains rise from west to east over the state&#x27;s eastern third, gradually increasing in elevation in an eastward direction.

More than 500 named creeks and rivers make up Oklahoma&#x27;s waterways, and with 200 lakes created by dams, it holds the nation&#x27;s highest number of artificial reservoirs. Most of the state lies in two primary drainage basins belonging to the Red and Arkansas Rivers, though the Lee and Little Rivers also contain significant drainage basins.
===Flora and fauna===


Due to Oklahoma&#x27;s location at the confluence of many geographic regions, the state&#x27;s climatic regions have a high rate of biodiversity. Forests cover 24 percent of Oklahoma and prairie grasslands composed of shortgrass, mixed-grass, and tallgrass prairie, harbor expansive ecosystems in the state&#x27;s central and western portions, although cropland has largely replaced native grasses. Where rainfall is sparse in the state&#x27;s western regions, shortgrass prairie and shrublands are the most prominent ecosystems, though pinyon pines, red cedar (junipers), and ponderosa pines grow near rivers and creek beds in the panhandle&#x27;s far western reaches. Southwestern Oklahoma contains many rare, disjunct species, including sugar maple, bigtooth maple, nolina, and Texas live oak.

Marshlands, cypress forests, and mixtures of shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, blue palmetto, and deciduous forests dominate the state&#x27;s southeastern quarter, while mixtures of largely post oak, elm, red cedar (&quot;Juniperus virginiana&quot;), and pine forests cover northeastern Oklahoma.

The state holds populations of white-tailed deer, mule deer, antelope, coyotes, mountain lions, bobcats, elk, and birds such as quail, doves, cardinals, bald eagles, red-tailed hawks, and pheasants. In prairie ecosystems, American bison, greater prairie chickens, badgers, and armadillo are common, and some of the nation&#x27;s largest prairie dog towns inhabit shortgrass prairie in the state&#x27;s panhandle. The Cross Timbers, a region transitioning from prairie to woodlands in Central Oklahoma, harbors 351 vertebrate species. The Ouachita Mountains are home to black bear, red fox, gray fox, and river otter populations, which coexist with 328 vertebrate species in southeastern Oklahoma. Also in southeastern Oklahoma lives the American alligator.

===Protected lands===

Oklahoma has fifty-one state parks, six national parks or protected regions, two national protected forests or grasslands, and a network of wildlife preserves and conservation areas. Six percent of the state&#x27;s of forest is public land, including the western portions of the Ouachita National Forest, the largest and oldest national forest in the Southern United States.

With , the Tallgrass Prairie Preserve in north-central Oklahoma is the largest protected area of tallgrass prairie in the world and is part of an ecosystem that encompasses only ten percent of its former land area, once covering fourteen states. In addition, the Black Kettle National Grassland covers of prairie in southwestern Oklahoma. The Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge is the oldest and largest of nine National Wildlife Refuges in the state and was founded in 1901, encompassing .

Of Oklahoma&#x27;s federally protected parks or recreational sites, the Chickasaw National Recreation Area is the largest, with . Other sites include the Santa Fe and Trail of Tears national historic trails, the Fort Smith and Washita Battlefield national historic sites, and the Oklahoma City National Memorial.

===Climate===

Oklahoma is in a humid subtropical region that lies in a transition zone between semiarid further to the west, humid continental to the north, and humid subtropical to the east and southeast. Most of the state lies in an area known as Tornado Alley characterized by frequent interaction between cold, dry air from Canada, warm to hot, dry air from Mexico and the Southwestern U.S., and warm, moist air from the Gulf of Mexico. The interactions between these three contrasting air currents produces severe weather (severe thunderstorms, damaging thunderstorm winds, large hail and tornadoes) with a frequency virtually unseen anywhere else on planet Earth. An average 62 tornadoes strike the state per year—one of the highest rates in the world.

Because of Oklahoma&#x27;s position between zones of differing prevailing temperature and winds, weather patterns within the state can vary widely over relatively short distances, and they can change drastically in a short time. On November 11, 1911, the temperature at Oklahoma City reached (the record high for that date), then a cold front of unprecedented intensity slammed across the state, causing the temperature to reach (the record low for that date) by midnight. This type of phenomenon is also responsible for many of the tornadoes in the area, such as the 1912 Oklahoma tornado outbreak when a warm front traveled along a stalled cold front, resulting in an average of about one tornado per hour.

The humid subtropical climate (Köppen &quot;Cfa&quot;) of central, southern, and eastern Oklahoma is influenced heavily by southerly winds bringing moisture from the Gulf of Mexico. Traveling westward, the climate transitions progressively toward a semiarid zone (Köppen &quot;BSk&quot;) in the high plains of the Panhandle and other western areas from about Lawton westward, less frequently touched by southern moisture. Precipitation and temperatures decline from east to west accordingly, with areas in the southeast averaging an annual temperature of and an annual rainfall of generally over and up to , while areas of the (higher-elevation) panhandle average , with annual rainfall under .

Over almost all of Oklahoma, winter is the driest season. Average monthly precipitation increases dramatically in the spring to a peak in May, the wettest month over most of the state, with its frequent and not uncommonly severe thunderstorm activity. Early June can still be wet, but most years see a marked decrease in rainfall during June and early July. Mid-summer (July and August) represents a secondary dry season over much of Oklahoma, with long stretches of hot weather with only sporadic thunderstorm activity not uncommon many years. Severe drought is common in the hottest summers, such as those of 1934, 1954, 1980 and 2011, all of which featured weeks on end of virtual rainlessness and highs well over . Average precipitation rises again from September to mid-October, representing a secondary wetter season, then declines from late October through December.

The entire state frequently experiences temperatures above or below , though below-zero temperatures are rare in south-central and southeastern Oklahoma. Snowfall ranges from an average of less than in the south to just over on the border of Colorado in the panhandle. The state is home to the Storm Prediction Center, the National Severe Storms Laboratory, the Warning Decision Training Division, and the Radar Operations Center, all part of the National Weather Service and in Norman.

===Cities and towns===

Oklahoma had 598 incorporated places in 2010, including four cities over 100,000 in population and 43 over 10,000. Two of the fifty largest cities in the United States are in Oklahoma, Oklahoma City and Tulsa, and sixty-five percent of Oklahomans live within their metropolitan areas, or spheres of economic and social influence defined by the United States Census Bureau as a metropolitan statistical area. Oklahoma City, the state&#x27;s capital and largest city, had the largest metropolitan area in the state in 2020, with 1,425,695 people, and the metropolitan area of Tulsa had 1,015,331 residents. Between 2000 and 2010, the leading cities in population growth were Blanchard (172.4%), Elgin (78.2%), Jenks (77.0%), Piedmont (56.7%), Bixby (56.6%), and Owasso (56.3%).

In descending order of population, Oklahoma&#x27;s largest cities in 2010 were: Oklahoma City (579,999, +14.6%), Tulsa (391,906, −0.3%), Norman (110,925, +15.9%), Broken Arrow (98,850, +32.0%), Lawton (96,867, +4.4%), Edmond (81,405, +19.2%), Moore (55,081, +33.9%), Midwest City (54,371, +0.5%), Enid (49,379, +5.0%), and Stillwater (45,688, +17.0%). Of the state&#x27;s ten largest cities, three are outside the metropolitan areas of Oklahoma City and Tulsa, and only Lawton has a metropolitan statistical area of its own as designated by the United States Census Bureau, though the metropolitan statistical area of Fort Smith, Arkansas extends into the state.

Under Oklahoma law, municipalities are divided into two categories: cities, defined as having more than 1,000 residents, and towns, with under 1,000 residents. Both have legislative, judicial, and public power within their boundaries, but cities can choose between a mayor–council, council–manager, or strong mayor form of government, while towns operate through an elected officer system.

==Demographics==
From a 1920 U.S. census population of 2,028,283, Oklahoma&#x27;s population has continued to increase. At the 2010 census, its population was 3,751,675. The 2020 census revealed its population to be was 3,959,353, an 5.5% increase since 2010. A 2022 American Community Survey estimate found that the population had surpassed 4 million residents for the first time. Among the states of the South Central region, Oklahoma had the second-largest population increase from 2010 to 2020, behind Texas.

Of the state&#x27;s total resident population, approximately 236,882 were immigrants according to a study in 2018, making up 6% of the state&#x27;s population at the time. Most of its immigrant population came from Mexico (45%), Vietnam (5%), India (5%), Germany (3%), and Guatemala (3%). In the state, 246,550 residents were native-born Americans who had at least one immigrant parent. An estimated 85,000 immigrants were undocumented with 125,989 Oklahomans having lived with at least one undocumented family member between 2010 and 2014. Immigrants to Oklahoma have contributed more than a billion U.S. dollars in taxes in 2018. In 2011, the U.S. Census Bureau&#x27;s American Community Survey data from 2005 to 2009 indicated about 5% of Oklahoma&#x27;s residents were born outside the United States. This was lower than the national figure (about 12.5% of U.S. residents were foreign-born).

In 2010, the center of population of Oklahoma was in Lincoln County near the town of Sparks.

According to HUD&#x27;s 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 3,754 homeless people in Oklahoma.

===Race and ethnicity===

As with majority of the U.S., Oklahoma has experienced diversification since the beginning of the 21st century; in 1940, 90.1% of the state&#x27;s population was non-Hispanic White; in 2020, 75.5% of the population was White, down from 1990&#x27;s 81% yet up from 2010&#x27;s 72.2%. Among its population at the 2020 census, the remainder of its increasingly diverse population was 11.9% Hispanic or Latino of any race, 16% American Indian and Alaska Native, 9.7% Black or African American, 3.1% Asian, 0.4% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, and 9% some other race. According to the 2010 census, 8.6% were American Indian and Alaska Native, 7.4% Black or African American, 1.7% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 4.1% from some other race and 5.9% of two or more races; 8.9% of Oklahoma&#x27;s population were of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin (they may be of any race).


In 2005, Oklahoma&#x27;s estimated ancestral makeup was 14.5% German, 13.1% American, 11.8% Irish, 9.6% English, 8.1% African American, and 11.4% Native American (including 7.9% Cherokee), though the percentage of people claiming American Indian as their only race was 8.1%. Most people from Oklahoma who self-identify as having American ancestry are of overwhelmingly English and Scots-Irish ancestry with significant amounts of Scottish, Welsh and Irish ancestry as well. The majority of Hispanics in Oklahoma are of Mexican origin. There are 38 federally recognized Native American tribes in the state.

In 2011, 47.3% of Oklahoma&#x27;s population younger than age1 were minorities, meaning they had at least one parent who was not non-Hispanic white.

===Language===

====English====
The English language has been official in the state of Oklahoma since 2010. The variety of North American English spoken is called Oklahoma English, which is &quot;quite diverse with its uneven blending of features of North Midland, South Midland, and Southern dialects&quot;. In 2000, 2,977,187 Oklahomans—92.6% of the resident population, five years or older—spoke only English at home, a decrease from 95% in 1990. 238,732 Oklahoma residents reported speaking a language other than English at home in the 2000 census, about 7.4% of the state&#x27;s population.

====Native American languages====

The two most commonly spoken native North American languages are Cherokee and Choctaw, with 10,000 Cherokee speakers living within the Cherokee Nation tribal jurisdiction area of eastern Oklahoma and another 10,000 Choctaw speakers living in the Choctaw Nation directly south of the Cherokees. Cherokee is an official language in the Cherokee Nation tribal jurisdiction area and in the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians.

Twenty-five Native American languages are spoken in Oklahoma, second only to California. However, only Cherokee, if any, exhibits some language vitality at present. &quot;Ethnologue&quot; sees Cherokee as moribund because the only remaining active users of the language are members of the grandparent generation and older.

====Other languages====

Spanish is the second-most commonly spoken language in the state, with 141,060 speakers counted in 2000. German has 13,444 speakers representing about 0.4% of the state&#x27;s population, and Vietnamese is spoken by 11,330 people, or about 0.4% of the population, many of whom live in the Asia District of Oklahoma City. Other languages include French with 8,258 speakers (0.3%), Chinese with 6,413 (0.2%), Korean with 3,948 (0.1%), Arabic with 3,265 (0.1%), other Asian languages with 3,134 (0.1%), Tagalog with 2,888 (0.1%), Japanese with 2,546 (0.1%), and African languages with 2,546 (0.1%).

===Religion===

Oklahoma is part of a geographical region characterized by conservative and Evangelical Protestant Christianity known as the &quot;Bible Belt&quot;. Spanning the southern and eastern parts of the United States, the area is known for politically and socially conservative views, with the Republican Party having the greater number of voters registered between the two major parties. Tulsa, the state&#x27;s second-largest city, home to Oral Roberts University, is sometimes called the &quot;buckle of the Bible Belt&quot;.

In 2000, there were about 5,000 Jews and 6,000 Muslims, with ten congregations to each group.

According to the Pew Research Center in 2008, the majority of Oklahoma&#x27;s religious adherents were Christian, accounting for about 80% of the population. The percentage of Catholics was half the national average, while the percentage of Evangelical Protestants was more than twice the national average (tied with Arkansas for the largest percentage of any state).
In 2010, the state&#x27;s largest church memberships were in the Southern Baptist Convention (886,394 members), the United Methodist Church (282,347), the Roman Catholic Church (178,430), and the Assemblies of God (85,926) and Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) (47,349). Other religions represented in the state include Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam.

According to the Pew Research Center in 2014, the majority of Oklahoma&#x27;s religious adherents remained Christian accounting for 79% of the population, 9 percent higher than the national average. The percentage of Evangelical Protestants declined since the last study, but they remain the largest religious group in the state at 47% over 20 percent higher than the national average. The largest growth over the six years between Pew&#x27;s 2008 and 2014 survey was in the number of people who identify as unaffiliated in the state with an increase of 6% of the total population.

By the 2020 Public Religion Research Institute&#x27;s survey, 73% of the population were Christian. Evangelicalism made up 29% of the state population, followed by Mainline Protestantism at 19%. Historically and predominantly African-American and Latino churches collectively made up 8% of the religious demographic. An estimated 13% of the state&#x27;s religious population were Roman Catholic. About 22% of the population had no religious affiliation.

===Incarceration===

Oklahoma has been described as &quot;the world&#x27;s prison capital&quot;, with 1,079 of every 100,000 residents imprisoned in 2018, the fourth-highest incarceration rate of any American state, and by comparison, higher than the incarceration rates of any country in the world.

=== Gender issues ===
In an April 2023 report, The Sentencing Project highlighted Oklahoma&#x27;s Failure to Protect law, which has &quot;been used primarily against women&quot; and has &quot;sometimes resulted in survivors of abuse facing longer sentences for allegedly failing to protect their children from harm than the person who committed the abuse.&quot; The report states that &quot;since the law went into effect in 2009, 139 women in Oklahoma have been imprisoned solely for failure-to-protect charges.&quot; The Human Rights Campaign has also pointed out cases of the Oklahoma legislature&#x27;s actions against the LGBTQ population and censuring of a nonbinary lawmaker.

==Economy==

Oklahoma is host to a diverse range of sectors including aviation, energy, transportation equipment, food processing, electronics, and telecommunications. Oklahoma is an important producer of natural gas, aircraft, and food. The state ranks third in the nation for production of natural gas, is the 27th-most agriculturally productive state, and also ranks 5th in production of wheat. Four Fortune 500 companies and six Fortune 1000 companies are headquartered in Oklahoma, and it has been rated one of the most business-friendly states in the nation, with the 7th-lowest tax burden in 2007.
* Total employment (2018): 1,385,228
* Number of employer establishments: 93,561

In 2010, Oklahoma City-based Love&#x27;s Travel Stops &amp; Country Stores ranked 18th on the Forbes list of largest private companies, Tulsa-based QuikTrip ranked 37th, and Oklahoma City-based Hobby Lobby ranked 198th in 2010 report.

Oklahoma&#x27;s gross domestic product was $254.13 billion in 2023. The state had a per capita income of $58,499 in 2023, which ranked 43rd in the U.S., and its median household income ranked 46th at $59,673. Additionally, Oklahoma ranks consistently among the lowest states in cost of living index.

Though oil has historically dominated the state&#x27;s economy, a collapse in the energy industry during the 1980s led to the loss of nearly 90,000 energy-related jobs between 1980 and 2000, severely damaging the local economy. Oil accounted for 35 billion dollars in Oklahoma&#x27;s economy in 2007, and employment in the state&#x27;s oil industry was outpaced by five other industries in 2007. , the state&#x27;s unemployment rate was 5.3%.

===Industry===

In mid-2011, Oklahoma had a civilian labor force of 1.7 million and non-farm employment fluctuated around 1.5 million. The government sector provides the most jobs, with 339,300 in 2011, followed by the transportation and utilities sector, providing 279,500 jobs, and the sectors of education, business, and manufacturing, providing 207,800, 177,400, and 132,700 jobs, respectively. Among the state&#x27;s largest industries, the aerospace sector generates $11 billion annually.

Tulsa is home to the largest airline maintenance base in the world, which serves as the global maintenance and engineering headquarters for American Airlines. In total, aerospace accounts for more than 10 percent of Oklahoma&#x27;s industrial output, and it is one of the top 10 states in aerospace engine manufacturing. Because of its position in the center of the United States, Oklahoma is also among the top states for logistic centers, and a major contributor to weather-related research.

The state is the top manufacturer of tires in North America and contains one of the fastest-growing biotechnology industries in the nation. In 2005, international exports from Oklahoma&#x27;s manufacturing industry totaled $4.3 billion, accounting for 3.6 percent of its economic impact. Tire manufacturing, meat processing, oil and gas equipment manufacturing, and air conditioner manufacturing are the state&#x27;s largest manufacturing industries.

===Energy===

Oklahoma is the nation&#x27;s third-largest producer of natural gas, and its fifth-largest producer of crude oil. The state also has the second-greatest number of active drilling rigs, and it is even ranked fifth in crude oil reserves. While the state was ranked eighth for installed wind energy capacity in 2011, it still was at the bottom of states in usage of renewable energy in 2009, with 94% of its electricity being generated by non-renewable sources in 2009, including 25% from coal and 46% from natural gas.

Ten years later in 2019, 53.5% of electricity was produced from natural gas and 34.6% from wind power.

Ranking 13th for total energy consumption per capita in 2009, the state&#x27;s energy costs were eighth-lowest in the nation.

==== Oil, gas, and coal ====
As a whole, the oil energy industry contributes $35 billion to Oklahoma&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP), and employees of the state&#x27;s oil-related companies earn an average of twice the state&#x27;s typical yearly income. In 2009, the state had 83,700 commercial oil wells churning of crude oil. A tabulated 8.5% of the nation&#x27;s natural gas supply is held in Oklahoma, with being produced in 2009.

The Oklahoma Stack Play is a geographic referenced area in the Anadarko Basin. The oil field &quot;Sooner Trend&quot;, Anadarko basin and the counties of Kingfisher and Canadian make up the basis for the &quot;Oklahoma STACK&quot;. Other Plays such as the Eagle Ford are geological rather than geographical.

All of the Fortune 500 companies based in Oklahoma are energy-related, including some of the largest companies in the petroleum industry in the U.S. Tulsa&#x27;s ONEOK and Williams Companies are the state&#x27;s largest and second-largest companies respectively, also ranking as the nation&#x27;s second- and third-largest companies in the field of energy, according to &quot;Fortune&quot; magazine.

Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric, commonly referred to as OG&amp;E (NYSE: OGE) operates four base electric power plants in Oklahoma. Two of them are coal-fired power plants: one in Muskogee, and the other in Red Rock. Two are gas-fired power plants: one in Harrah and the other in Konawa. OG&amp;E was the first electric company in Oklahoma to generate electricity from wind farms in 2003.

==== Nuclear power ====
Oklahoma had no operational nuclear power plants as of March 2021.

In 1973, the Public Service Company of Oklahoma proposed the Black Fox Nuclear Power Plant near Inola, Oklahoma. Protestors disrupted project construction in 1979, several months after the Three Mile Island accident, and the project was cancelled in 1982 after nine years of legal challenges.

====Wind generation====
===Agriculture===

The 27th-most agriculturally productive state, Oklahoma is fifth in cattle production and fifth in production of wheat. Approximately 5.5 percent of American beef comes from Oklahoma, while the state produces 6.1 percent of American wheat, 4.2 percent of American pig products, and 2.2 percent of dairy products.

The state had 85,500 farms in 2012, collectively producing $4.3 billion in animal products and fewer than one billion dollars in crop output with more than $6.1 billion added to the state&#x27;s gross domestic product. Poultry and swine are its second- and third-largest agricultural industries.

==Education==

With an educational system made up of public school districts and independent private institutions, Oklahoma had 638,817 students enrolled in 1,845 public primary, secondary, and vocational schools in 533 school districts . Oklahoma has the highest enrollment of Native American students in the nation with 126,078 students in the 2009–10 school year. Oklahoma spent $7,755 for each student in 2008, and was 47th in the nation in expenditures per student, though its growth of total education expenditures between 1992 and 2002 ranked 22nd.

The state is among the best in pre-kindergarten education, and the National Institute for Early Education Research rated it first in the United States with regard to standards, quality, and access to pre-kindergarten education in 2004, calling it &quot;a model for early childhood schooling&quot;. High school dropout rate decreased from 3.1 to 2.5 percent between 2007 and 2008 with Oklahoma ranked among 18 other states with 3 percent or less dropout rate. In 2004, the state ranked 36th in the nation for the relative number of adults with high school diplomas, though at 85.2 percent, it had the highest rate among Southern states. According to a study conducted by the Pell Institute, Oklahoma ranks 48th in college-participation for low-income students.

The University of Oklahoma, The University of Tulsa, Oklahoma State University, the University of Central Oklahoma, and Northeastern State University are the largest institutions of higher education in Oklahoma, each operating through one primary campus and satellite campuses throughout the state. The two state universities, along with Oklahoma City University and the University of Tulsa, rank among the country&#x27;s best universities.

Oklahoma City University School of Law, University of Oklahoma College of Law, and University of Tulsa College of Law are the state&#x27;s only ABA-accredited institutions. Both University of Oklahoma and University of Tulsa are Tier2 institutions, with the University of Oklahoma ranked 55th and the University of Tulsa ranked 120th in the nation.

Oklahoma holds eleven public regional universities, including Northeastern State University, the second-oldest institution of higher education west of the Mississippi River, also containing the only College of Optometry in Oklahoma and the largest enrollment of Native American students in the nation by percentage and amount. Langston University is Oklahoma&#x27;s only historically black college. Six of the state&#x27;s universities were placed in the Princeton Review&#x27;s list of best 122 regional colleges in 2007, and three made the list of top colleges for best value. The state has 55 post-secondary technical institutions operated by Oklahoma&#x27;s CareerTech program for training in specific fields of industry or trade.

In the 2007–2008 school year, there were 181,973 undergraduate students, 20,014 graduate students, and 4,395 first-professional degree students enrolled in Oklahoma colleges. Of these students, 18,892 received a bachelor&#x27;s degree, 5,386 received a master&#x27;s degree, and 462 received a first professional degree. This means the state of Oklahoma produces an average of 38,278-degree-holders per completions component (i.e. July 1, 2007June 30, 2008). National average is 68,322 total degrees awarded per completions component.

Beginning on April 2, 2018, tens of thousands of K–12 public school teachers went on strike due to lack of funding. According to the National Education Association, teachers in Oklahoma had ranked 49th out of the 50 states in terms of teacher pay in 2016. The Oklahoma Legislature had passed a measure a week earlier to raise teacher salaries by $6,100, but it fell short of the $10,000 raise for teachers, $5,000 raise for other school employees, and $200 million increase in extra education funding many had sought. A survey in 2019 found that the pay raise obtained by the strike lifted the State&#x27;s teacher pay ranking to 34th in the nation.

===Non-English education===

The Cherokee Nation instigated a ten-year plan in 2005 that involved growing new speakers of the Cherokee language from childhood as well as speaking it exclusively at home. The plan was part of an ambitious goal that in fifty years would have at least 80% of their people fluent. The Cherokee Preservation Foundation has invested $3 million into opening schools, training teachers, and developing curricula for language education, as well as initiating community gatherings where the language can be actively used.
A Cherokee language immersion school in Tahlequah, Oklahoma educates students from pre-school through eighth grade.

==Culture==

Oklahoma is placed in the South by the United States Census Bureau, but other definitions place the state at least partly in the Southwest, Midwest, Upland South, and Great Plains. Oklahomans have a high rate of English, Scotch-Irish, German, and Native American ancestry, with 25 different Indigenous languages spoken in the state.

Because many American Indians were forced to move to Indian territory (modern day Oklahoma) when American settlement within North America had increased, Oklahoma has much linguistic diversity. Mary Linn, an associate professor of anthropology at the University of Oklahoma and the associate curator of Native American languages at the Sam Noble Museum, notes Oklahoma also has high levels of language endangerment.

Sixty-seven Native American tribes and bands are represented in Oklahoma, including 38 federally recognized tribes, who are headquartered and have tribal jurisdictional areas or Indian reservations in the state. Native American tribes, Western ranchers, Southern settlers, and Eastern oil barons have shaped the state&#x27;s cultural predisposition, and its largest cities have been named among the most underrated cultural destinations in the United States.

Residents of Oklahoma are associated with traits of Southern hospitality—the 2006 Catalogue for Philanthropy (with data from 2004) ranks Oklahomans 7th in the nation for overall generosity. The state has also been associated with a negative cultural stereotype first popularized by John Steinbeck&#x27;s 1939 novel &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;, which described the plight of uneducated, poverty-stricken Dust Bowl-era farmers deemed &quot;Okies&quot;. While the term is often used in a positive manner by Oklahomans, it is still considered a derogatory term by many.

===Arts===


In the state&#x27;s largest urban areas, pockets of jazz culture flourish, and African American, Mexican American, and Asian American communities produce music and art of their respective cultures. The Oklahoma Mozart Festival in Bartlesville is one of the largest classical music festivals on the Southern Plains, and Oklahoma City&#x27;s Festival of the Arts has been named one of the top fine arts festivals in the nation.

The state has a rich history in ballet with five Native American ballerinas attaining worldwide fame. These were Yvonne Chouteau, sisters Marjorie and Maria Tallchief, Rosella Hightower and Moscelyne Larkin, known collectively as the Five Moons. &quot;The New York Times&quot; rates the Tulsa Ballet as one of the top ballet companies in the United States. The Oklahoma City Ballet and University of Oklahoma&#x27;s dance program were formed by ballerina Yvonne Chouteau and husband Miguel Terekhov. The university program was founded in 1962 and was the first fully accredited program of its kind in the United States.

In Sand Springs, an outdoor amphitheater called &quot;Discoveryland!&quot; (since closed) is the official performance headquarters for the musical &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; Ridge Bond, native of McAlester, Oklahoma, starred in the Broadway and International touring productions of &quot;Oklahoma!&quot;, playing the role of &quot;Curly McClain&quot; in more than 2,600 performances. In 1953 he was featured along with the &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; cast on a CBS Omnibus television broadcast. Bond was instrumental in the Oklahoma! title song becoming the Oklahoma state song and is also featured on the U.S. postage stamp commemorating the musical&#x27;s 50th anniversary. Historically, the state has produced musical styles such as The Tulsa Sound and western swing, which was popularized at Cain&#x27;s Ballroom in Tulsa. The building, known as the &quot;Carnegie Hall of Western Swing&quot;, served as the performance headquarters of Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys during the 1930s. Stillwater is known as the epicenter of Red Dirt music, the best-known proponent of which is the late Bob Childers.

Prominent theatre companies in Oklahoma include, in the capital city, Lyric Theatre of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City Theatre Company, Carpenter Square Theatre, Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park, and CityRep. CityRep is a professional company affording equity points to those performers and technical theatre professionals. In Tulsa, Oklahoma&#x27;s oldest resident professional company is American Theatre Company, and Theatre Tulsa is the oldest community theatre company west of the Mississippi. Other companies in Tulsa include Heller Theatre and Tulsa Spotlight Theater. The cities of Norman, Lawton, and Stillwater, among others, also host well-reviewed community theatre companies.

Oklahoma is in the nation&#x27;s middle percentile in per capita spending on the arts, ranking 17th, and contains more than 300 museums. The Philbrook Museum of Tulsa is considered one of the top 50 fine art museums in the United States, and the Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History in Norman, one of the largest university-based art and history museums in the country, documents the natural history of the region. The collections of Thomas Gilcrease are housed in the Gilcrease Museum of Tulsa, which also holds the world&#x27;s largest, most comprehensive collection of art and artifacts of the American West.

The Egyptian art collection at the Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art in Shawnee is considered to be the finest Egyptian collection between Chicago and Los Angeles. The Oklahoma City Museum of Art contains the most comprehensive collection of glass sculptures by artist Dale Chihuly in the world, and Oklahoma City&#x27;s National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum documents the heritage of the American Western frontier. With remnants of the Holocaust and artifacts relevant to Judaism, the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art of Tulsa preserves the largest collection of Jewish art in the Southwest United States.

===Festivals and events===
Oklahoma&#x27;s centennial celebration was named the top event in the United States for 2007 by the American Bus Association, and consisted of multiple celebrations saving with the 100th anniversary of statehood on November 16, 2007. Annual ethnic festivals and events take place throughout the state such as ceremonial events, include festivals (as examples) in Scottish, Irish, German, Italian, Vietnamese, Chinese, Czech, Jewish, Arab, Mexican and African-American communities depicting cultural heritage or traditions.

Oklahoma City is home to a few reoccurring events and festivals. During a ten-day run in Oklahoma City, the State Fair of Oklahoma attracts roughly one million people along with the annual Festival of the Arts. Such as various Latin American and Asian heritage festivals, and cultural festivals such as the Juneteenth celebrations are held in Oklahoma City each year. The Oklahoma City Pride Parade has been held annually in late June since 1987 in the gay district of Oklahoma City on 39th and Penn. The First Friday Art Walk in the Paseo Arts District is an art appreciation festival held the first Friday of every month. Additionally, an annual art festival is held in the Paseo on Memorial Day Weekend.

The Tulsa State Fair attracts more than a million people each year during its ten-day run, and the city&#x27;s Mayfest festival entertained more than 375,000 in four days during 2007. In 2006, Tulsa&#x27;s Oktoberfest was named one of the top 10 in the world by &quot;USA Today&quot;.

Norman plays host to the Norman Music Festival, a festival that highlights native Oklahoma bands and musicians. Norman is also host to the Medieval Fair of Norman, which has been held annually since 1976 and was Oklahoma&#x27;s first medieval fair. The Fair was held first on the south oval of the University of Oklahoma campus and in the third year moved to the Duck Pond in Norman until the Fair became too big and moved to Reaves Park in 2003. The Medieval Fair of Norman is Oklahoma&#x27;s &quot;largest weekend event and the third-largest event in Oklahoma, and was selected by Events Media Network as one of the top 100 events in the nation&quot;.
===Sports===
The Oklahoma City Thunder of the National Basketball Association (NBA) is the state&#x27;s only major league sports franchise. The state had a team in the Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association, the Tulsa Shock, from 2010 through 2015, but the team relocated to Dallas–Fort Worth after that season and became the Dallas Wings.

Oklahoma has teams in several minor leagues, including Minor League Baseball at the Triple-A and Double-A levels (the Oklahoma City Comets and Tulsa Drillers, respectively), hockey&#x27;s ECHL with the Tulsa Oilers, and a number of indoor football leagues. In the last-named sport, the state&#x27;s most notable team was the Tulsa Talons, which played in the Arena Football League until 2012, when the team was moved to San Antonio, Texas. The Oklahoma Defenders replaced the Talons as Tulsa&#x27;s only professional arena football team, playing the CPIFL. The Oklahoma City Blue, of the NBA G League, relocated to Oklahoma City from Tulsa in 2014, where they were formerly known as the Tulsa 66ers. Tulsa is the base for the Tulsa Revolution, which plays in the American Indoor Soccer League. Enid and Lawton host professional basketball teams in the USBL and the CBA.
Collegiate athletics are a popular draw in the state. The state has four schools that compete at the highest level of college sports, NCAA Division I. The Oklahoma Sooners participate in the Southeastern Conference, and the Oklahoma State Cowboys and Cowgirls participate in the Big 12 Conference. The Big 12 and SEC are two of the so-called Power Four conferences of the top tier of college football, Division I FBS. The Sooners and Cowboys average well over 50,000 fans attending their football games, and Oklahoma&#x27;s football program ranked 12th in attendance among American colleges in 2010, with an average of 84,738 people attending its home games. The two universities meet several times each year in rivalry matches known as the Bedlam Series, which are some of the greatest sporting draws to the state. &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; magazine rates Oklahoma and Oklahoma State among the top colleges for athletics in the nation.

Two private institutions in Tulsa, the University of Tulsa and Oral Roberts University; are also Division I members. Tulsa competes in FBS football and other sports in the American Athletic Conference, while Oral Roberts, which does not sponsor football, is a member of the Summit League. In addition, 12 of the state&#x27;s smaller colleges and universities compete in NCAA Division II as members of three different conferences, and eight other Oklahoma institutions participate in the NAIA, mostly within the Sooner Athletic Conference.

Regular LPGA tournaments are held at Cedar Ridge Country Club in Tulsa, and major championships for the PGA or LPGA have been played at Southern Hills Country Club in Tulsa, Oak Tree Country Club in Oklahoma City, and Cedar Ridge Country Club in Tulsa. Rated one of the top golf courses in the nation, Southern Hills has hosted five PGA Championships, including one in 2022, and three U.S. Opens, the most recent in 2001. Rodeos are popular throughout the state, and Guymon, in the state&#x27;s panhandle, hosts one of the largest in the nation.

ESPN called Oklahoma City &quot;the center of the softball universe&quot;, specifically referring to the fast-pitch version, in a 2020 story. Oklahoma City is home to the governing body of the sport in the United States, USA Softball, which has its headquarters in a complex that also includes Devon Park. It annually hosts the Women&#x27;s College World Series, the eight-team final round of the NCAA Division I softball tournament. Devon Park will host softball at the 2028 Summer Olympics, and the Riversport OKC complex will host canoe slalom at the Games.

College wrestling has strong tradition in Oklahoma. Oklahoma State has the most NCAA national championships of any collegiate team with 34, with the Oklahoma Sooners having 7 NCAA wrestling titles. The National Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum is headquartered in Stillwater.

A teqball competition was held in Tulsa June 14–16, 2024.

====Current professional teams====





==Health==

Oklahoma was the 21st-largest recipient of medical funding from the federal government in 2005, with health-related federal expenditures in the state totaling $75,801,364; immunizations, bioterrorism preparedness, and health education were the top three most funded medical items. Instances of major diseases are near the national average in Oklahoma, and the state ranks at or slightly above the rest of the country in percentage of people with asthma, diabetes, cancer, and hypertension.

In 2000, Oklahoma ranked 45th in physicians per capita and slightly below the national average in nurses per capita, but was slightly above the national average in hospital beds per 100,000 people and above the national average in net growth of health services over a twelve-year period. One of the worst states for percentage of insured people, nearly 25 percent of Oklahomans between the age of 18 and 64 did not have health insurance in 2005, the fifth-highest rate in the nation.

Oklahomans are in the upper half of Americans in terms of obesity prevalence, and the state is the 5th most obese in the nation, with 30.3 percent of its population at or near obesity. Oklahoma ranked last among the 50 states in a 2007 study by the Commonwealth Fund on health care performance.

The OU Medical Center, Oklahoma&#x27;s largest collection of hospitals, is the only hospital in the state designated a LevelI trauma center by the American College of Surgeons. OU Medical Center is on the grounds of the Oklahoma Health Center in Oklahoma City, the state&#x27;s largest concentration of medical research facilities.

The Cancer Treatment Centers of America at Southwestern Regional Medical Center in Tulsa is one of four such regional facilities nationwide, offering cancer treatment to the entire southwestern United States, and is one of the largest cancer treatment hospitals in the country. The largest osteopathic teaching facility in the nation, Oklahoma State University Medical Center at Tulsa, also rates as one of the largest facilities in the field of neuroscience.
On June 26, 2018, Oklahoma made marijuana legal for medical purposes, making it one of the most conservative states to approve medical marijuana.

===Life expectancy===
The residents of Oklahoma have a lower life expectancy than the U.S. national average. In 2014, males in Oklahoma lived an average of 73.7 years compared to a male national average of 76.7 years and females lived an average of 78.5 years compared to a female national average of 81.5 years. Moreover, increases in life expectancy have been below the national average. Male life expectancy in Oklahoma between 1980 and 2014, increased by an average of 4.0 years, compared to a male national average of a 6.7 year increase. Life expectancy for females in Oklahoma between 1980 and 2014, increased by 1.0 years, compared to a female national average of a 4.0 year increase.

Using 2016–2018 data, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation calculated that life expectancy (all sexes) for Oklahoma counties ranged from 71.2 years for Okfuskee County to 79.7 years for Cimarron and Logan counties. Life expectancy for the state as a whole was 76.0 years.

===Impact of Covid===
As of December 22, 2022, Oklahoma has been impacted more by the Covid pandemic (2020–2023) than the average U.S. state. Statistics for the U.S. as a whole are 331 deaths per 100,000 population with 68 percent of the population fully vaccinated. The comparable statistics for Oklahoma are 405 deaths per 100,000 population with 59 percent of the population fully vaccinated; 16,041 deaths from Covid have been recorded in Oklahoma. A wide variation in deaths from Covid exists among Oklahoma counties. Greer County recorded the highest death rate of .00753 (753 deaths per 100,000 residents). Payne County recorded the lowest death rate of .00231 (231 deaths per 100,000 residents).

==Media==

Oklahoma City and Tulsa are the 45th- and 61st-largest media markets in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research. The state&#x27;s third-largest media market, Lawton-Wichita Falls, Texas, is ranked 149th nationally by the agency. Broadcast television in Oklahoma began in 1949 when KFOR-TV (then WKY-TV) in Oklahoma City and KOTV-TV in Tulsa began broadcasting a few months apart. Currently, all major American broadcast networks have affiliated television stations in the state.

The state has two primary newspapers. &quot;The Oklahoman&quot;, based in Oklahoma City, is the largest newspaper in the state and 54th-largest in the nation by circulation, with a weekday readership of 138,493 and a Sunday readership of 202,690. The &quot;Tulsa World&quot;, the second-most widely circulated newspaper in Oklahoma and 79th in the nation, holds a Sunday circulation of 132,969 and a weekday readership of 93,558. Oklahoma&#x27;s first newspaper was established in 1844, called the &quot;Cherokee Advocate&quot;, and was written in both Cherokee and English. In 2006, there were more than 220 newspapers in the state, including 177 with weekly publications and 48 with daily publications.

The state&#x27;s first radio station, WKY in Oklahoma City, began broadcasting in 1920. In 2006, there were more than 500 radio stations in Oklahoma broadcasting with various local or nationally owned networks. Five universities in Oklahoma operate non-commercial, public radio stations/networks.

Oklahoma has a few ethnic-oriented TV stations broadcasting in Spanish and Asian languages, and there is some Native American programming. TBN, a Christian religious television network, has a studio in Tulsa, and built its first entirely TBN-owned affiliate in Oklahoma City in 1980.

==Transportation==
Transportation in Oklahoma is generated by an anchor system of Interstate Highways, inter-city rail lines, airports, inland ports, and mass transit networks. Situated along an integral point in the United States Interstate network, Oklahoma contains three primary Interstate highways and four auxiliary Interstate Highways. In Oklahoma City, Interstate 35 intersects with Interstate 44 and Interstate 40, forming one of the most important intersections along the United States highway system.

More than of roads make up the state&#x27;s major highway skeleton, including state-operated highways, ten turnpikes or major toll roads, and the longest drivable stretch of Route 66 in the nation. In 2008, Interstate 44 in Oklahoma City was Oklahoma&#x27;s busiest highway, with a daily traffic volume of 123,300 cars. In 2010, the state had the nation&#x27;s third-highest number of bridges classified as structurally deficient, with nearly 5,212 bridges in disrepair, including 235 National Highway System Bridges.

Oklahoma&#x27;s largest commercial airport is Will Rogers World Airport in Oklahoma City, averaging a yearly passenger count of more than 3.5 million (1.7 million boardings) in 2010. Tulsa International Airport, the state&#x27;s second-largest commercial airport, served more than 1.3 million boardings in 2010. Between the two, six airlines operate in Oklahoma. In terms of traffic, R. L. Jones Jr. (Riverside) Airport in Tulsa is the state&#x27;s busiest airport, with 335,826 takeoffs and landings in 2008. Oklahoma has more than 150 public-use airports.

Oklahoma is connected to the nation&#x27;s rail network via Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Heartland Flyer&quot;, its only regional passenger rail line. It currently stretches from Oklahoma City to Fort Worth, Texas. Lawmakers began seeking funding in early 2007 to connect the &quot;Heartland Flyer&quot; to Tulsa, but nothing came of this. In June 2023, following studies and negotiations, Oklahoma and Kansas state officials began seeking federal approval and funding to extend the &quot;Heartland Flyer&quot; from Oklahoma City to Newton, Kansas. The two locations are currently connected by an Amtrak Thruway Bus route that includes a stop in Wichita, Kansas. In November 2023, KDOT said the service would start in 2029 if approved, but could begin sooner were the project to be fast tracked.

Two inland ports on rivers serve Oklahoma: the Port of Muskogee and the Tulsa Port of Catoosa. The Tulsa Port of Catoosa is one of the United States&#x27; most inland international ports, at head of navigation of the McClellan–Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System, which connects barge traffic from Tulsa and Muskogee to the Mississippi River. The port ships over two million tons of goods annually and is a designated foreign trade zone.

==Law and government==

Oklahoma is a constitutional republic with a government modeled after the federal government of the United States, with executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The state has 77 counties with jurisdiction over most local government functions within each respective domain, five congressional districts, and a voting base with a majority in the Republican Party. State officials are elected by plurality voting in the state of Oklahoma.

Oklahoma has capital punishment as a legal sentence, and the state has had (between 1976 through mid-2011) the highest per capita execution rate in the nation. Authorized methods of execution include the electric chair, the gas chamber and the firing squad.

In a 2020 study, Oklahoma was ranked as the 14th most difficult state for citizens to vote in. In May 2020, it became the first state to enact an anti-red flag law, prohibiting the acceptance of any grants or funding to enact red flag laws. Abortion in Oklahoma is illegal in nearly all circumstances.

===State government===

The Legislature of Oklahoma consists of the Senate and the House of Representatives. As the lawmaking branch of the state government, it is responsible for raising and distributing the money necessary to run the government. The Senate has 48 members serving four-year terms, while the House has 101 members with two-year terms. The state has a term limit for its legislature that restricts any one person to twelve cumulative years service between both legislative branches.

Oklahoma&#x27;s judicial branch consists of the Oklahoma Supreme Court, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals, and 77 District Courts that each serve one county. The Oklahoma judiciary also contains two independent courts: a Court of Impeachment (for impeachment trials) and the Oklahoma Court on the Judiciary. Oklahoma has two courts of last resort: the state Supreme Court hears civil cases, and the state Court of Criminal Appeals hears criminal cases (this split system exists only in Oklahoma and neighboring Texas). Judges of those two courts, as well as the Court of Civil Appeals are appointed by the governor upon the recommendation of the state Judicial Nominating Commission, and are subject to a non-partisan retention vote on a six-year rotating schedule.

The executive branch consists of the governor, their staff, and other elected officials. The principal head of government, the governor is the chief executive of the Oklahoma executive branch, serving as the ex officio Commander-in-chief of the Oklahoma National Guard when not called into Federal use and reserving the power to veto bills passed through the legislature. The responsibilities of the Executive branch include submitting the budget, ensuring state laws are enforced, and ensuring peace within the state is preserved.

===Local government===

The state is divided into 77 counties that govern locally, each headed by a three-member council of elected commissioners, a tax assessor, clerk, court clerk, treasurer, and sheriff. While each municipality operates as a separate and independent local government with executive, legislative and judicial power, county governments maintain jurisdiction over both incorporated cities and non-incorporated areas within their boundaries, and have executive power but no legislative or judicial power. Both county and municipal governments collect taxes, employ a separate police force, hold elections, and operate emergency response services within their jurisdiction. Other local government units include school districts, technology center districts, community college districts, rural fire departments, rural water districts, and other special use districts.

Thirty-nine Native American tribal governments are based in Oklahoma, each holding limited powers within designated areas. While Indian reservations are typical in most of the United States, they are not present in Oklahoma, tribal governments hold land granted during the Indian Territory era, but with limited jurisdiction and no control over state governing bodies such as municipalities and counties. Tribal governments are recognized by the United States as quasi-sovereign entities with executive, judicial, and legislative powers over tribal members and functions, but are subject to the authority of the United States Congress to revoke or withhold certain powers. The tribal governments are required to submit a constitution and any subsequent amendments to the United States Congress for approval.

Oklahoma has 11 substate districts including the two large Councils of Governments, INCOG in Tulsa (Indian Nations Council of Governments) and ACOG (Association of Central Oklahoma Governments).

===National politics===

During the first half-century of statehood, Oklahoma was considered a Democratic stronghold, being carried by the Republican Party in only two presidential elections (1920 and 1928). After the 1948 election, the state turned firmly Republican. Although registered Republicans were a minority in the state until 2015, Oklahoma has been carried by Republican presidential candidates in all but one election since 1952: Lyndon B. Johnson&#x27;s 1964 landslide victory. Every single county in the state has been won by the Republican candidate in each election since 2004. In fact, it was the only state where Barack Obama failed to carry any counties in 2008. Oklahoma City was the largest city in the United States carried by Republican Donald Trump in both the 2016 and 2020 elections.

Democrats are strongest in urban areas, such as the inner parts of Oklahoma City and Tulsa, as well as the college towns of Norman and Stillwater, and areas which are most heavily African American. The party once held dominance in the eastern part of the state and Little Dixie before the area gradually shifted Republican in the late 2000s. As of the 2020 election, Native American voters, 16% of the state&#x27;s population, are split, with urban populations supporting the Democrats and rural reservation populaces favoring the Republicans.

Following the 2000 census, the Oklahoma delegation to the U.S. House of Representatives was reduced from six to five representatives, each serving one congressional district. Oklahoma has had an all-Republican congressional delegation since 2021 and previously from 2013 to 2019.

===Military===

==State symbols==


State law codifies Oklahoma&#x27;s state emblems and honorary positions; the Oklahoma Senate or House of Representatives may adopt resolutions designating others for special events and to benefit organizations. In 2012 the House passed HCR 1024, which would change the state motto from &quot;Labor Omnia Vincit&quot; to &quot;Oklahoma—In God We Trust!&quot; The author of the resolution stated a constituent researched the Oklahoma Constitution and found no &quot;official&quot; vote regarding &quot;Labor Omnia Vincit&quot;, therefore opening the door for an entirely new motto.
==See also==
* 
* Index of Oklahoma-related articles
* Outline of Oklahoma
* Zodletone Mountain

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* complete text online; 900 pages of scholarly articles

==External links==

===Government===
* Oklahoma Legislative Branch
* Oklahoma Department of Commerce
* Oklahoma Department of Human Services
* Oklahoma Department of Transportation

===Tourism and recreation===

* Official Oklahoma Tourism Info
* Oklahoma State Parks
* Red Earth 
* Woody Guthrie Folk Festival

===Culture and history===

* Oklahoma State Guide from the Library of Congress
* Oklahoma Arts Council
* Oklahoma Theatre Association
* Oklahoma Oral History Research Program
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture
* Voices of Oklahoma Oral History Project

===Maps and demographics===

* Oklahoma QuickFacts Geographic and Demographic information
* State highway maps
* Oklahoma Genealogical Society
* Realtime USGS geographic, weather, and geologic information 
* Oklahoma Digital Maps: Digital Collections of Oklahoma and Indian Territory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="0" end="8" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="13" end="20" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="42" end="47" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="55" end="68" title="South Central United States" label="South Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="83" end="96" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="109" end="114" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="138" end="144" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="159" end="167" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="186" end="194" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="208" end="218" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="236" end="244" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="303" end="315" title="Upland South" label="Upland South"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="327" end="346" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area" label="20th-most extensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="355" end="373" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="28th-most populous"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="473" end="486" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="531" end="538" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q783822" start="650" end="658" title="List of U.S. state and territory nicknames" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490791" start="710" end="717" title="Sooners" label="Sooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="719" end="736" title="American pioneer" label="American settlers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="811" end="844" title="Indian Appropriations Act#1889 Act" label="Indian Appropriations Act of 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q631498" start="860" end="877" title="Land Rush of 1889" label="Land Rush of 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q623319" start="950" end="954" title="mesa" label="mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="1007" end="1019" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003780" start="1021" end="1034" title="Cross Timbers" label="Cross Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863209" start="1044" end="1067" title="U.S. Interior Highlands" label="U.S. Interior Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q518261" start="1158" end="1174" title="cultural area" label="cultural regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="1227" end="1236" title="territories of the United States" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1422" end="1461" title=":Category:Indigenous languages of Oklahoma" label="Indigenous languages spoken in Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1537" end="1553" title="Native Americans of the United States" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="1797" end="1802" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="1911" end="1940" title="metropolitan statistical area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="2003" end="2019" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731960" start="2107" end="2119" title="Allen Wright" label="Allen Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="2183" end="2204" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="2219" end="2235" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070813" start="2254" end="2289" title="Indian barrier state" label="all exclusive American Indian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="2308" end="2346" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="United States bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="2404" end="2422" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="2504" end="2521" title="American pioneer" label="American settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="2558" end="2576" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="2621" end="2633" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425238" start="2652" end="2681" title="Wichita people" label="Wichita and Affiliated Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708543" start="2693" end="2698" title="Teyas Indians" label="Teyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396881" start="2703" end="2714" title="Escanjaque Indians" label="Escanjaques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689203" start="2719" end="2727" title="Tawakoni" label="Tawakoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493185" start="2730" end="2737" title="Tonkawa" label="Tonkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35170" start="2743" end="2748" title="Caddo" label="Caddo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197600" start="2760" end="2766" title="Kichai people" label="Kichai"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711072" start="2799" end="2824" title="Southern Plains villagers" label="Southern Plains villagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131021" start="2890" end="2907" title="Panhandle culture" label="Panhandle culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016319" start="2948" end="2977" title="Caddoan Mississippian culture" label="Caddoan Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044290" start="3026" end="3038" title="Spiro Mounds" label="Spiro Mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968037" start="3055" end="3070" title="Spiro, Oklahoma" label="Spiro, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="3084" end="3097" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523166" start="3153" end="3166" title="Plains Apache" label="Plains Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q271974" start="3319" end="3348" title="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado" label="Francisco Vázquez de Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="3741" end="3759" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q672700" start="3793" end="3811" title="Arkansas Territory" label="Arkansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="3886" end="3909" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="4136" end="4157" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="4181" end="4207" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="4226" end="4240" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="4299" end="4306" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="4365" end="4373" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="4490" end="4495" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268882" start="4500" end="4506" title="Quapaw" label="Quapaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="4534" end="4548" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="4764" end="4780" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4896" end="4914" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092177" start="4920" end="4935" title="Cherokee Nation (1794–1907)" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604535" start="5201" end="5214" title="Cattle drive" label="Cattle trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="5247" end="5253" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="5630" end="5639" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007791" start="5656" end="5674" title="Curtis Act of 1898" label="Curtis Act of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052689" start="6460" end="6469" title="land runs" label="land runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q631498" start="6559" end="6576" title="Land Rush of 1889" label="Land Rush of 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="6816" end="6837" title="Homestead Act of 1862" label="Homestead Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490791" start="7103" end="7110" title="sooners" label="sooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508555" start="7178" end="7202" title="George Washington Steele" label="George Washington Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536163" start="7424" end="7432" title="State of Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082219" start="7631" end="7702" title="Oklahoma Enabling Act" label="a statute authorizing the people of the Oklahoma and Indian Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="7744" end="7751" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="7756" end="7766" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="7880" end="7898" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241458" start="7906" end="7931" title="Presidential proclamation (United States)" label="Presidential Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="8045" end="8057" title="Petroleum industry" label="oil industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081294" start="8187" end="8211" title="Oil Capital of the World" label="Oil Capital of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009486" start="8345" end="8356" title="Cyrus Avery" label="Cyrus Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="8432" end="8445" title="U.S. Route 66" label="U.S. Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q51691" start="8479" end="8494" title="Amarillo, Texas" label="Amarillo, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860021" start="8596" end="8623" title="U.S. Highway 66 Association" label="U.S. Highway 66 Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="8741" end="8752" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q110319150" start="9439" end="9463" title="African Americans in Oklahoma" label="African-American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420574" start="9609" end="9619" title="Exodusters" label="Exodusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344728" start="9692" end="9708" title="Edward P. McCabe" label="Edward P. McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116157" start="9920" end="9929" title="Greenwood, Tulsa" label="Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="9942" end="9947" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="10030" end="10043" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="10060" end="10078" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="10241" end="10253" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824714" start="10270" end="10289" title="Tulsa race massacre" label="Tulsa race massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="10367" end="10373" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784082" start="10424" end="10459" title="Mass racial violence in the United States" label="racist violence in American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="10847" end="10856" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060358" start="10915" end="10936" title="northwestern Oklahoma" label="northwestern Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="11056" end="11066" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q889669" start="11384" end="11388" title="Soil conservation" label="Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462136" start="11393" end="11411" title="water conservation" label="water conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="11789" end="11810" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q220850" start="11839" end="11854" title="Timothy McVeigh" label="Timothy McVeigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q597408" start="11909" end="11942" title="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building" label="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354768" start="12082" end="12095" title="Terry Nichols" label="Terry Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284056" start="12260" end="12283" title="May 2016 North American storm complex" label="record setting flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="12307" end="12341" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392414" start="12362" end="12380" title="McGirt v. Oklahoma" label="McGirt v. Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="13037" end="13049" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="13089" end="13106" title="Contiguous United States" label="contiguous states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="13138" end="13146" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="13151" end="13159" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="13177" end="13183" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="13205" end="13213" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="13234" end="13244" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="13280" end="13285" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="13384" end="13403" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas-Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="13544" end="13560" title="Kansas Territory" label="Kansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309052" start="13597" end="13614" title="Drum Creek Treaty" label="Drum Creek Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414375" start="13753" end="13771" title="Oklahoma Panhandle" label="Oklahoma Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="13816" end="13838" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="13985" end="14002" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="14259" end="14278" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837035" start="15070" end="15096" title="Treaty of Doak&amp;#x27;s Stand" label="Treaty of Doak&amp;#x27;s Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q178346" start="15128" end="15158" title="Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek" label="Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="15190" end="15197" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="15950" end="15962" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="15971" end="15984" title="Ozarks" label="Ozark Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="15992" end="16006" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q880398" start="16203" end="16213" title="Black Mesa (Oklahoma)" label="Black Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414375" start="16281" end="16299" title="Oklahoma Panhandle" label="Oklahoma Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106941" start="16406" end="16412" title="Idabel, Oklahoma" label="Idabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="16548" end="16566" title="ecoregion" label="ecological regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033447" start="16967" end="16985" title="Ouachita Mountains" label="Ouachita Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305321" start="16991" end="17009" title="Arbuckle Mountains" label="Arbuckle Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305333" start="17015" end="17032" title="Wichita Mountains" label="Wichita Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="17042" end="17057" title="Ozarks" label="Ozark Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863209" start="17080" end="17103" title="U.S. Interior Highlands" label="U.S. Interior Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="17195" end="17210" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="17219" end="17231" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379070" start="17250" end="17261" title="Flint Hills" label="Flint Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943245" start="17400" end="17412" title="Cavanal Hill" label="Cavanal Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="17510" end="17519" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548512" start="17520" end="17531" title="High Plains (United States)" label="high plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060358" start="17552" end="17571" title="northwestern Oklahoma" label="northwestern corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="17661" end="17667" title="canyon" label="canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q623319" start="17673" end="17677" title="mesa" label="mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108559" start="17694" end="17709" title="Glass Mountains" label="Glass Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584931" start="17748" end="17758" title="sky island" label="sky island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852658" start="17784" end="17798" title="Antelope Hills, Oklahoma" label="Antelope Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305333" start="17807" end="17824" title="Wichita Mountains" label="Wichita Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571438" start="17829" end="17850" title="southwestern Oklahoma" label="southwestern Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073760" start="17877" end="17888" title="oak savanna" label="oak savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061549" start="17900" end="17915" title="Central Oklahoma" label="central portion"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="18299" end="18313" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="18332" end="18335" title="Red River of the South" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="18340" end="18348" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="18643" end="18661" title="prairie" label="prairie grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="18703" end="18720" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="18809" end="18817" title="Agricultural land" label="cropland"/>
<link wikidata="Q879641" start="18940" end="18949" title="shrubland" label="shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="18993" end="19004" title="pinyon pine" label="pinyon pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="19018" end="19025" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="19033" end="19048" title="Pinus ponderosa" label="ponderosa pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571438" start="19126" end="19147" title="Southwestern Oklahoma" label="Southwestern Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228546" start="19168" end="19184" title="Disjunct distribution" label="disjunct species"/>
<link wikidata="Q214733" start="19196" end="19207" title="Acer saccharum" label="sugar maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702054" start="19209" end="19223" title="Acer grandidentatum" label="bigtooth maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q139062" start="19225" end="19231" title="nolina" label="nolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009781" start="19237" end="19251" title="Quercus fusiformis" label="Texas live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="19254" end="19259" title="Marsh" label="Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169641" start="19266" end="19273" title="cypress" label="cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237846" start="19299" end="19313" title="Pinus echinata" label="shortleaf pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q368248" start="19315" end="19328" title="Pinus taeda" label="loblolly pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244278" start="19330" end="19343" title="sabal minor" label="blue palmetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196301" start="19393" end="19413" title="Kiamichi Country" label="southeastern quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600501" start="19441" end="19449" title="Quercus stellata" label="post oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="19451" end="19454" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q157522" start="19473" end="19493" title="Juniperus virginiana" label="Juniperus virginiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="19506" end="19510" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602443" start="19525" end="19546" title="Green Country" label="northeastern Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="19580" end="19597" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="19599" end="19608" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="19610" end="19618" title="Pronghorn" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="19620" end="19626" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="19629" end="19643" title="Cougar" label="mountain lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="19645" end="19651" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="19654" end="19657" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072584" start="19677" end="19682" title="quail" label="quail"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="19684" end="19689" title="Columbidae" label="doves"/>
<link wikidata="Q726389" start="19691" end="19700" title="northern cardinal" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="19702" end="19712" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q457471" start="19715" end="19730" title="red-tailed hawk" label="red-tailed hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="19737" end="19745" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="19771" end="19785" title="American bison" label="American bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630" start="19787" end="19810" title="greater prairie chicken" label="greater prairie chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="19813" end="19819" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="19826" end="19835" title="armadillo" label="armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359" start="19886" end="19897" title="prairie dog" label="prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003780" start="19966" end="19979" title="Cross Timbers" label="Cross Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="20063" end="20081" title="Vertebrate" label="vertebrate species"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="20118" end="20128" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="20130" end="20137" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="20139" end="20147" title="gray fox" label="gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="20153" end="20164" title="North American river otter" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193327" start="20286" end="20304" title="American alligator" label="American alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="20353" end="20363" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="20370" end="20383" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="20411" end="20437" title="United States National Forest" label="national protected forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="20441" end="20450" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079109" start="20609" end="20633" title="Ouachita National Forest" label="Ouachita National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="20681" end="20703" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514544" start="20717" end="20743" title="Tallgrass Prairie Preserve" label="Tallgrass Prairie Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="20803" end="20820" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="20852" end="20861" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921102" start="20969" end="21000" title="Black Kettle National Grassland" label="Black Kettle National Grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q743584" start="21049" end="21082" title="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge" label="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410668" start="21117" end="21141" title="National Wildlife Refuge" label="National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096201" start="21269" end="21303" title="Chickasaw National Recreation Area" label="Chickasaw National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="21351" end="21359" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="21364" end="21378" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078083" start="21409" end="21419" title="Fort Smith National Historic Site" label="Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972608" start="21424" end="21443" title="Washita Battlefield National Historic Site" label="Washita Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q638272" start="21477" end="21508" title="Oklahoma City National Memorial" label="Oklahoma City National Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="21761" end="21774" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q741507" start="22024" end="22038" title="severe weather" label="severe weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="22196" end="22203" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q132068446" start="22206" end="22231" title="Tornadoes in Oklahoma" label="strike the state per year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598782" start="22602" end="22641" title="Great Blue Norther of November 11, 1911" label="a cold front of unprecedented intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108206" start="22840" end="22870" title="Tornado outbreak of April 27–29, 1912" label="1912 Oklahoma tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="22986" end="23011" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="23148" end="23162" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="23231" end="23239" title="semiarid" label="semiarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q503336" start="23341" end="23347" title="Lawton, Oklahoma" label="Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="24795" end="24803" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q751874" start="24847" end="24870" title="Storm Prediction Center" label="Storm Prediction Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656840" start="24876" end="24909" title="National Severe Storms Laboratory" label="National Severe Storms Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969816" start="24915" end="24949" title="Warning Decision Training Division" label="Warning Decision Training Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155036" start="24959" end="24982" title="Radar Operations Center" label="Radar Operations Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="25000" end="25024" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q40347" start="25032" end="25038" title="Norman, Oklahoma" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="25191" end="25211" title="List of United States cities by population" label="fifty largest cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="25250" end="25263" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="25268" end="25273" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="25442" end="25471" title="metropolitan statistical area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082164" start="25539" end="25577" title="Oklahoma City Metroplex" label="largest metropolitan area in the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331745" start="25618" end="25644" title="Tulsa Metropolitan Area" label="metropolitan area of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241314" start="25738" end="25747" title="Blanchard, Oklahoma" label="Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q431761" start="25758" end="25763" title="Elgin, Oklahoma" label="Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237107" start="25773" end="25778" title="Jenks, Oklahoma" label="Jenks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29689" start="25788" end="25796" title="Piedmont, Oklahoma" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q941310" start="25806" end="25811" title="Bixby, Oklahoma" label="Bixby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677698" start="25825" end="25831" title="Owasso, Oklahoma" label="Owasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q835810" start="26005" end="26017" title="Broken Arrow, Oklahoma" label="Broken Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q862645" start="26060" end="26066" title="Edmond, Oklahoma" label="Edmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q917458" start="26085" end="26090" title="Moore, Oklahoma" label="Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q985298" start="26109" end="26121" title="Midwest City, Oklahoma" label="Midwest City"/>
<link wikidata="Q984361" start="26139" end="26143" title="Enid, Oklahoma" label="Enid"/>
<link wikidata="Q852714" start="26165" end="26175" title="Stillwater, Oklahoma" label="Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535" start="26460" end="26480" title="Fort Smith, Arkansas" label="Fort Smith, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="26676" end="26687" title="Legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="26689" end="26697" title="Judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="26773" end="26786" title="Mayor–council government" label="mayor–council"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="26788" end="26803" title="Council–manager government" label="council–manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="26808" end="26820" title="Mayor–council government" label="strong mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042056" start="26921" end="26937" title="1920 United States census" label="1920 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="27024" end="27035" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="27071" end="27082" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="27164" end="27189" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140073" start="27303" end="27316" title="South Central United States" label="South Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="27403" end="27408" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="27485" end="27495" title="Immigrants (United States)" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q852031" start="28321" end="28341" title="center of population" label="center of population"/>
<link wikidata="Q495899" start="28361" end="28375" title="Lincoln County, Oklahoma" label="Lincoln County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287452" start="28393" end="28399" title="Sparks, Oklahoma" label="Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="28415" end="28418" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769654" start="28431" end="28464" title="Annual Homeless Assessment Report to Congress" label="Annual Homeless Assessment Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="28496" end="28504" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="28714" end="28732" title="non-Hispanic White" label="non-Hispanic White"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="28939" end="28957" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="28975" end="29008" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian and Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="29015" end="29040" title="African Americans" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="29047" end="29052" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="29059" end="29074" title="Native Hawaiians" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="29079" end="29101" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="other Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29536" end="29544" title="Southern United States#European colonization" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="29552" end="29557" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="29564" end="29571" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="29578" end="29594" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="29789" end="29806" title="American ancestry" label="American ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="29829" end="29836" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="29841" end="29852" title="Scots-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="29890" end="29898" title="Scottish American" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094841" start="29900" end="29905" title="Welsh American" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="29910" end="29915" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="29979" end="29986" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053766" start="30340" end="30362" title="North American English" label="North American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="30501" end="30509" title="Southern American English" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="30914" end="30922" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="30927" end="30934" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="30984" end="30999" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="31095" end="31109" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651031" start="31235" end="31276" title="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians" label="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="31291" end="31316" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Native American languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="31356" end="31366" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="31450" end="31460" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="31484" end="31492" title="Endangered language" label="moribund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301077" start="31628" end="31635" title="Spanish language in the United States" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806365" start="31917" end="31930" title="Asia District, Oklahoma City" label="Asia District"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="31934" end="31947" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="32008" end="32015" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="32128" end="32135" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="32372" end="32382" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="32474" end="32498" title="Ideology" label="politically and socially"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="32528" end="32544" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121493" start="32676" end="32699" title="Oral Roberts University" label="Oral Roberts University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32731" end="32755" title="Bible Belt#Buckle" label="buckle of the Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642079" start="32796" end="32800" title="List of synagogues in Oklahoma" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="32876" end="32895" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="32962" end="32971" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="33100" end="33111" title="Evangelical" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="33292" end="33319" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="33343" end="33366" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33382" end="33403" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422454" start="33423" end="33440" title="Assemblies of God USA" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="33454" end="33497" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="33570" end="33578" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="33580" end="33588" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="33594" end="33599" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="34110" end="34122" title="irreligious" label="unaffiliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="34197" end="34231" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121095" start="34349" end="34368" title="Mainline Protestant" label="Mainline Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="34380" end="34427" title="Black church" label="Historically and predominantly African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625295" start="34891" end="34910" title="List of countries by incarceration rate" label="incarceration rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451210" start="34988" end="35010" title="The Sentencing Project" label="The Sentencing Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="35464" end="35485" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="35695" end="35703" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="35739" end="35754" title="food processing" label="food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="35756" end="35767" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="35857" end="35861" title="agriculture" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="36028" end="36039" title="Fortune 500" label="Fortune 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q285800" start="36058" end="36070" title="Fortune 1000" label="Fortune 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872496" start="36341" end="36386" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Travel Stops &amp;amp; Country Stores" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Travel Stops &amp;amp; Country Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271953" start="36460" end="36468" title="QuikTrip" label="QuikTrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874938" start="36506" end="36517" title="Hobby Lobby" label="Hobby Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="36564" end="36586" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="36632" end="36649" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="36709" end="36732" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q615231" start="36915" end="36946" title="1980s oil glut" label="collapse in the energy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="37617" end="37630" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="37929" end="37946" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="38384" end="38397" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="38806" end="38817" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688575" start="38920" end="38932" title="drilling rig" label="drilling rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="39034" end="39045" title="Wind power" label="wind energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="39113" end="39129" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936791" start="39186" end="39199" title="Non-renewable energy" label="non-renewable"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="39332" end="39343" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="39359" end="39369" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="40367" end="40385" title="petroleum industry" label="petroleum industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074156" start="40411" end="40416" title="ONEOK" label="ONEOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q930639" start="40421" end="40439" title="Williams Companies" label="Williams Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="40619" end="40638" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q524233" start="40826" end="40834" title="Muskogee, Oklahoma" label="Muskogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277362" start="40853" end="40861" title="Red Rock, Oklahoma" label="Red Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450077" start="40902" end="40908" title="Harrah, Oklahoma" label="Harrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705887" start="40926" end="40932" title="Konawa, Oklahoma" label="Konawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q464092" start="41141" end="41175" title="Public Service Company of Oklahoma" label="Public Service Company of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920792" start="41189" end="41218" title="Black Fox Nuclear Power Plant" label="Black Fox Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019815" start="41224" end="41239" title="Inola, Oklahoma" label="Inola, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q840847" start="41317" end="41343" title="Three Mile Island accident" label="Three Mile Island accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="42129" end="42142" title="State school" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="42169" end="42189" title="private school" label="private institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="42270" end="42280" title="vocational education" label="vocational"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="42296" end="42312" title="school districts" label="school districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239239" start="42664" end="42680" title="pre-kindergarten" label="pre-kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472221" start="42898" end="42923" title="early childhood education" label="early childhood schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312529" start="43176" end="43195" title="high school diploma" label="high school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="43398" end="43420" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848657" start="43422" end="43445" title="The University of Tulsa" label="The University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q749718" start="43447" end="43472" title="Oklahoma State University" label="Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275637" start="43478" end="43508" title="University of Central Oklahoma" label="University of Central Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124195" start="43514" end="43543" title="Northeastern State University" label="Northeastern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443498" start="43732" end="43756" title="Oklahoma City University" label="Oklahoma City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848657" start="43765" end="43784" title="University of Tulsa" label="University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082157" start="43836" end="43874" title="Oklahoma City University School of Law" label="Oklahoma City University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896011" start="43876" end="43913" title="University of Oklahoma College of Law" label="University of Oklahoma College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896506" start="43919" end="43953" title="University of Tulsa College of Law" label="University of Tulsa College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124195" start="44248" end="44277" title="Northeastern State University" label="Northeastern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="44341" end="44358" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q618211" start="44396" end="44405" title="Optometry" label="Optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="44448" end="44463" title="Indigenous peoples of the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302016" start="44513" end="44532" title="Langston University" label="Langston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q851717" start="44641" end="44657" title="Princeton Review" label="Princeton Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082187" start="44832" end="44866" title="Oklahoma Department of Career and Technology Education" label="Oklahoma&amp;#x27;s CareerTech program"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316299" start="45535" end="45549" title="2018 Oklahoma teachers&amp;#x27; strike" label="went on strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="46142" end="46157" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="46235" end="46252" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092194" start="46423" end="46455" title="Cherokee Preservation Foundation" label="Cherokee Preservation Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q736809" start="46694" end="46713" title="Tahlequah, Oklahoma" label="Tahlequah, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="46823" end="46850" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="46913" end="46922" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="46924" end="46931" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="46933" end="46945" title="Upland South" label="Upland South"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="46951" end="46963" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="46996" end="47003" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="47005" end="47017" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="47019" end="47025" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="47031" end="47046" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="47171" end="47187" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="47215" end="47234" title="American pioneer" label="American settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="47368" end="47390" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330870" start="47453" end="47469" title="Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History" label="Sam Noble Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="47621" end="47648" title="federally recognized tribes" label="federally recognized tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082411" start="47681" end="47708" title="Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area" label="tribal jurisdictional areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="47712" end="47731" title="Indian reservations" label="Indian reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147556" start="48046" end="48066" title="Southern hospitality" label="Southern hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="48244" end="48254" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="48276" end="48290" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q215983" start="48315" end="48334" title="The Grapes of Wrath" label="The Grapes of Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q446406" start="48436" end="48440" title="Okie" label="Okie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="48630" end="48634" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="48657" end="48673" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="48675" end="48691" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="48697" end="48711" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q809450" start="48808" end="48820" title="Bartlesville" label="Bartlesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062431" start="49118" end="49133" title="Yvonne Chouteau" label="Yvonne Chouteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766339" start="49143" end="49151" title="Marjorie Tallchief" label="Marjorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q264400" start="49156" end="49171" title="Maria Tallchief" label="Maria Tallchief"/>
<link wikidata="Q442839" start="49173" end="49190" title="Rosella Hightower" label="Rosella Hightower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915392" start="49195" end="49211" title="Moscelyne Larkin" label="Moscelyne Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456033" start="49239" end="49249" title="Five Moons" label="Five Moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="49257" end="49275" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852324" start="49292" end="49304" title="Tulsa Ballet" label="Tulsa Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082135" start="49366" end="49386" title="Oklahoma City Ballet" label="Oklahoma City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844819" start="49488" end="49503" title="Miguel Terekhov" label="Miguel Terekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220501" start="49629" end="49641" title="Sand Springs, Oklahoma" label="Sand Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="49779" end="49788" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478998" start="49795" end="49805" title="Ridge Bond" label="Ridge Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994656" start="49817" end="49836" title="McAlester, Oklahoma" label="McAlester, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="49853" end="49861" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="50050" end="50059" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="50076" end="50079" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882279" start="50080" end="50087" title="Omnibus (U.S. TV series)" label="Omnibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305977" start="50139" end="50159" title="Oklahoma (Rodgers and Hammerstein song)" label="Oklahoma! title song"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="50226" end="50239" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q642760" start="50351" end="50366" title="The Tulsa Sound" label="The Tulsa Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="50371" end="50384" title="western swing" label="western swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017561" start="50411" end="50431" title="Cain&amp;#x27;s Ballroom" label="Cain&amp;#x27;s Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="50555" end="50564" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="50573" end="50587" title="Texas Playboys" label="Texas Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422697" start="50646" end="50654" title="Red Dirt (music)" label="Red Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307900" start="50708" end="50720" title="Bob Childers" label="Bob Childers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50793" end="50818" title="Lyric Theatre of Oklahoma" label="Lyric Theatre of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082320" start="50877" end="50909" title="Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park" label="Oklahoma Shakespeare in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777455" start="51135" end="51148" title="Theatre Tulsa" label="Theatre Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800684" start="51163" end="51180" title="community theatre" label="community theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707397" start="51247" end="51261" title="Heller Theatre" label="Heller Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997830" start="51546" end="51562" title="Philbrook Museum" label="Philbrook Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="51604" end="51612" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330870" start="51651" end="51695" title="Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History" label="Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790033" start="51847" end="51863" title="Thomas Gilcrease" label="Thomas Gilcrease"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708424" start="51882" end="51898" title="Gilcrease Museum" label="Gilcrease Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721375" start="52061" end="52087" title="Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art" label="Mabee-Gerrer Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="52158" end="52165" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082143" start="52187" end="52214" title="Oklahoma City Museum of Art" label="Oklahoma City Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q613380" start="52288" end="52300" title="Dale Chihuly" label="Dale Chihuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971981" start="52340" end="52385" title="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum" label="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="52464" end="52473" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743264" start="52765" end="52789" title="American Bus Association" label="American Bus Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="52867" end="52876" title="U.S. state" label="statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="53028" end="53036" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="53038" end="53043" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="53045" end="53051" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="53053" end="53060" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="53062" end="53072" title="Vietnamese Americans" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="53074" end="53081" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q518188" start="53083" end="53088" title="Czech Americans" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="53090" end="53096" title="American Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q787519" start="53098" end="53102" title="Arab Americans" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="53104" end="53111" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082352" start="53297" end="53319" title="Oklahoma State Fair" label="State Fair of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q149806" start="53435" end="53440" title="Culture of Asia" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312521" start="53496" end="53506" title="Juneteenth" label="Juneteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="53575" end="53587" title="Pride Parade" label="Pride Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955985" start="53675" end="53688" title="NW 39th Street Enclave" label="39th and Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141892" start="53723" end="53742" title="Paseo Arts District" label="Paseo Arts District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852368" start="53901" end="53917" title="Tulsa State Fair" label="Tulsa State Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="54103" end="54114" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="54165" end="54174" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052629" start="54208" end="54229" title="Norman Music Festival" label="Norman Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q180950" start="54854" end="54875" title="Oklahoma City Thunder" label="Oklahoma City Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="54883" end="54914" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409663" start="54946" end="54975" title="Major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada" label="major league sports franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="55005" end="55049" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536851" start="55055" end="55066" title="Tulsa Shock" label="Tulsa Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="55118" end="55135" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21334944" start="55169" end="55181" title="Dallas Wings" label="Dallas Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="55239" end="55260" title="Minor League Baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="55268" end="55276" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880336" start="55281" end="55289" title="Double-A (baseball)" label="Double-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297548" start="55302" end="55322" title="Oklahoma City Comets" label="Oklahoma City Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q15884776" start="55327" end="55341" title="Tulsa Drillers" label="Tulsa Drillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="55372" end="55376" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459566" start="55386" end="55398" title="Tulsa Oilers" label="Tulsa Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q724139" start="55509" end="55521" title="Tulsa Talons" label="Tulsa Talons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="55543" end="55564" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="55604" end="55615" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="55617" end="55622" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082185" start="55628" end="55646" title="Oklahoma Defenders" label="Oklahoma Defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070078" start="55734" end="55739" title="CPIFL" label="CPIFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575624" start="55745" end="55763" title="Oklahoma City Blue" label="Oklahoma City Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="55772" end="55784" title="NBA G League" label="NBA G League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852358" start="55910" end="55926" title="Tulsa Revolution" label="Tulsa Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744123" start="55947" end="55976" title="American Indoor Soccer League" label="American Indoor Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q384864" start="56036" end="56040" title="USBL" label="USBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q204348" start="56049" end="56052" title="Continental Basketball Association" label="CBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051160" start="56054" end="56074" title="College athletics in the United States" label="Collegiate athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="56188" end="56203" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490794" start="56209" end="56225" title="Oklahoma Sooners" label="Oklahoma Sooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="56245" end="56268" title="Southeastern Conference" label="Southeastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001865" start="56278" end="56313" title="Oklahoma State Cowboys and Cowgirls" label="Oklahoma State Cowboys and Cowgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="56333" end="56350" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826532" start="56396" end="56418" title="Power Five conferences" label="Power Four conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673326" start="56456" end="56470" title="NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision" label="Division I FBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879288" start="56795" end="56808" title="Bedlam Series" label="Bedlam Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="56876" end="56894" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078813" start="57036" end="57055" title="Tulsa Golden Hurricane" label="University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099372" start="57060" end="57083" title="Oral Roberts Golden Eagles" label="Oral Roberts University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312525" start="57169" end="57197" title="American Athletic Conference" label="American Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400411" start="57271" end="57284" title="Summit League" label="Summit League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="57367" end="57383" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="57484" end="57488" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562699" start="57508" end="57534" title="Sooner Athletic Conference" label="Sooner Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="57545" end="57549" title="LPGA" label="LPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="57613" end="57632" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363321" start="57641" end="57644" title="Professional Golfers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="PGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569992" start="57673" end="57700" title="Southern Hills Country Club" label="Southern Hills Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q828160" start="57870" end="57886" title="PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q259776" start="57922" end="57932" title="U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Opens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="57959" end="57964" title="Rodeo" label="Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920861" start="58004" end="58010" title="Guymon, Oklahoma" label="Guymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="58084" end="58088" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="58134" end="58142" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="58226" end="58239" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841347" start="58305" end="58317" title="USA Softball" label="USA Softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654058" start="58378" end="58388" title="Devon Park (stadium)" label="Devon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030864" start="58412" end="58445" title="Women&amp;#x27;s College World Series" label="Women&amp;#x27;s College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952936" start="58481" end="58516" title="NCAA Division I softball tournament" label="NCAA Division I softball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451505" start="58555" end="58575" title="2028 Summer Olympics" label="2028 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="58646" end="58663" title="Collegiate wrestling" label="College wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082346" start="58698" end="58712" title="Oklahoma State Cowboys wrestling" label="Oklahoma State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953049" start="58726" end="58730" title="NCAA Division I Wrestling Championships" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="58761" end="58776" title="Collegiate wrestling" label="collegiate team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979466" start="58848" end="58890" title="National Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q852714" start="58911" end="58921" title="Stillwater, Oklahoma" label="Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578052" start="58926" end="58933" title="teqball" label="teqball"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="58958" end="58963" title="Tulsa" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415366" start="59207" end="59219" title="immunization" label="immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q854975" start="59222" end="59234" title="bioterrorism" label="bioterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="59481" end="59487" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="59489" end="59497" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="59511" end="59523" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="60069" end="60076" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684876" start="60260" end="60277" title="Commonwealth Fund" label="Commonwealth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896014" start="60311" end="60328" title="University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center" label="OU Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="60433" end="60446" title="trauma center" label="trauma center"/>
<link wikidata="Q463720" start="60454" end="60482" title="American College of Surgeons" label="American College of Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107631" start="60930" end="60941" title="Osteopathic medicine in the United States" label="osteopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082383" start="60975" end="61015" title="Oklahoma State University Medical Center" label="Oklahoma State University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="61086" end="61098" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="61132" end="61168" title="Medical cannabis" label="marijuana legal for medical purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601005" start="61300" end="61323" title="List of U.S. states and territories by life expectancy" label="a lower life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075569" start="61967" end="61997" title="Robert Wood Johnson Foundation" label="Robert Wood Johnson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q495885" start="62091" end="62106" title="Okfuskee County" label="Okfuskee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q485044" start="62125" end="62133" title="Cimarron County" label="Cimarron"/>
<link wikidata="Q495906" start="62138" end="62143" title="Logan County, Oklahoma" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="62298" end="62312" title="Covid pandemic" label="Covid pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111968" start="62735" end="62747" title="Greer County, Oklahoma" label="Greer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495873" start="62826" end="62838" title="Payne County, Oklahoma" label="Payne County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="62983" end="62995" title="media market" label="media market"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="63031" end="63053" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Media Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="63107" end="63127" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="63171" end="63191" title="Terrestrial television" label="Broadcast television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329175" start="63223" end="63230" title="KFOR-TV" label="KFOR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335295" start="63266" end="63273" title="KOTV-TV" label="KOTV-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="63352" end="63370" title="Television network" label="broadcast networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754787" start="63466" end="63479" title="The Oklahoman" label="The Oklahoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852377" start="63679" end="63690" title="Tulsa World" label="Tulsa World"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="63975" end="63983" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952040" start="64166" end="64169" title="WKY" label="WKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="64501" end="64506" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="64565" end="64568" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="TBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="64793" end="64812" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022147" start="64814" end="64829" title="inter-city rail" label="inter-city rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="64847" end="64858" title="inland port" label="inland port"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="64865" end="64877" title="Public transport" label="mass transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828268" start="64986" end="65013" title="List of Interstate Highways" label="primary Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894739" start="65023" end="65052" title="List of auxiliary Interstate Highways" label="auxiliary Interstate Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q94150" start="65072" end="65085" title="Interstate 35" label="Interstate 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q94275" start="65102" end="65115" title="Interstate 44" label="Interstate 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q94209" start="65120" end="65133" title="Interstate 40" label="Interstate 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174757" start="65331" end="65340" title="Turnpikes of Oklahoma" label="turnpikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174798" start="65398" end="65406" title="U.S. Route 66 in Oklahoma" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499872" start="65789" end="65814" title="Will Rogers World Airport" label="Will Rogers World Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q515522" start="65926" end="65953" title="Tulsa International Airport" label="Tulsa International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327421" start="66127" end="66162" title="Richard Lloyd Jones Jr. Airport" label="R. L. Jones Jr. (Riverside) Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="66362" end="66368" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q734900" start="66382" end="66397" title="Heartland Flyer" label="Heartland Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="66472" end="66485" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="66489" end="66506" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="66600" end="66605" title="Tulsa" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003636" start="66826" end="66840" title="Newton, Kansas" label="Newton, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="66939" end="66954" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231207" start="67137" end="67153" title="Port of Muskogee" label="Port of Muskogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852349" start="67162" end="67183" title="Tulsa Port of Catoosa" label="Tulsa Port of Catoosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800338" start="67307" end="67354" title="McClellan–Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System" label="McClellan–Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16518" start="67371" end="67376" title="barge" label="barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="67510" end="67528" title="Free-trade zone" label="foreign trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="67629" end="67668" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334169" start="67736" end="67747" title="List of counties in Oklahoma" label="77 counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082093" start="67834" end="67862" title="Oklahoma&amp;#x27;s congressional districts" label="five congressional districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="67905" end="67921" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="67954" end="67970" title="plurality voting" label="plurality voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="68011" end="68029" title="capital punishment in the United States" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="68202" end="68216" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="68222" end="68233" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="68242" end="68254" title="Execution by firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68403" end="68420" title="Red flag law#Oklahoma anti-red flag law" label="anti-red flag law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25006676" start="68498" end="68518" title="Abortion in Oklahoma" label="Abortion in Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q583952" start="68588" end="68611" title="Oklahoma Legislature" label="Legislature of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q910898" start="68628" end="68634" title="Oklahoma Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q910886" start="68643" end="68667" title="Oklahoma House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="68928" end="68938" title="term limit" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082395" start="69108" end="69130" title="Oklahoma Supreme Court" label="Oklahoma Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973018" start="69136" end="69170" title="Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals" label="Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="69295" end="69306" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="Impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106677651" start="69312" end="69329" title="impeachment trial" label="impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082179" start="69340" end="69371" title="Oklahoma Court on the Judiciary" label="Oklahoma Court on the Judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049542" start="69770" end="69782" title="non-partisan" label="non-partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550683" start="69869" end="69877" title="Governor of Oklahoma" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355267" start="70040" end="70050" title="List of Latin phrases (E)" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="70051" end="70069" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082272" start="70077" end="70100" title="Oklahoma National Guard" label="Oklahoma National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="70122" end="70129" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="70418" end="70426" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="70535" end="70546" title="court clerk" label="court clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278288" start="70563" end="70570" title="Sheriffs in the United States" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="71091" end="71106" title="school district" label="school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="71377" end="71395" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="71860" end="71882" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="72348" end="72358" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="72392" end="72408" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="72445" end="72449" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="72454" end="72458" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="72471" end="72484" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="72695" end="72712" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="72720" end="72742" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="72841" end="72845" title="United States presidential election, 2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="72884" end="72896" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="72929" end="72933" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="73171" end="73183" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="73244" end="73260" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649800" start="73329" end="73341" title="Little Dixie (Oklahoma)" label="Little Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="73623" end="73634" title="United States Census Bureau" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="73667" end="73696" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q505410" start="73760" end="73782" title="congressional district" label="congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018521" start="74524" end="74558" title="Index of Oklahoma-related articles" label="Index of Oklahoma-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112398" start="74561" end="74580" title="Outline of Oklahoma" label="Outline of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q31655515" start="74583" end="74601" title="Zodletone Mountain" label="Zodletone Mountain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22490" wikidata="Q642576" url="?curid=22490" title="Oxbridge">
<text>Oxbridge is a portmanteau of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the two oldest, wealthiest, and most prestigious universities in the United Kingdom. The term is used to refer to them collectively, in contrast to other British universities, and more broadly to describe characteristics reminiscent of them, often with implications of superior social or intellectual status or elitism.

==Origins==
Although both universities were founded more than eight centuries ago, the term &quot;Oxbridge&quot; is relatively recent. In William Makepeace Thackeray&#x27;s novel &quot;Pendennis&quot;, published in 1850, the main character attends the fictional Boniface College, Oxbridge. According to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, the first recorded use of the word was by Virginia Woolf, who, citing William Makepeace Thackeray, referenced it in her 1929 essay &quot;A Room of One&#x27;s Own.&quot; The term was used in the &quot;Times Educational Supplement&quot; in 1957, and the following year in &quot;Universities Quarterly&quot;.

When expanded, the universities are almost always referred to as &quot;Oxford and Cambridge&quot;, the order in which they were founded. A notable exception is Tokyo&#x27;s &quot;Cambridge and Oxford Society&quot;; this probably arises from the fact that the Cambridge Club was founded there first, and also had more members than its Oxford counterpart when they amalgamated in 1905.

==Meaning==
In addition to being a collective term, &quot;Oxbridge&quot; is often used as shorthand for characteristics the two institutions share:

*They are the two oldest universities in continuous operation in the UK. Both were founded more than 800 years ago, and continued as England&#x27;s only universities (barring short-lived foundations, such as those at Northampton, Stamford and Durham) until the 19th century. Between them, they have educated a large number of Britain&#x27;s most prominent scientists, writers, and politicians, as well as noted figures in many other fields.
*Each has a similar collegiate structure, whereby the university is a cooperative of its constituent colleges, which are responsible for supervisions/tutorials (the principal undergraduate teaching method, unique to Oxbridge), accommodation and pastoral care.
*They have established similar institutions and facilities such as leading publishing houses (Oxford University Press and Cambridge University Press), botanical gardens (University of Oxford Botanic Garden and Cambridge University Botanic Garden), museums (the Ashmolean and the Fitzwilliam), legal deposit libraries (the Bodleian and the Cambridge University Library), debating societies (the Oxford Union and the Cambridge Union), and notable comedy groups (The Oxford Revue and The Cambridge Footlights). 
*Rivalry between Oxford and Cambridge also has a long history, dating back to around 1209, when Cambridge was founded by scholars taking refuge from hostile Oxford townsmen, and celebrated to this day in varsity matches such as The Boat Race.
*They are usually the top-scoring institutions in cross-subject UK university rankings, so they are targeted by ambitious pupils, parents and schools. Entrance is extremely competitive and some schools promote themselves based on the achievement Oxbridge offers. Combined, the two universities award over one-sixth of all English full-time research doctorates.
*Oxford and Cambridge have common approaches to undergraduate admissions. Until the mid-1980s, entry was typically by sitting special entrance exams. Applications must be made at least three months earlier than to other UK universities (the deadline for applications to Oxbridge is mid-October whereas the deadline for all other universities, apart from applicants for medicine, is in January). Additionally, candidates may not apply to both Oxford and Cambridge in the same year, apart from a few exceptions (e.g. organ scholars). Most candidates achieve, or are predicted to achieve, outstanding results in their final school exams, and consequently interviews are usually used to check whether the course is well suited to the applicant&#x27;s interests and aptitudes, and to look for evidence of self-motivation, independent thinking, academic potential and ability to learn through the tutorial system.
* Membership of the Oxford and Cambridge Club is largely restricted to those who are members of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.

==Criticism==

The word &quot;Oxbridge&quot; may also be used pejoratively: as a descriptor of social class (referring to the professional classes who dominated the intake of both universities at the beginning of the twentieth century), as shorthand for an elite that &quot;continues to dominate Britain&#x27;s political and cultural establishment&quot; and a parental attitude that &quot;continues to see UK higher education through an Oxbridge prism&quot;, or to describe a &quot;pressure-cooker&quot; culture that attracts and then fails to support overachievers &quot;who are vulnerable to a kind of self-inflicted stress that can all too often become unbearable&quot; and high-flying state school students who find &quot;coping with the workload very difficult in terms of balancing work and life&quot; and &quot;feel socially out of [their] depth&quot;.

The Sutton Trust maintains that the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge &quot;recruit&quot; disproportionately from eight schools (Westminster School, Eton College, Hills Road Sixth Form College, St Paul&#x27;s School, Peter Symonds College, St Paul&#x27;s Girls&#x27; School, King&#x27;s College School, and Magdalen College School). They examined published admissions data from 2015 to 2017 and found that, out of the 19,851 places during the three years, the eight schools accounted for 1,310, whereas 2,900 other schools with historically few admissions to Oxbridge accounted for 1,220.

==Related terms ==
Other portmanteaus have been coined that extend the term &quot;Oxbridge&quot;, with different degrees of recognition:

The term &quot;Loxbridge&quot; is also used referring to the golden triangle of London, Oxford, and Cambridge. It was also adopted as the name of the Ancient History conference now known as &quot;AMPAH&quot;.

Doxbridge is another example of this, referring to Durham, Oxford and Cambridge. &quot;Doxbridge&quot; was also used for an annual inter-collegiate sports tournament between some of the colleges of Durham, Oxford, Cambridge and York.

&quot;Woxbridge&quot; is the name of the annual conference between the business schools of Warwick, Oxford and Cambridge.

When the University of St Andrews topped the 2023 UK universities ranking in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, the top three institutions were labelled &quot;Stoxbridge&quot; to reflect the new order.

Thackeray&#x27;s &quot;Pendennis&quot;, which introduced the term &quot;Oxbridge&quot;, also introduced &quot;Camford&quot; as another combination of the university names – &quot;he was a Camford man and very nearly got the English Prize Poem&quot; – but this term has never achieved the same degree of usage as &quot;Oxbridge&quot;. Camford is, however, used as the name of a fictional university city in the Sherlock Holmes story &quot;The Adventure of the Creeping Man&quot; (1923).

== See also ==
* Armorial of British universities
* Golden triangle, sometimes referred to as Loxbridge: an unofficial grouping of Oxford, Cambridge and certain elite universities in London
* Ivy League, a grouping of eight elite universities in the United States
* Oxford–Cambridge rivalry
* Russell Group

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="0" end="8" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="14" end="25" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="33" end="55" title="University of Oxford" label="Universities of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="60" end="69" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="140" end="154" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="382" end="389" title="elitism" label="elitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="530" end="557" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162382" start="577" end="586" title="Pendennis" label="Pendennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990210" start="654" end="680" title="List of fictional Oxbridge colleges" label="Boniface College, Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="705" end="730" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="780" end="794" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="808" end="835" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204366" start="875" end="899" title="A Room of One&amp;#x27;s Own" label="A Room of One&amp;#x27;s Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806532" start="938" end="966" title="Times Educational Supplement" label="Times Educational Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027998" start="1597" end="1640" title="List of oldest universities in continuous operation" label="oldest universities in continuous operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496110" start="1796" end="1807" title="University of Northampton (13th century)" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610899" start="1809" end="1817" title="Stamford University (England)" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316484" start="1822" end="1828" title="New College, Durham (17th century)" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354859" start="2040" end="2060" title="collegiate university" label="collegiate structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856975" start="2157" end="2179" title="Tutorial system" label="supervisions/tutorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="2374" end="2397" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="2402" end="2428" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115661" start="2450" end="2485" title="University of Oxford Botanic Garden" label="University of Oxford Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q894665" start="2490" end="2525" title="Cambridge University Botanic Garden" label="Cambridge University Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q636400" start="2541" end="2550" title="Ashmolean Museum" label="Ashmolean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421440" start="2559" end="2570" title="Fitzwilliam Museum" label="Fitzwilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22806" start="2573" end="2596" title="national library" label="legal deposit libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="2602" end="2610" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028334" start="2619" end="2647" title="Cambridge University Library" label="Cambridge University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q179875" start="2650" end="2658" title="debate" label="debating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="2674" end="2686" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025566" start="2695" end="2710" title="Cambridge Union" label="Cambridge Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755808" start="2740" end="2756" title="The Oxford Revue" label="The Oxford Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="2761" end="2785" title="Footlights" label="The Cambridge Footlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115558" start="2790" end="2826" title="Oxford–Cambridge rivalry" label="Rivalry between Oxford and Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916170" start="2993" end="3006" title="List of British and Irish varsity matches" label="varsity match"/>
<link wikidata="Q887604" start="3017" end="3030" title="The Boat Race" label="The Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3441" end="3465" title="University and college admissions#Undergraduate entry 2" label="undergraduate admissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355298" start="3536" end="3541" title="exams" label="exams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115553" start="4321" end="4346" title="Oxford and Cambridge Club" label="Oxford and Cambridge Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="4535" end="4547" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4697" end="4702" title="Elite#Educational elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650332" start="5305" end="5317" title="Sutton Trust" label="Sutton Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="5337" end="5357" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="5366" end="5389" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="5449" end="5467" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="5469" end="5481" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763482" start="5483" end="5512" title="Hills Road Sixth Form College" label="Hills Road Sixth Form College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227526" start="5514" end="5535" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School, London" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177215" start="5537" end="5558" title="Peter Symonds College" label="Peter Symonds College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638918" start="5560" end="5593" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410900" start="5595" end="5621" title="King&amp;#x27;s College School" label="King&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729834" start="5627" end="5650" title="Magdalen College School, Oxford" label="Magdalen College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073858" start="6109" end="6124" title="Golden triangle (universities)" label="golden triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="6198" end="6213" title="Ancient history" label="Ancient History"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088919" start="6258" end="6267" title="Doxbridge" label="Doxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="6309" end="6315" title="Durham University" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q967165" start="6486" end="6490" title="University of York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="6584" end="6591" title="University of Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="6625" end="6649" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6699" end="6711" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162382" start="6833" end="6842" title="Pendennis" label="Pendennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="7220" end="7235" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041769" start="7248" end="7281" title="The Adventure of the Creeping Man" label="The Adventure of the Creeping Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359871" start="7314" end="7346" title="Armorial of British universities" label="Armorial of British universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073858" start="7349" end="7364" title="Golden triangle (universities)" label="Golden triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="7489" end="7499" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115558" start="7563" end="7587" title="Oxford–Cambridge rivalry" label="Oxford–Cambridge rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q590631" start="7590" end="7603" title="Russell Group" label="Russell Group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22492" wikidata="Q83100" url="?curid=22492" title="Osman I">
<text>Osman I or Osman Ghazi (; or &quot;Osman Gazi&quot;; died 1323/4) was the eponymous founder of the Ottoman Empire (first known as a beylik or emirate). While initially a small Turkoman principality during Osman&#x27;s lifetime, his beylik transformed into a vast empire in the centuries after his death. It existed until 1922 shortly after the end of World War I, when the sultanate was abolished.

Owing to the scarcity of historical sources dating from his lifetime, very little factual information about Osman has survived. Not a single written source survives from Osman&#x27;s reign, and the Ottomans did not record the history of his life until the fifteenth century, more than a hundred years after his death. Because of this, historians find it very challenging to differentiate between fact and myth in the many stories told about him. One historian has even gone so far as to declare it impossible, describing the period of Osman&#x27;s life as a &quot;black hole&quot;.

According to later Ottoman tradition, Osman&#x27;s ancestors were descendants of the Kayı tribe of Oghuz Turks. However, many scholars of the early Ottomans regard it as a later fabrication meant to reinforce dynastic legitimacy.

The Ottoman principality was one of many Anatolian beyliks that emerged in the second half of the thirteenth century. Situated in the region of Bithynia in the north of Asia Minor, Osman&#x27;s principality found itself particularly well placed to launch attacks on the vulnerable Byzantine Empire, which his descendants would eventually go on to conquer.

==Name==
Some scholars have argued that Osman&#x27;s original name was Turkish, probably Atman or Ataman, and was only later changed to &quot;ʿOsmān&quot;, of Arabic origin. The earliest Byzantine sources, including Osman&#x27;s contemporary and Greek historian George Pachymeres, spell his name as Ἀτουμάν (Atouman) or Ἀτμάν (Atman), whereas Greek sources regularly render both the Arabic form &quot;ʿUthmān&quot; and the Turkish version &quot;ʿOsmān&quot; with θ, τθ, or τσ. An early Arabic source mentioning him also used &quot;ط&quot; (&quot;ṭ&quot;) rather than &quot;ث&quot; (&quot;th&quot;) in one instance. Osman thus could have adopted the more prestigious Muslim name later in his life. Turkish historian Halil İnalcık argued that the hypotheses that Osman was in fact named Ataman (per George Pachymeres), and that he came from the &quot;Desth-i Qipchaq&quot; north of the Black Sea, are both remote possibilities.

Arab scholars like Shihab al-Umari and Ibn Khaldun used the name Othman, while Ibn Battuta, who visited the region during Orhan&#x27;s reign, called him Osmancık (also spelled Othmānjiq or Osmanjiq). The suffix -cık (or -cuk), indicates the diminutive in Turkish, thus he was known by the name of Osmancik, which means &quot;Osman the Little&quot;, to differentiate between him and the third Rashidun Caliph &quot;Uthman the Great&quot;.

== Historical background ==

Most sources agree that the Ottoman Turks belonged to the Kayı Oghuz Turkic clan, who, according to Ottoman traditions, fled their native homeland in Central Asia during the early 13th century due to the Mongol invasions. The clan settled in Anatolia, in a region belonging to the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm. Other sources claim that the Kayı clan moved to Anatolia two centuries earlier than the previously mentioned date, alongside the Seljuks, when they left Transoxiana to Khurasan around 1040 to reside near the city of Merv. Then, the Kayı clan moved towards eastern Anatolia after 1071 CE, where it displaced other Turkic clans. Later, it became involved in the army of Sultan Kayqubad I and fought against the Khwarazmians, Mongols and Byzantines, who were raiding Seljuk lands. According to several sources, the Kayı warriors were known for filling first lines in battles, and their fighting skills and bravery were among the major factors the Seljuks were victorious in many battles. This fact prompted Sultan Kayqubad to appoint Ertuğrul, the clan&#x27;s Emir, as a &quot;Moqaddam&quot; (Lieutenant), and to reward the Kayıs some fertile lands near Ankara, where they settled and remained in the service of the Sultan for several years.

Later, Ertuğrul was granted dominion over the town of Söğüt in northwestern Anatolia on the Byzantine frontier. He also obtained the title of &quot;Uç beyliği&quot; or &quot;Uç bey&quot; (literally: marcher-lord). Granting this title was in line with the traditions of the Seljuk Sultanate, which is rewarding any clan chieftain who rises to power and is joined by a number of smaller clans, the title of marcher-lord. However, Ertuğrul had far-reaching political ambitions. He sought to expand beyond the lands rewarded to him. Thus, he started raiding the Byzantine possessions in the name of the Sultan successfully conquering several towns and villages, and slowly expanding his dominion during the half of the century he spent as a Seljuk governor. In 1281, Ertuğrul died at nearly 90 years of age.

== Lineage ==

Although the exact date of Osman&#x27;s birth is unspecified, some sources indicate that he was born on 13 February 1258, the exact same day the Mongol hordes invaded Baghdad, killing its inhabitants and ravaging its landmarks. Other sources, such as the 16th-century Ottoman historian Kemalpaşazâde, say that Osman was most likely born around the middle of the 13th century, possibly in 1254/5. Information related to the early life of Osman is limited. However, the few available sources agree that he was born in the town of Söğüt, which his father Ertuğrul took as the capital of his emirate. The reason for the lack of information available about this stage of Osman&#x27;s life is due to the fact that the oldest-known source about this time period was written about a hundred years after Osman&#x27;s death. Among these sources are: &quot;Destan-ı Tevarih-i Al-i Osman&quot; (The Oral history of the Ottomans), written in the 14th century by the Ottoman poet and court physician better known as Ahmedî (1334–1413), &#x27; (The Joy of histories) by Şükrullah (d. 1464), and &#x27; (History of the Ottomans) by Derviş Ahmed Âşıkî, known as Âşıkpaşazâde (1400–1484). Additionally, these remaining sources are not the originals, but rather copies, or copies of the copies that were rewritten over the years, leading to a probable loss or altering in the information. In fact, it is accepted that Ottoman, European, and Byzantine sources are not very reliable when considering the origins of Osman and his clan. On one hand, the oldest known records originally written by the Ottomans all date back to the period that followed the conquest of Constantinople (1453 CE). On the other hand, none of the Byzantine historians did refer in their writings to the origin of the Ottomans. As for European historians, these Turkic Muslim peoples were outside of their interest. However, that changed after a century of this period, when the Ottomans began to pose a threat to Europe. The Ottoman historian Kemalpaşazâde mentioned that Osman was Ertuğrul&#x27;s youngest son and that he was raised in the traditional nomadic Turkic ways: he learned , , horse riding, arrow shooting, and falconry, from an early age. He quickly mastered the previously mentioned skills, outperforming all his brothers. He was also taught the principles of Islam, and was influenced by the teachings of Sufi sheikhs, mostly his mentor Sheikh Edebali, and this was reflected in his personality and lifestyle.
In terms of proportions, the most popular and classic narration is that Osman is the grandson of Süleyman Şah, who died drowning while crossing the Euphrates River on horseback. The Turkish historian Yılmaz Öztuna considers that Osman&#x27;s grandfather, and Ertuğrul&#x27;s father, is called Gündüz Alp, saying that it is more likely that Süleyman Şah is a name stuck in Anatolian popular memory, and it actually refers to Süleyman bin Qutulmish who founded the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm. Öztuna adds that it is possible that Ottoman historians tried forming a connection between the Ottomans and the Seljuks, especially since the Ottomans appeared on the stage of history claiming to be the legitimate successors of the Seljuks. Based on this, Osman&#x27;s assumed lineage is as follows: &quot;Osman bin Ertuğrul bin Gündüz Alp bin Kaya Alp bin Gökalp bin Sarquk Alp bin Kayı Alp&quot;. Other researchers agree that the connection between Ertuğrul, Osman, and the Seljuks may have been largely invented by court chroniclers a century later, and the true origins of the Ottomans thus remain obscure. On the other hand, some Ottoman sources indicate further lineage to Osman and the Oghuz Turks, which is closer to myth than reality, saying that these people are descendants of Japheth, son of Noah, and that Osman&#x27;s genealogical tree contains 52 ancestors or more and ends with the Prophet Noah himself. This lineage includes Gökalp and Oghuz Han (who is said to be the father of Gökalp), and all the Oghuz Turkic peoples, including the Seljuks.

==Origin of the Ottoman Empire==

The exact date of Osman&#x27;s birth is unknown, and very little is known about his early life and origins due to the scarcity of sources and the many myths and legends which came to be told about him by the Ottomans in later centuries. He was most likely born around the middle of the thirteenth century, possibly in 1254/5, the date given by the sixteenth-century Ottoman historian Kemalpaşazade. According to Ottoman tradition, Osman&#x27;s father Ertuğrul led the Turkic Kayı tribe west from Central Asia into Anatolia, fleeing the Mongol onslaught. He then pledged allegiance to the Sultan of the Anatolian Seljuks, who granted him dominion over the town of Söğüt on the Byzantine frontier. This connection between Ertuğrul and the Seljuks, however, was largely invented by court chroniclers a century later, and the true origins of the Ottomans thus remain obscure. According to the Karamanid historian Shikari, Osman was a lowborn Yörük and shepherd.

Almost nothing is known for certain about Osman&#x27;s early activities, except that he controlled the region around the town of Söğüt and from there launched raids against the neighboring Byzantine Empire. The first datable event in Osman&#x27;s life is the Battle of Bapheus in 1301 or 1302, in which he defeated a Byzantine force sent to counter him.

Osman appears to have followed the strategy of increasing his territories at the expense of the Byzantines while avoiding conflict with his more powerful Turkish neighbors. His first advances were through the passes which lead from the barren areas of northern Phrygia near modern Eskişehir into the more fertile plains of Bithynia; according to Stanford Shaw, these conquests were achieved against the local Byzantine nobles, &quot;some of whom were defeated in battle, others being absorbed peacefully by purchase contracts, marriage contracts, and the like.&quot;

=== Ascendance to leadership ===
Osman became Emir, or &quot;Bey&quot;, upon his father&#x27;s death around 1281. According to some historians, Osman&#x27;s accession to power wasn&#x27;t peaceful as he had to fight his relatives before he got hold of his clan&#x27;s leadership. One of Osman&#x27;s major rivals was his uncle Dündar Bey, who might have plotted to kill his nephew or rebelled against him when the latter decided to attack a small Greek island. Dündar Bey saw that Osman&#x27;s ambition as a threat that might put the whole clan in danger. However, Osman had to pull out his sword to kill his uncle for disobeying.

In the &quot;&quot;, a book containing the narrations about Haji Bektash Veli, Osman&#x27;s younger uncle, was the one who became Bey after Ertuğrul&#x27;s death. During that time, Osman and several other warriors started organizing raids on Byzantine lands adjacent to Söğüt, such as , Bilecik, İnegöl, and İznik. As a result, the Byzantine &quot;Tekfur&quot; (governor) of Bursa was provoked, and he sent envoys to the Seljuk Sultan Alâeddin Kayqubad III, complaining about these constant assaults. Thus, the Sultan ordered Gündüz Alp to bring forth his young nephew to stand before him, and so Osman was arrested and sent to Konya. According to this narration, Sultan Kayqubad admired Osman&#x27;s courage and deeds, and didn&#x27;t wish to punish him, instead, Osman was sent to Ḥājī Baktāš Walī to consider his matter. Osman was warmly received by the Sufi mystic, who then ordered his release saying: &quot;I have been waiting for someone like him for years&quot;. After that, Ḥājī Baktāš Walī wrapped Osman&#x27;s head with the same Turban associated with Sufi sheikhs, and sent him back to Konya with a message to the sultan, asking that Osman to become the Kayı Emir. Thus, Osman became the clan&#x27;s leader.

=== Importance of the Osmanic Beylik location ===
From a military point of view, the location of Osman&#x27;s Beylik had a significant impact on his success as a conquering warrior. His capital Söğüt was located on a hill in a well-defended position, mediating the main road from Constantinople to Konya. The importance of this site emerged due to the political fragmentation of Anatolia that gave small states greater importance than they originally had. Being an Emir to a beylik bordering Byzantine lands, Osman had the opportunity to direct all his efforts towards war and Jihad following the footsteps of the Seljuks with intentions to conquer all Byzantine territories, and absorb them into the Islamic Caliphate. Encouraged by the weakness of the ancient Empire and its ongoing wars in Europe, Osman had the chance to expand towards western Anatolia crossing the Dardanelles to southeastern Europe. Commenting on these actions, some historians argue that Osman&#x27;s strategy of increasing his territories at the expense of the Byzantines was due to his intention to avoid conflicts with his more powerful Turkic neighbours.

Politically, Osman showed great skills forming and applying new administrative systems in his beylik. During his reign, the Ottomans made great strides towards transitioning from the Nomadic tribe system to settling down in permanent settlements. This helped them consolidate their position and rapidly develop into a major power. Moreover, the beylik&#x27;s location in northwestern Anatolia, next to Christendom, imposed a military policy on the Ottomans, which gave them better chances to grow and expand compared to the beyliaks of the interior. Osman&#x27;s beylik was also relatively far from both the Mongol invasions and the influence of the powerful Turkoman beyliks in southern and southwestern Anatolia. Add to that, its proximity to the Silk Road linking Byzantine lands in the west to areas controlled by the Mongols in the east, gave it prominent strategic and economic characteristics. Also, the Osmanic beylik was the only Islamic base facing the yet unconquered Byzantine regions, which made it a magnet to many Turkomen farmers, warriors, and Dervishes fleeing the Mongols, and aspiring to conquer new lands for economic and religious reasons.

===Osman&#x27;s Dream===

Osman I had a close relationship with a local religious leader of dervishes named Sheikh Edebali, whose daughter he married. A story emerged among later Ottoman writers to explain the relationship between the two men, in which Osman had a dream while staying in the Sheikh&#x27;s house. The story appears in the late-fifteenth-century chronicle of Aşıkpaşazade as follows:

The dream became an important foundational myth for the empire, imbuing the House of Osman with God-given authority over the earth and providing its fifteenth-century audience with an explanation for Ottoman success. The dream story may also have served as a form of compact: just as God promised to provide Osman and his descendants with sovereignty, it was also implicit that it was the duty of Osman to provide his subjects with prosperity.

=== Political relations at the beginning of Osman&#x27;s reign ===
According to the Bektashi narration, whose accuracy cannot be confirmed since it was only mentioned in Bektashi sources, plus the fact that it did not enjoy much support from the majority of researchers, Ḥājī Baktāš Walī was one of the &quot;Wafā&#x27;īyyah tariqah&quot; dervishes, a Murid of . Once Bābā Eliyās died, both Ḥājī Baktāš Walī and Sheikh Edebali became among his 60 successors, and grandmasters of the Ahyan Rûm brotherhood of warriors and farmers, who enjoyed great influence among the people. When Osman married Sheikh Edebali&#x27;s daughter, he secured his control over the brotherhood, and soon became their new grandmaster. As a result of this marriage, all the Ahyan sheikhs became under Ottoman control. This has a major impact on the establishment and development of the Osmanic beylik after Osman&#x27;s death during the reign of his son Orhan. Some argue that Osman&#x27;s marriage to sheikh Edebali&#x27;s daughter was his first brilliant political undertake. On the other hand, Turkish historian Professor Cemal Kafadar considers that the intermarriage between the Osmanic and Edebali&#x27;s houses, explains the hostilities that later rose between the Ottomans and the Germiyanids, since the Germiyanid Turkoman house was rewarded lands and titles by the Seljuks because of their services in subjugating the Bābā&#x27;ī revolt in 1240, and because Sheikh Edebali was considered by his followers a leader and successor to Bābā Ishāq, they all became the focus of attention of the Germiyanids.

Kafadar adds that early in Osman&#x27;s reign, the young Emir showed political ingenuity forming relations with his neighbours. Osman&#x27;s alliances transcended tribal, ethnic, and religious lines, and he may have followed his instinct and the requirements of his political aspirations, not mistaking the future results of the family connections he created and secured for his son after him. Osman reconstituted the political culture of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm in line with the needs of his beylik. He was more creative than his Turkomen neighbours in combining Turkic, Islamic, and Byzantine traditions.

Additionally, the Emir also cooperated with the Byzantine &quot;Tekfurs&quot; of the neighbouring cities and villages. He forged an agreement, so his clan, whenever they move between grazing areas in the summer, leave their belongings in the Byzantine fortress of Bilecik, and upon their return, they give its governor a token of appreciation, in the form of cheese and butter made from sheep milk and preserved in animal skins, or a good carpet made from wool. This agreement reflects the coexistence between herders, farmers and urban dwellers, during Osman&#x27;s reign. Osman&#x27;s friendship with Köse Mihal, governor of Chirmenkia (modern Harmanköy), was the culmination of this coexistence between Muslims and Byzantines. As for his relations with other peoples, such as the Mongols, most of whom moved to the borders of western Anatolia, and the Germiyanid Turkomen, it was hostile. That is because the Turks, in general, despised the Mongols, and the Germiyanids were probably of non-Oghuz origin. Osman allied with the Ahyan Rûm brotherhood, they formed organized groups, members in each of which worked in a single trade. The brotherhood took the responsibility to preserve justice, prevent injustice, stop oppression, follow sharia law, dictate good morals, and carry out military duties if the need arises, to defend their rights and the rights of Muslims.

The Emir also allied with newly arrived Turkomen clans to Anatolia. In general, the nomads have always had a strong militarized spirit compared to people installed in the cities. Thus, the clans were more active and effective than their city-dwelling kin. Soon enough, they become the beating heart of the Seljuk border provinces in total, and the Osmanic beylik in particular. Osman also enticed many Turkomen from the region of Paphlagonia to join his forces. These Turkomen were fine warriors, eager for jihad and conquest, each of them followed a &quot;Tariqah&quot; (an order of Sufism) and was supervised by a sheikh who taught them the meaning of jihad alongside many Islamic principles. However, another section of these Turkomen did not have close ties to Islam for various reasons, thus Osman entrusted them to several sheikhs and dervishes to be given proper Islamic education and be satiated with the values that glorify conquests aiming to spread the word of Islam. In fact, these sheikhs and dervishes were very enthusiastic about promoting the &quot;Turuq&quot; of the Khorasani Walis, and Osman&#x27;s request gave them this chance.

As for the ruling hierarchy, Osman was firstly subordinate to the Chobanid Emir in Kastamonu, followed by the Seljuk Sultan through the Germiyanid Bey in Kütahya, who was in turn subordinate to the Mongol Ilkhan in Tabriz. During this period, the Seljuk Sultans had lost their power over their local Emirs, and the Mongol Ilkhan practised his authority in Anatolia through his appointed Generals, where he requested that every local governor, including Osman, sends him soldiers whenever he requests so. As for the hierarchy of name delivering in &quot;khuṭbah&quot;, Imams used to pray for the guidance of the: Abbasid caliph in Egypt first, the Mongol Ilkhan in Tabriz, Seljuk Sultan in Konya, and finally the local Bey or Emir.

== Expansion of the beylik ==
Until the end of thirteenth century, Osman I&#x27;s conquests include the areas of Bilecik (Belokomis), Yenişehir (Melangeia), İnegöl (Angelokomis) and (Köprühisar), and Byzantine castles in these areas.

According to Shaw, Osman&#x27;s first real conquests followed the collapse of Seljuk authority when he was able to occupy the fortresses of Kulucahisar and Eskişehir. Then he captured the first significant city in his territories, Yenişehir, which became the Ottoman capital.

In 1302, after soundly defeating a Byzantine force near Nicaea, Osman began settling his forces closer to Byzantine controlled areas.

Alarmed by Osman&#x27;s growing influence, the Byzantines gradually fled the Anatolian countryside. Byzantine leadership attempted to contain Ottoman expansion, but their efforts were poorly organized and ineffectual. Meanwhile, Osman spent the remainder of his reign expanding his control in two directions, north along the course of the Sakarya River and southwest towards the Sea of Marmara, achieving his objectives by 1308.

Osman&#x27;s last campaign was against the city of Bursa. Although Osman did not physically participate in the battle, the victory at Bursa proved to be extremely vital for the Ottomans as the city served as a staging ground against the Byzantines in Constantinople, and as a newly adorned capital for Osman&#x27;s son, Orhan. Ottoman tradition holds that Osman died just after the capture of Bursa, but some scholars have argued that his death should be placed in 1324, the year of Orhan&#x27;s accession.

=== Conquest of Karacahisar ===

After establishing his beylik, Osman had to fight on two fronts: one against the Byzantine, and the other against the Turkomen beyliks that opposed his rule, especially the Germiyanids. Osman focused on expanding at the expense of the Byzantines, and since that time, the primary Ottoman goal became the conquest of the remaining Byzantine lands. Some accounts indicate that the first battle Osman launched against the Byzantines was aimed to revenge a defeat that he suffered in the spring of 1284 or 1285, where the Byzantines, led by the &quot;Tekfur&quot; of Bursa, ambushed him and his men. It is in doubt that Osman knew about this ambush from one of his spies. Nevertheless, he chose to clash with the Byzantines and he was defeated and forced to withdraw with casualties, including his nephew Koca Saruhan bey, son of Savcı Bey. Based on this, around 1286, Osman went forward to Kulacahisar at the head of a military force of three hundred fighters, it was a fortress located two leagues away from İnegöl, within the scope of mount Uludağ. The Emir attacked the fort at night and managed to conquer it, extending his beylik northwards toward Lake İznik&#x27;s proximity. The Ottoman victory at Kulacahisar triggered the fort&#x27;s governor, who refused to be a subordinate subject to a Muslim ruler, especially a border Emir, so he allied himself with Karacahisar&#x27;s governor, and both men agreed to fight the Muslims aiming at retaking all Byzantine lands that were lost recently. Thus, the Ottomans and the Byzantines met again in battle, somewhere between Bilecik and İnegöl, where fierce fighting took place in which Osman&#x27;s brother Savcı Bey and the Byzantine commander Pilatos were killed. The Battle ended with an Ottoman victory. Then, the Ottomans entered Karacahisar where they, reportedly for the first time, converted the town&#x27;s church into a mosque. Osman appointed a &quot;&quot; (magistrate) and a &quot;&quot; (chief of police) for the newly conquered city. Historians differed in determining the date of this conquest, yet none made it prior to 1286, or exceeding 1291. Osman made his new city a staging base of his military campaigns against the Byzantines, and ordered that his name be delivered at the Friday &quot;&quot;, which was the first manifestation of his sovereignty and authority.

Osman&#x27;s latest victory was his greatest up to that date. Seljuk Sultan Alâeddin Kayqubad III expressed his deep appreciation for Osman&#x27;s accomplishments in the name of the Seljuks and Islam, giving him the title of Ḥaḍrat ʻUthmān ghāzī marzubān &#x27;Âli Jâh ʻUthmān Shāh (the honourable conqueror and border guardian Osman Shāh). The Sultan also bestowed upon Osman the governance of all the land he did conquered as well as the towns of Eskişehir and İnönü. Moreover, The Seljuk Sultan issued a decree exempting Osman from all types of taxes. Osman also received several gifts from the Sultan reflecting the new high stature to the Seljuk court. These gifts included: a golden war banner, a &quot;mehter&quot; (war drum), a &quot;tuğ&quot; (a pole with circularly arranged horse tail hairs), a tassel, a gilded sword, a loose saddle, and one hundred thousand dirhams. The decree also included the recognition of Osman&#x27;s right to be mentioned in the Friday &quot;khuṭbah&quot; in all areas subject to him, and was permitted to mint coins in his name. Thus, Osman became a Sultan, but lacking only the title.

It is narrated that when drums were beaten announcing Sultan&#x27;s Kayqubad&#x27;s arrival, Osman stood up in glorification, and remained so till the music halted. Since that day, Ottoman soldiers enacted standing in glorification for their Sultan whenever drums were beaten.

=== Conquest of Bilecik, Yarhisar, and İnegöl ===
Soon after the conquest of Karacahisar, Osman marched with his soldiers north towards Sakarya River. Upon his arrival there, he raided and looted the forts of Göynük and Yenice Taraklı. Many argue that during this time, Osman received a message from his Byzantine friend Köse Mihal, warning him of a secret conspiracy that was being prepared by the &quot;tekfurs&quot; of Bilecik and Yarhisar. The two were aiming at killing Osman after inviting him to attend their children&#x27;s wedding. Osman was disappointed by being betrayed by Bilecik&#x27;s tekfur. That is because he considered the relationship with Bilecik to have been built on trust and good faith, as demonstrated by the aforementioned custom of his clan leaving their belongings in this fortress whenever they moved between grazing areas. Osman devised a plan to escape the trap and take over the fortress. He sent forty of his soldiers carrying some of the clan&#x27;s belongings to be kept in Bilecik, while most of its inhabitants were outside attending the wedding. Once his men entered the fort, they quickly overpowered its small garrison, and it fell to the Ottomans. Then, Osman went to the feast followed by some Byzantine knights who were easily ambushed by his men later. A short battle took place in which Osman was victorious, and most of the Byzantines were killed. After that, Osman rode towards Yarhisar and took it by surprise; A large part of the fort&#x27;s garrison was killed, while the rest were taken prisoners. The &quot;tekfur&#x27;s&quot; daughter Holophira, was also captured in this action, she soon became Osman&#x27;s daughter in law, having married his son Orhan sometime later, and her name was changed in Bayalun Afterwards, Osman and several of his men took over all towns and villages surrounding İnegöl, before laying siege on the fort itself and taking it with ease. Osman ordered the execution of İnegöl&#x27;s &quot;tekfur&quot; since he was known for persecuting his Muslim neighbours, then placed a new garrison for the town, and distributed the loot among his men.

=== Fall of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm, and the Osmanic Beylik&#x27;s independence ===
Osman aspired, after his multiple victories, to expand on two axes, aiming to isolate the Byzantine cities he was looking to conquer. First, he blocked the road leading to from the eastern side. Then, he advanced from the west towards and Evrenos. After that Osman turned around from both north and south, avoiding the fortified city of Bursa, connecting with his Muslim neighbours in the southeast. During that time, the Byzantine Empire was preoccupied with ongoing clashes with its powerful enemies in Anatolia, such as the Germiyanids and the coastal beyliks, not to mention suppressing unrest and discord in Constantinople and the . The Empire was unable to face Osman&#x27;s threats, thus, he felt free to expand at the Byzantines expense exploiting the current situation. At the same time, the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm was seeing its final days. The Sultanate grip was slowly weakened over its Turkoman Beyliks. Sultan Alâeddin Kayqubad III became deeply unpopular after he purged the Seljuk administration of his predecessor&#x27;s men with extreme violence. This prompted the Mongol Ilkhan Mahmud Ghazan to call upon Kayqubad to appear before him, and once the latter did in 1302, he was executed and replaced with his predecessor to keep the peace in Anatolia. According to another account, Mongol and hordes raided Asia Minor in 1300, and killed Sultan Kayqubad in his capital Konya. It was also said that Kaykāwūs himself killed his rival, coveting his own return on the throne. Another story suggests that Kayqubad escaped and sought refuge in the Byzantine court where he remained until his death. In all cases, Kaykāwūs&#x27;s rule was short-lived, lasting between 4 and 6 years at most, and when he died in 1308 CE, the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm was no more to be mentioned in the historical records, giving the way for the Turkoman beyliks to emerge as independent states.

The demise of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm gave Osman autonomy over his dominion, he soon dubbed himself &quot;Padişah Āl-ıʿOsmān&quot; (sovereign of the house of Osman). After that, Osman set his sights towards conquering the last of the Byzantine cities, towns, and fortresses in Anatolia. According to one account, after Sultan Alâeddin Kayqubad III was killed by the Mongols, viziers and notable leaders met and decided that since the late Sultan had no offspring, one of the local Emirs should take his place, and they found Osman perfect fitting the candidacy. Thus, the leaders offered the Emir the position, and Osman accepted becoming a Sultan. It is likely that Kayqubad&#x27;s and Kaykāwūs&#x27;s deaths led to the Sultanate of Rûm falling into chaos, and prompted many of its regular soldiers to join the armies of local Emirs, including Osman. This gave the latter a great momentum and important military experience enriching his army for the upcoming conquests.

=== Battle of Bapheus ===
Soon after Osman secured his independence and established control over all fortresses he conquered, he sent messages to all remaining Byzantine &quot;tekfurs&quot; in Anatolia asking them to choose between accepting Islam, Ottoman sovereignty and paying &quot;jizyah&quot;, or war. Some of these &quot;tekfurs&quot; ended up accepting Islam, including Osman&#x27;s old friend Köse Mihal, who became the Turkic leader&#x27;s companion, and would play a considerable part in the upcoming expansions of the Osmanic beylik. His descendants became known in Ottoman history as &quot;Mihaloğulları&quot; (children of Michael, plural of &quot;Mihaloğlu&quot;). Other governors acknowledged Osman&#x27;s sovereignty, while the rest kept their loyalty to the Byzantine Emperor. Thus, Osman started harassing their fortresses such as Bursa and Nicaea which was besieged in 1301. The Ottoman raids also threatened the port city of Nicomedia with famine, as the Ottomans roamed the countryside prohibiting peasants from harvesting wheat. This provoked Bursa&#x27;s &quot;tekfur&quot; among others to unite their efforts to eliminate this new emerging Islamic power.

In the spring of 1302, Emperor Michael IX launched a campaign that reached south to Magnesia. The Ottomans, awed by his large army, avoided an open battle. The Emperor sought to confront The Ottomans, but he was dissuaded by his generals. Encouraged by that, The Ottomans resumed their raids, virtually isolating the Emperor at Magnesia. Soon, the imperial army started dissolving without engaging in a single battle, that is because the local troops left to defend their homes which were continuously raided by the Ottomans, and the Alan mercenaries left as well, aiming to rejoin with their families in Thrace. The Byzantine emperor was forced to withdraw by the sea, followed by a wave of refugees. To counter the threat to Nicomedia, Michael&#x27;s father, Andronikos II, sent a Byzantine force of some 2,000 men (half of whom were recently hired Alan mercenaries), under the &quot;megas hetaireiarches&quot;, Giorgios Mouzalon, to cross the Bosporus and relieve the city.

The Byzantine response was a warning for the Islamic border villages and towns. However, when the locals noticed Osman&#x27;s leadership and military strength, as well as his devotion to Islam, they rallied to support and stand with him to consolidate a new Islamic state that would unite them and form an impenetrable wall against the Byzantines. Several Byzantine deserters joined Osman as well, some of which were liberated prisoners of war who chose to align with him, reportedly due to his good treatment during their custody. Many Islamic warrior brotherhoods also joined the Ottomans. For example, the Gazi Rûm&#x27;s (Raiders of the Romans), they were stationed on the borders of the Byzantine Empire and repelled its attacks on Muslim lands since the Abbasid era, gaining great experiences and knowledge in Byzantine strategies and tactics. Another example is the Ḥajjian Rûm&#x27;s (pilgrims of [the land of] the Romans), a brotherhood of Muslim clergy concerned with teaching local villagers and recent converts the basics and different aspects of Islam, and had a side objective of assisting the &quot;Mujahideen&quot; in combat.

The Byzantine and Ottoman armies eventually met on 27 July 1302 at the plain of Bapheus located between Nicomedia and Nicaea. The Ottoman army consisted of light cavalry under Osman himself, and they numbered around 5,000, while the Byzantines numbered around 2,000 men. The Muslim cavalry charged toward the Byzantines fast, whose Alan contingent did not participate in the battle. As a result of the attack, the Byzantine line was broken, forcing Giorgios Mouzalon to withdraw into Nicomedia under the cover of the Alan force.

Bapheus was the first major victory for the nascent Osmanic Beylik, and of major significance for its future expansion: the Byzantines effectively lost control of the countryside of Bithynia, withdrawing to their forts, which became isolated and fell one by one eventually. The Byzantine defeat also sparked a mass exodus of the Christian population from the area into the European parts of the empire, further altering the region&#x27;s demographic balance. Coupled with the defeat at Magnesia, the Ottomans were able to reach the coasts of the Aegean Sea, threatening Byzantium with a final loss for their territory in Asia Minor. According to Halil İnalcık, the battle allowed the Ottomans to achieve the characteristics and qualities of a true state.

=== Byzantine-Mongol convergence attempt ===

After the victory in Bapheus, Osman divided the conquered lands among his kin and army leaders establishing Islamic hegemony and ending the Byzantine era in his new areas. He gave Eskişehir to his brother Gündüz bey, Karacahisar to his son Orhan, Yarhisar to Hasan Alp, and İnegöl to Turgut Alp. By that time, Emperor Andronikos II felt the pressure of the Ottoman expansion. The Emperor watched in fear how the demographic changes were rapidly taking place in Anatolia, and he decided to stop it. Yet, being recently defeated, Andronikos II couldn&#x27;t face the Ottomans in an open battle. To add insult to injury for the Byzantine, conflicts were taking place in the Balkans. Thus, Andronikos II had no choice but to try making an alliance with the Mongols in Persia, who were controlling central and eastern Anatolia. To achieve that, the Emperor sent a letter to Ilkhan Mahmud Ghazan offering him a family rapprochement through marriage and establishing an alliance between both Empires.

At that time, The Mongols were passing through a period of high tension with the Mamluks in Egypt and Syria, this did overwhelm the relations with the Byzantines, especially that Ghazan was preparing for another campaign to Damascus and Palestine after his first invasion in 1299 CE, in which many civilians were massacred and where the Mamluk army suffered a massive defeat at the Battle of Wadi al-Khaznadar near Ḥimṣ. The Mamluks themselves were preparing for the upcoming war with the Mongols aiming to wash away the shame of their previous defeat. As a result, On 20 April 1303, the Mongols and Mamluks engaged in a fierce battle on the outskirts of Damascus, known as the Battle of Shaqhab or Battle of Marj al-Saffar, in which the Mamluks won a decisive victory. This devastating defeat had a heavy toll on Ghazan and seems to have contributed to deteriorating his health further more, until he died in Qazvin on Sunday 17 May 1304. This eliminated any hope of a Byzantine-Mongol alliance, and allowed the Ottomans to continue on with their conquests.

=== Byzantine-Catalan alliance ===
After Ghazan&#x27;s death, the Byzantine Emperor was forced to seek other solutions to the problem of Ottoman expansion. Thus, he hired a company of Catalan mercenaries led by Roger de Flor. The mercenaries had become unemployed after the signing of the Peace of Caltabellotta between the Crown of Aragon and the French dynasty of the Angevins in 1302. The company arrived at Constantinople in January 1303, where they were received by the Emperor himself, then, the mercenaries were housed in the district of Blachernae. The Emperor arranged the wedding of Roger de Flor to his niece, the 15-year-old princess Maria Asanina, daughter of the Tsar of Bulgaria Ivan Asen III and Irene Palaiologina. De Flor was named &quot;Megas doux&quot; (Great Dux, i.e., Commander of the Imperial forces), and was promised a four months payment for him and his men.

The Catalans soon crossed to Asia Minor and fought against the Karasids and Germiyanids winning a fast victory. Afterward, they resolved to attack the maritime provinces of the Ottomans and moved to the town of Philadelphia which was besieged by Yakup I of Germiyan, who suffered a defeat at the hands of the Catalans and was forced to lift his siege and retreat. This victory proved that had Byzantium been able to gather sufficient military forces and material capabilities, it would have been able to eliminate the emerging Turkic power, but it had neither. It was not long before the Catalans abandoned fighting the Muslims and turned their attention towards the Byzantines themselves. The reason for that was that the local population of Magnesia beheaded the Catalan garrison and stole its treasure, which infuriated Roger de Flor and made him march towards that city intending on revenge. The Byzantines were horrified by the mercenaries&#x27; attacks, and became preoccupied in defending themselves. Roger de Flor was soon killed by order of the emperor&#x27;s son Michael IX, who saw the indiscipline of the Catalan mercenaries as a growing danger, as did the people of Constantinople, who rose up against the Catalans and killed many of them. Once the news reached the main Catalan force in Gallipoli, they went on a killing spree of their own, killing all the local Byzantines. Soon after this the Byzantines and the Catalans were at war with each other, giving way to Osman to move on with his conquests.

=== Conquest of Yenişehir and Its Surroundings ===
After securing his northern borders by reaching the Black and Marmara seas, Osman turned his attention towards the southern borders of his beylik. Thus, he attacked the Byzantine towns, villages, and fortresses surrounding the city of Yenişehir preparing to conquer it. Osman sent a large campaign to the fortress of Yāvandhisar and annexed it. Then, he attacked Yenişehir, took it with ease, and made it his temporary capital after fortifying and strengthening its defenses. Soon after that Osman started sending more campaigns against the remaining Byzantine cities conquering several fortresses including Lefke, Akhisar, Koçhisar, Yenicehisar, , and . In fact, conquering the aforementioned forts aimed at imposing a security belt around Yenişehir, thus Osman surrounded it with a series of front forts to ward off any invasions.

=== Conquest of Bursa ===
With Yenişehir in his hands, Osman focused his efforts on isolated large cities starting with Bursa, unaware that this would be his last campaign. He gave the orders to start building two forts overseeing and surrounding the city, then, when the construction was completed, Osman provided the forts with large garrisons. This allowed his men to tighten the blockade and prevent any provisions reaching Bursa. The Ottoman siege lasted between six and nine years, this was due to the fact that the Ottomans had no Siege engines and they had never captured a large fortified city before.

During the long siege, Osman and some of his military commanders conquered the smaller Byzantine fortresses on the vicinity of the beylik, in which Several &quot;tekfurs&quot; acknowledged Osman&#x27;s sovereignty, and became among his subjects, some of them accepting Islam in the process. Soon after that, Osman started suffering from Gout, and couldn&#x27;t accompany his men in any more campaigns or witness the Siege of Bursa, so he entrusted his son Orhan to complete this major task, while he retired in his capital. Orhan&#x27;s continued the siege without any fighting, but he continued isolating Bursa from its surrounding forts, conquering Mudanya to cut off the city&#x27;s connection to the sea. He also captured the city of Praenetos on the southern coast of İzmit, changing its name to Karamürsel, after the Muslim leader who took it &quot;Karamürsel Bey&quot;. The last fort to fall was Beyce, which was considered Bursa&#x27;s key as it overlooked it, and it was renamed Orhaneli.

Orhan tightened the blockade around Bursa till its garrison fell into despair. Soon, the Byzantine emperor realized that the fall of the city into Muslim hands was inevitable, thus, he made a difficult decision ordering his governor to evacuate the city. Orhan entered Bursa on 6 April 1326, its people were not subjected to any harm after they recognized Ottoman sovereignty and pledged to pay &quot;jizyah&quot;. Saroz, the garrison&#x27;s leader, surrendered to Orhan and pledged allegiance to his father Osman. He also converted to Islam and was given the title of &quot;Bey&quot; out of respect to his courage and patience during the long siege. According to some sources, Osman died just before the fall of the city, while others suggest that he lived long enough to hear about the victory on his death-bed.

==Family==

Due to the scarcity of sources about his life, very little is known about Osman&#x27;s family relations. According to certain fifteenth-century Ottoman writers, Osman was descended from the Kayı branch of the Oghuz Turks, a claim which later became part of the official Ottoman genealogy and was eventually enshrined in the Turkish Nationalist historical tradition with the writings of M. F. Köprülü. However, the claim to Kayı lineage does not appear in the earliest extant Ottoman genealogies. Thus many scholars of the early Ottomans regard it as a later fabrication meant to shore up dynastic legitimacy with regard to the empire&#x27;s Turkish rivals in Anatolia. Yazıcıoğlu Ali, in the early 15th century, constructed a genealogy for Osman, tracing it back to Oghuz Khagan, the mythical ancestor of the Western Turks, through the eldest grandson of his eldest son, thereby lending legitimacy to the Ottoman sultans&#x27; claim of primacy among Turkish monarchs.

It is very difficult for historians to determine what is factual and what is legendary about the many stories the Ottomans told about Osman and his exploits, and the Ottoman sources do not always agree with each other. According to one story, Osman had an uncle named Dündar with whom he had a quarrel early in his career. Osman wished to attack the local Christian lord of Bilecik, while Dündar opposed it, arguing that they already had enough enemies. Interpreting this as a challenge to his leadership position, Osman shot and killed his uncle with an arrow. This story first appears in Neşri&#x27;s work but is missing in earlier Ottoman historical works. If it was true, it means that it was likely covered up to avoid tarnishing the reputation of the Ottoman dynasty&#x27;s founder with the murder of a family member. It may also indicate an important change in the relationship of the Ottomans with their neighbors, shifting from relatively peaceful accommodation to a more aggressive policy of conquest.

===Consorts===
Osman I had two known consorts, who were both his legal wives, and some unknown concubines:
* Rabia Bala Hatun. She was the daughter of Sheikh Edebali and the mother of Alaeddin Ali Pasha. She spent the last years of her life with her father and died in Bilecik in 1324. She was buried next to her father&#x27;s tomb. 
* Kameriye Malhun Hatun. Daughter of Ömer Abdülaziz Bey. Called also Mal or Mala Hatun, she was the mother of Orhan I.
* &quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun. Girl from humble social background with whom Osman became infatuated when he was very young. When she rejected his marriage proposal, believing it to be a joke, Osman kidnapped her and made her his concubine.

===Sons===
Osman I had at least eight sons:
* &quot;Fülan&quot; Bey (born before 1281) – with &quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun. He was sent to the court of Gıyasüddin III Kaykhusraw, Seljuk sultan, to be raised in his house when Ertuğrul signed peace with him. He had at least three sons, Ahmed, Bayad and Halil; and his descendants were still alive at the time of the reign of Bayezid I.
* Orhan I (1281–1362) – with Malhun Hatun. Second Ottoman ruler.
* Alaeddin Erden Ali Pasha ( – 1331) – with Rabia Bala Hatun. Governor of Bilecik and founder of several mosques in Bursa. His descendants were still alive in the 16th century.
* Çoban Bey (1283–1337). He built a mosque in Bursa. Buried in Söğüt, in the Türbe of Ertuğrul.
* Pazarlı Bey (1285 – ?). General of Orhan I. He had at least two sons, İlyas Bey and Murad Bey, and at least two daughters. Buried in Söğüt, in the Türbe of Ertuğrul.
* Hamid Bey (1288–1329). Buried in Söğüt, in the Türbe of Ertuğrul.
* Murad Arslan Melik Bey (1290–1336). He had at least one daughter, Melek Hatun, Buried in Söğüt, in the Türbe of Ertuğrul.
* Savcı Bey. He had at least one son, Süleyman Bey. Buried in Söğüt, in the Türbe of Ertuğrul.

===Daughters===
Osman I had at least one daughter:
* Fatma Hatun (1284, Söğüt – 1347, Bursa)

==Personality==
Ottoman historiography depicts Osman as a semi-holy person.

It is known that among the Turkoman tribes, the tribe or part of it was named after its leader. The fact that the Kayi tribe became known by the name of Osman, suggests that the tribe became powerful because of his excellent leadership. Orientalist R. Rakhmanaliev writes that the historical role of Osman was that of a tribal leader, who enjoyed enormous success in uniting his people around him.

The activities and personality of Osman as the founder of the state and dynasty are highly appreciated by historians of both the past and the present. The state and the dynasty of rulers are named after him. The population of the state was called Ottomans (Osmanlilar) until the beginning of the 20th century, that is until the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. Historian F. Uspensky notes that Osman relied not only on force, but also cunningness. Historian and writer Lord Kinross writes that Osman was a wise, patient ruler, whom people sincerely respected and were ready to serve him faithfully. He had a natural sense of superiority, but he never sought to assert himself with the help of power, and therefore he was respected not only by those who were equal in position, but also those who exceeded his abilities on the battlefield or on wisdom. Osman did not arouse feelings of rivalry in his people—only loyalty. Herbert Gibbons believed that Osman was &quot;great enough to exploit masterful people&quot;.

According to Cemal Kafadar, Osman for the Ottomans was the same as Romulus for the Romans.

== Death ==
According to the sources that say Osman lived to hear of the fall of Bursa, Orhan rushed back to Söğüt to inform his father of his great victory. Once he reached it, he was immediately summoned to Osman, who was on his death-bed. Soon after Osman heard the news, he died from natural causes. However, Osman managed to name Orhan to be his successor, although the latter was not Osman&#x27;s first-born. Yet the dead Emir believed that Orhan was better fit to rule than his elder half-brother Alâeddin, who was more passive and pious than Orhan. As for the exact cause of Osman&#x27;s death, it is well known that he suffered from gout for several years, which seemingly caused his eventual death. This is confirmed by what Aşıkpaşazade mentioned in &quot;Tevarih-i Âl-i Osman&quot; when he talked about the late period of Osman&#x27;s life, saying: &quot;Osman had a bad foot from which he experienced severe pain&quot;. It is noted that Aşıkpaşazade used a similar expression when he talked about the death of Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror: &quot;The cause of his death was the issue in his feet&quot;. It is now known that gout is a genetic disease in the Ottoman dynasty, and many sultans suffered from it.

The exact date of Osman&#x27;s death is debatable. It is said that he died on 21 August 1326 at 70 years old. The 15th-century Ottoman historian Rouhi Çelebi, who wrote down the history of the Ottoman Empire until 1481, indicates that Osman died in 1320. However, Uruç adiloğlu, another Ottoman historian who lived during the time of Sultans Mehmed the Conqueror and Bayezid II up until 1502, says that Osman died in 1327. Contemporary Turkish historian states that, despite the absence of documents mentioning Osman&#x27;s name after the year 1320, there are documents confirming Orhan&#x27;s ascension to the throne in 1324. Based on this, Osman&#x27;s death might have occurred in the same or previous year. It is also certain that Osman&#x27;s death was after the death of his father-in-law, Sheikh Edebali, and after the death of his wife, Rabia Bala Hatun, because it is known that Osman buried the two in Bilecik.

Once Osman died, Orhan ordered the transfer of his body to Bursa, his new capital. Thus, Osman&#x27;s body was laid there to rest. His grave is located today in the neighbourhood of Tophane. The reason behind the transferring Osman&#x27;s body was due to a will Osman did tell his son about during the early years of besieging Bursa: &quot;My Son, when I die, bury me under that silver dome in Bursa&quot;. However, Osman&#x27;s current tomb dates back to the time of Sultan Abdulaziz (1861–1876), because the first tomb was completely destroyed in a severe earthquake that struck the region in 1855, it was rebuilt by the aforementioned Sultan. Sultan Abdulhamid II (1876–1909) also constructed a shrine in Söğüt where Osman was buried for a while before he was moved to Bursa.

According to some sources, Osman left a written will to his son Orhan instructing him to move on with conquests and jihad against the Byzantines, that he abides by the teachings of Islam, accompany the &quot;ʿUlamāʾ&quot;, amend his parish, and dedicates himself to spread the word of Islam.

== Legacy ==
Osman is considered the founder of the Ottoman dynasty who started an imperial line that would expand to include 35 sultans – rulers of one of the largest and most powerful empires in world history. The Ottoman Empire lasted until 1918, when it disintegrated after defeat alongside other Central Powers in World War I. Osman is often referred to as the first in the line of Ottoman Sultans, although he himself never carried this title in his life, and was instead called &quot;Bey&quot; or &quot;Emir&quot;. One endowment written in Persian and dating back to 1324, indicates that Osman was given the titles &quot;Muḥiuddin&quot; (Reviver of the faith) and &quot;Fakhruddin&quot; (Pride of the faith).

Osman&#x27;s descendants are distributed today in several American, European and Arab countries after the royal Ottoman family was expelled from Turkey in 1924 shortly after the declaration of the Republic, by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Eventually, several family members returned to Turkey, after the Turkish government allowed the females to return in 1951. However, male descendants had to wait until 1973 CE to be able to enter Turkey again. Other members remained in the countries where their ancestors had sought refuge, such as England, France, the United States, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, among others. Osman&#x27;s descendants are known today as the Osmanoğlu (son of Osman) family.

A Turkish navy landing ship is named after Osman.

===The Sword of Osman===

The Sword of Osman () was an important sword of state used during the coronation ceremony of the Ottoman Sultans starting with Sultan Murad II. The practice started when Osman was girt with the sword of Islam by his father-in-law Sheik Edebali. The girding of the sword of Osman was a vital ceremony which took place within two weeks of a sultan&#x27;s accession to the throne. It was held at the tomb complex at Eyüp, on the Golden Horn waterway in the capital Constantinople. The fact that the emblem by which a sultan was enthroned consisted of a sword was highly symbolic: it showed that the office with which he was invested was first and foremost that of a warrior. The Sword of Osman was girded on to the new sultan by the Sharif of Konya, a Mevlevi dervish, who was summoned to Constantinople for that purpose.

===In popular culture===

Osman and people close to him have been portrayed in the Turkish television series
&quot;&quot; (1988), adapted from a novel by the same name, &quot;Diriliş: Ertuğrul&quot; (2014–2019) and &quot;Kuruluş: Osman&quot; (2019–present).

==See also==
* Osmanoğlu family
* List of Ottoman conquests, sieges and landings
* Köse Mihal
* Ghaza thesis
==Notes==
==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="0" end="7" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="11" end="22" title="Osman I" label="Osman Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="99" end="113" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="132" end="138" title="bey" label="beylik"/>
<link wikidata="Q189898" start="142" end="149" title="emirate" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812344" start="176" end="184" title="Turkoman (ethnonym)" label="Turkoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="351" end="362" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="804" end="808" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417344" start="1067" end="1077" title="Kayı (tribe)" label="Kayı tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="1081" end="1092" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Oghuz Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="1254" end="1271" title="Anatolian beyliks" label="Anatolian beyliks"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="1357" end="1365" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1494" end="1510" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q727229" start="1668" end="1674" title="Ataman" label="Ataman"/>
<link wikidata="Q318365" start="1832" end="1849" title="George Pachymeres" label="George Pachymeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525358" start="2116" end="2117" title="Teth" label="ṭ"/>
<link wikidata="Q172747" start="2158" end="2160" title="Ṯāʾ" label="th"/>
<link wikidata="Q739524" start="2285" end="2298" title="Halil İnalcık" label="Halil İnalcık"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122052" start="2419" end="2434" title="Cumania" label="Desth-i Qipchaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="2454" end="2463" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658869" start="2516" end="2531" title="Shihab al-Umari" label="Shihab al-Umari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="2536" end="2547" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="2576" end="2587" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="2619" end="2624" title="Orhan" label="Orhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="2889" end="2904" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="2911" end="2917" title="Uthman" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="3028" end="3045" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Oghuz Turkic clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3115" end="3127" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="3253" end="3269" title="Sultanate of Rûm" label="Sultanate of Rûm"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="3424" end="3435" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="3439" end="3447" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khurasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193325" start="3487" end="3491" title="Merv" label="Merv"/>
<link wikidata="Q155542" start="3527" end="3543" title="Eastern Anatolia Region" label="eastern Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61964" start="3646" end="3656" title="Kayqubad I" label="Kayqubad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q486918" start="3680" end="3692" title="Khwarazmian dynasty" label="Khwarazmians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3706" end="3716" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="4122" end="4128" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="4265" end="4270" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388414" start="4385" end="4391" title="Uç bey" label="Uç bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q449254" start="5317" end="5330" title="Ibn Kemal" label="Kemalpaşazâde"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="5559" end="5564" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q243245" start="5583" end="5591" title="Ertuğrul" label="Ertuğrul"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="5619" end="5626" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854270" start="6086" end="6095" title="Şükrullah" label="Şükrullah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6176" end="6188" title="Âşıkpaşazâde" label="Âşıkpaşazâde"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="6664" end="6690" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="conquest of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="7175" end="7187" title="Equestrianism" label="horse riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q211011" start="7209" end="7217" title="falconry" label="falconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7360" end="7365" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="7406" end="7410" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="7411" end="7417" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481733" start="7445" end="7452" title="Sheikh Edebali" label="Edebali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799152" start="7608" end="7620" title="Suleyman Shah" label="Süleyman Şah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="7659" end="7674" title="Euphrates River" label="Euphrates River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069298" start="7711" end="7724" title="Yılmaz Öztuna" label="Yılmaz Öztuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043070" start="7804" end="7814" title="Gündüz Alp" label="Gündüz Alp"/>
<link wikidata="Q730338" start="7935" end="7957" title="Suleiman ibn Qutulmish" label="Süleyman bin Qutulmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200637" start="8787" end="8794" title="Japheth" label="Japheth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782672" start="8803" end="8807" title="Noah in Islam" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118293" start="8952" end="8961" title="Oghuz Khagan" label="Oghuz Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q449254" start="9480" end="9493" title="Ibn Kemal" label="Kemalpaşazade"/>
<link wikidata="Q243245" start="9547" end="9555" title="Ertuğrul" label="Ertuğrul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417344" start="9571" end="9581" title="Kayı tribe" label="Kayı tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="9610" end="9618" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="9632" end="9638" title="Mongols" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="9684" end="9690" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="9698" end="9715" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Anatolian Seljuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="9759" end="9764" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9772" end="9781" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469100" start="9985" end="9994" title="Karamanid" label="Karamanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170056" start="10034" end="10039" title="Yörük" label="Yörük"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="10184" end="10189" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509619" start="10314" end="10331" title="Battle of Bapheus" label="Battle of Bapheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="10691" end="10700" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007455" start="10756" end="10769" title="Stanford Shaw" label="Stanford Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="11024" end="11028" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="11039" end="11042" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582424" start="11305" end="11315" title="Dündar Bey" label="Dündar Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q469865" start="11670" end="11687" title="Haji Bektash Veli" label="Haji Bektash Veli"/>
<link wikidata="Q208006" start="11897" end="11904" title="Bilecik" label="Bilecik"/>
<link wikidata="Q343973" start="11906" end="11912" title="İnegöl" label="İnegöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q217125" start="11918" end="11923" title="İznik" label="İznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036539" start="11958" end="11964" title="Tekfur" label="Tekfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="11985" end="11990" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378353" start="12045" end="12066" title="Kayqubad III" label="Alâeddin Kayqubad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460567" start="12650" end="12656" title="Turban" label="Turban"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="13111" end="13125" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="13306" end="13312" title="Anatolian beyliks" label="beylik"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="13408" end="13413" title="Jihad" label="Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="13532" end="13549" title="Caliphate" label="Islamic Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13624" end="13630" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="13701" end="13712" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="13716" end="13735" title="Southeast Europe" label="southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14148" end="14168" title="Nomadic tribe system" label="Nomadic tribe system"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="14367" end="14378" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="14573" end="14589" title="Mongol invasions and conquests" label="Mongol invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="14714" end="14723" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q487865" start="15220" end="15227" title="dervish" label="dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q722705" start="15502" end="15514" title="Aşıkpaşazade" label="Aşıkpaşazade"/>
<link wikidata="Q467692" start="16057" end="16065" title="Bektashi Order" label="Bektashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754897" start="16325" end="16330" title="Murid" label="Murid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="16902" end="16907" title="Orhan" label="Orhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058628" start="17073" end="17086" title="Cemal Kafadar" label="Cemal Kafadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324889" start="17237" end="17248" title="Germiyanids" label="Germiyanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q940397" start="17376" end="17394" title="Babai revolt" label="Bābā&amp;#x27;ī revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057767" start="17489" end="17499" title="Baba Ishak" label="Bābā Ishāq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796711" start="18776" end="18786" title="Köse Mihal" label="Köse Mihal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155453" start="18819" end="18828" title="Harmanköy, İnhisar" label="Harmanköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622032" start="19975" end="19986" title="Paphlagonia" label="Paphlagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="20102" end="20109" title="Tariqah" label="Tariqah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="20498" end="20522" title="Islamization" label="spread the word of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="20639" end="20644" title="Walis" label="Walis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661668" start="20761" end="20769" title="Chobanids (beylik)" label="Chobanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155915" start="20778" end="20787" title="Kastamonu" label="Kastamonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188894" start="20849" end="20856" title="Kütahya" label="Kütahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="20910" end="20916" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21307" end="21336" title="List of Abbasid caliphs#Caliphs of Cairo (13 June 1261 – 22 January 1517)" label="Abbasid caliph in Egypt first"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21342" end="21355" title="Ilkhanate#Ilkhans" label="Mongol Ilkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596694" start="21367" end="21389" title="List of Seljuk sultans of Rûm" label="Seljuk Sultan in Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q208006" start="21540" end="21547" title="Bilecik" label="Bilecik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994764" start="21561" end="21570" title="Yenişehir, Bursa" label="Yenişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q343973" start="21584" end="21590" title="İnegöl" label="İnegöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="21740" end="21756" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q103813821" start="21777" end="21813" title="Siege of Kulaca Hisar" label="occupy the fortresses of Kulucahisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994764" start="21893" end="21902" title="Yenişehir, Bursa" label="Yenişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509619" start="21962" end="21989" title="Battle of Bapheus" label="defeating a Byzantine force"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="21995" end="22001" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="22413" end="22426" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="22453" end="22467" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="22555" end="22560" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099263" start="22623" end="22643" title="Siege of Brusa" label="the victory at Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="22755" end="22769" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="22824" end="22829" title="Orhan I" label="Orhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579565" start="23871" end="23880" title="Saru Batu Savcı Bey" label="Savcı Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q925688" start="24085" end="24091" title="Uludağ" label="Uludağ"/>
<link wikidata="Q103813821" start="24144" end="24154" title="Siege of Kulaca Hisar" label="conquer it"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994756" start="24406" end="24417" title="Karacahisar Castle" label="Karacahisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="25829" end="25838" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833269" start="25843" end="25848" title="İnönü, Eskişehir" label="İnönü"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26083" end="26101" title="Ottoman military band#Instruments" label="&amp;quot;mehter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783602" start="26122" end="26125" title="Tug (banner)" label="tuğ"/>
<link wikidata="Q572664" start="26251" end="26257" title="dirham" label="dirham"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="26919" end="26932" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901109" start="26992" end="26998" title="Göynük" label="Göynük"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266583" start="27003" end="27017" title="Taraklı" label="Yenice Taraklı"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="30092" end="30105" title="Mahmud Ghazan" label="Mahmud Ghazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193383" start="31035" end="31049" title="Ottoman dynasty" label="house of Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="32144" end="32149" title="jizya" label="jizya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932829" start="32461" end="32474" title="Mihaloğlu" label="Mihaloğulları"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="32717" end="32723" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="32803" end="32812" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="33069" end="33079" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q920866" start="33122" end="33130" title="Magnesia ad Sipylum" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="33572" end="33576" title="Alans" label="Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="33643" end="33649" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="33799" end="33812" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145093" start="33924" end="33944" title="Hetaireia" label="megas hetaireiarches"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="33984" end="33992" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="34776" end="34787" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509619" start="35192" end="35206" title="Battle of Bapheus" label="eventually met"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="35871" end="35879" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="36235" end="36245" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25763" start="37255" end="37261" title="Greater Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="37578" end="37583" title="Egypt in the Middle Ages" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="37588" end="37593" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="37710" end="37718" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="37723" end="37732" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37743" end="37757" title="Mongol raids into Palestine#Mongol campaigns of 1299–1300" label="first invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290814" start="37868" end="37895" title="Battle of Wadi al-Khaznadar" label="Battle of Wadi al-Khaznadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="37901" end="37905" title="Homs" label="Ḥimṣ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732255" start="38164" end="38209" title="Battle of Marj al-Saffar (1303)" label="Battle of Shaqhab or Battle of Marj al-Saffar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181578" start="38396" end="38402" title="Qazvin" label="Qazvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="38719" end="38749" title="Catalan Company" label="company of Catalan mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="38757" end="38770" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q661425" start="38835" end="38857" title="Peace of Caltabellotta" label="Peace of Caltabellotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="38870" end="38885" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="38916" end="38924" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Angevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749015" start="39091" end="39101" title="Blachernae" label="Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q379687" start="39223" end="39239" title="List of Bulgarian monarchs" label="Tsar of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q285508" start="39240" end="39253" title="Ivan Asen III of Bulgaria" label="Ivan Asen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360993" start="39258" end="39276" title="Irene Palaiologina, Empress of Bulgaria" label="Irene Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q136578" start="39302" end="39312" title="Megas doux" label="Megas doux"/>
<link wikidata="Q941887" start="39496" end="39504" title="Karasids" label="Karasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q138280" start="39644" end="39656" title="Alaşehir" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17522379" start="39679" end="39698" title="Yakup I of Germiyan" label="Yakup I of Germiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="40734" end="40743" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994764" start="41237" end="41246" title="Yenişehir, Bursa" label="Yenişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q736759" start="41610" end="41615" title="Osmaneli" label="Lefke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209905" start="41617" end="41624" title="Akhisar" label="Akhisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435462" start="41626" end="41634" title="Koçhisar, Sandıklı" label="Koçhisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="42374" end="42387" title="Siege engines" label="Siege engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="42785" end="42789" title="Gout" label="Gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099263" start="42864" end="42878" title="Siege of Bursa" label="Siege of Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q856171" start="43099" end="43106" title="Mudanya" label="Mudanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248693" start="43186" end="43195" title="Karamürsel" label="Praenetos"/>
<link wikidata="Q129649" start="43221" end="43226" title="İzmit" label="İzmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948420" start="43436" end="43444" title="Orhaneli" label="Orhaneli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417344" start="44464" end="44468" title="Kayı (tribe)" label="Kayı"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="44483" end="44494" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Oghuz Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568928" start="44598" end="44617" title="Turkish nationalism" label="Turkish Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q604285" start="44660" end="44673" title="Mehmet Fuat Köprülü" label="M. F. Köprülü"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118293" start="45040" end="45052" title="Oghuz Khagan" label="Oghuz Khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="45083" end="45096" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Western Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="45224" end="45240" title="Anatolian Beyliks" label="Turkish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208006" start="45617" end="45624" title="Bilecik" label="Bilecik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984103" start="45833" end="45838" title="Neşri" label="Neşri"/>
<link wikidata="Q19411693" start="46365" end="46381" title="Rabia Bala Hatun" label="Rabia Bala Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481733" start="46407" end="46421" title="Sheikh Edebali" label="Sheikh Edebali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057754" start="46592" end="46613" title="Malhun Hatun" label="Kameriye Malhun Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378714" start="47095" end="47120" title="Kaykhusraw III" label="Gıyasüddin III Kaykhusraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="47122" end="47135" title="Seljuk dynasty" label="Seljuk sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243245" start="47168" end="47176" title="Ertuğrul" label="Ertuğrul"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="47317" end="47326" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="47330" end="47337" title="Orhan I" label="Orhan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q720989" start="47395" end="47419" title="Alaeddin Pasha" label="Alaeddin Erden Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q208006" start="47467" end="47474" title="Bilecik" label="Bilecik"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="47509" end="47514" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="48102" end="48107" title="Türbe" label="Türbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812344" start="48320" end="48328" title="Turkoman (ethnonym)" label="Turkoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417344" start="48407" end="48417" title="Kayi tribe" label="Kayi tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193383" start="48764" end="48771" title="Ottoman dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="48939" end="48947" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="49020" end="49050" title="collapse of the Ottoman Empire" label="collapse of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q451292" start="49062" end="49073" title="Fyodor Uspensky" label="F. Uspensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077113" start="49160" end="49172" title="Patrick Balfour, 3rd Baron Kinross" label="Lord Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421403" start="49612" end="49627" title="Herbert Adams Gibbons" label="Herbert Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058628" start="49720" end="49733" title="Cemal Kafadar" label="Cemal Kafadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="49774" end="49781" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651392" start="49790" end="49796" title="Roman people" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q720989" start="50303" end="50311" title="Alaeddin Pasha" label="Alâeddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="50441" end="50445" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="50829" end="50849" title="Mehmed the Conqueror" label="Mehmed the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="50944" end="50959" title="Genetic disorder" label="genetic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q165983" start="51387" end="51397" title="Bayezid II" label="Bayezid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481733" start="51816" end="51830" title="Sheikh Edebali" label="Sheikh Edebali"/>
<link wikidata="Q19411693" start="51865" end="51881" title="Rabia Bala Hatun" label="Rabia Bala Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q151500" start="52417" end="52426" title="Abdulaziz" label="Abdulaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="52595" end="52608" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdulhamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="52930" end="52937" title="Ulama" label="ʿUlamāʾ"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="53141" end="53151" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="35 sultans"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="53316" end="53330" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="53334" end="53345" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="53562" end="53569" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125029469" start="53643" end="53652" title="Mohy al-Din" label="Muḥiuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173819" start="53692" end="53702" title="Fakhr al-Din" label="Fakhruddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="53877" end="53883" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="53942" end="53963" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="54263" end="54270" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="54272" end="54278" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="54284" end="54297" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="54299" end="54304" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="54306" end="54318" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107138" start="54382" end="54413" title="Osmanoğlu family" label="Osmanoğlu (son of Osman) family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107076" start="54418" end="54443" title="TCG Osmangazi" label="Turkish navy landing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760821" start="54532" end="54546" title="sword of state" label="sword of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="54590" end="54605" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Sultans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="54627" end="54635" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481733" start="54723" end="54736" title="Sheik Edebali" label="Sheik Edebali"/>
<link wikidata="Q673073" start="54906" end="54910" title="Eyüp" label="Eyüp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="54919" end="54930" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="54955" end="54969" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q10411663" start="55223" end="55229" title="Sharif" label="Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="55233" end="55238" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q659567" start="55242" end="55249" title="Mevlevi" label="Mevlevi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55488" end="55505" title="Diriliş: Ertuğrul" label="Diriliş: Ertuğrul"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55534" end="55548" title="Kuruluş: Osman" label="Kuruluş: Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107138" start="55587" end="55603" title="Osmanoğlu family" label="Osmanoğlu family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12910571" start="55606" end="55652" title="List of Ottoman conquests, sieges and landings" label="List of Ottoman conquests, sieges and landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796711" start="55655" end="55665" title="Köse Mihal" label="Köse Mihal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15812216" start="55668" end="55680" title="Ghaza thesis" label="Ghaza thesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22493" wikidata="Q133168" url="?curid=22493" title="Orhan">
<text>Orhan Ghazi (; , also spelled Orkhan; died 1362) was the second sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1323/4 to 1362. He was born in Söğüt, as the son of Osman I.

In the early stages of his reign, Orhan focused his energies on conquering most of northwestern Anatolia. The majority of these areas were under Byzantine rule and he won his first battle at Pelekanon against the Byzantine Emperor Andronikos III Palaiologos. Orhan also occupied the lands of the Karasids of Balıkesir and the Ahis of Ankara.

A series of civil wars surrounding the ascension of the nine-year-old Byzantine emperor John V Palaiologos greatly benefited Orhan. In the Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347, the regent John VI Kantakouzenos married his daughter Theodora to Orhan and employed Ottoman warriors against the rival forces of the empress dowager, allowing them to loot Thrace. In the Byzantine civil war of 1352–1357, Kantakouzenos used Ottoman forces against John V, granting them the use of a European fortress at Çimpe around 1352. A major earthquake devastated Gallipoli (modern Gelibolu) two years later, after which Orhan&#x27;s son, Süleyman Pasha, occupied the town, giving the Ottomans a strong bridgehead into mainland Europe.

According to Muslim scholar Ibn Battuta, Orhan was &quot;the greatest of the Turcoman kings and the richest in wealth, lands, and military forces&quot;.
==Passage of power==
Osman Gazi died in either 1323 or 1324, and Orhan succeeded him. According to Ottoman tradition, when Orhan succeeded his father, he proposed to his brother, Alaeddin, that they should share the emerging empire. The latter refused on the grounds that their father had designated Orhan as sole successor, and that the empire should not be divided. He only accepted as his share the revenues of a single village near Bursa.

==Government==
According to some authorities, it was in Alaeddin&#x27;s time, and by his advice, that the Ottomans ceased acting like vassals to the Seljuk ruler: they no longer stamped money with his image or used his name in public prayers. These changes are attributed by others to Osman himself, but the vast majority of the oriental writers concur in attributing to Alaeddin the introduction of laws respecting the costume of the various subjects of the empire, and the creation and funding of a standing army of regular troops. It was by his advice and that of a contemporary Turkish statesman that the celebrated corps of Janissaries was formed, an institution which European writers erroneously fix at a later date, and ascribe to Murad I.

===Janissaries===

Alaeddin, by his military legislation, may be truly said to have organized victory for the Ottoman dynasty. He organised for the Ottoman Beylik a standing army of regularly paid and disciplined infantry and horses, a full century before Charles VII of France established his fifteen permanent companies of men-at-arms, which are generally regarded as the first modern standing army.

Orhan&#x27;s predecessors, Ertuğrul and Osman I, had made war at the head of the armed vassals and volunteers. This army rode on horseback to their prince&#x27;s banner when summoned for each expedition, and were disbanded as soon as the campaign was over. Alaeddin determined to ensure any future success by forming a corps of paid infantry, which was to be kept in constant readiness for service. These troops were called Yaya, or piyade. They were divided into tens, hundreds, and thousands with their commanders. Their pay was high, and their pride soon caused their sovereign some anxiety. Orhan wished to provide a check to them, and he took counsel for this purpose with his brother Alaeddin and Kara Khalil Çandarlı (of House of Candar), who was connected with the royal house by marriage. Çandarlı laid before his master and the vizier a project. Out of this arose the renowned corps of Janissaries, which was considered the scourge of the Balkans and Central Europe for a long time, until it was abolished by Sultan Mahmud II in 1826.

Çandarlı proposed to Orhan to create the Janissary corps, an army entirely composed of the children of conquered places. Çandarlı argued that:

He also claimed that incorporating children of the conquered would induce other people to enlist: their friends and relations, who would come as volunteers to join the Ottoman ranks. Acting on this advice, Orhan selected a thousand of the finest boys from conquered Christian families. The recruits were trained according to their individual abilities, and employed in posts ranging from professional soldier to Grand Vizier. This practice continued for centuries, until the reign of Sultan Mehmed IV.

==Politics==
===Initial expansion===

Orhan invaded Byzantine territories in northwest Anatolia. First, in 1321, Orhan captured Mudanya, the port linking the city of Bursa to the Sea of Marmara coast. He then sent a column under Konur Alp towards the west Black Sea coast; another column under Akça Koca to capture Kocaeli, and finally a column under Abdurrahman Ghazi to capture the southeast coast of the Sea of Marmara. Then, he captured Bursa by persuading its Byzantine commander to defect. As Evrenos Bey, he became a commander of light cavalry, and he and his sons and grandsons led Ottoman troops in the Balkans. Once Bursa was captured, Orhan sent cavalry towards the Bosphorus, capturing Byzantine towns on the Marmara coast. There were even sightings of Ottoman light cavalry along the Bosphorus coast, and Ottoman forces laid siege to Nicaea (second only to Constantinople in the Byzantine Empire).

In 1329, Byzantine Emperor Andronikos III led a mercenary army to relieve Nicaea and regain Kocaeli. In the ensuing battle of Pelekanon (near Nicomedia, Bithynia.
Present day: Maltepe, Turkey), on 10 or 15 June, Orhan&#x27;s disciplined troops routed the Byzantines. Thereafter Andronikos abandoned the idea of getting Kocaeli back and never again conducted a field battle against Ottoman forces.

Nicaea surrendered to Orhan after a three-year siege that concluded in 1331. Orhan captured Nicomedia in 1337. Orhan gave the command of Nicomedia to his eldest son, Suleyman Pasha, who had directed the operations of the siege.

In 1338, Orhan captured Scutari; most of northwest Anatolia was in Ottoman hands. The Byzantines still controlled the coastal strip from Şile on the Black Sea to Scutari and the city of Amastris (now Amasra) in Paphlagonia, but these were so scattered and isolated as to be no threat to the Ottomans.

In 1345, there was a change of strategy. Instead of aiming to gain land from non-Muslims, Orhan took over a Turkish principality, Karesi (present Balıkesir and surroundings). According to Islamic philosophy of war, the areas under Islamic rule were to be &quot;abodes of peace&quot; and the other areas &quot;abodes of war&quot;. Conducting a war in &quot;abodes of war&quot; was considered a good deed. Karesi principality was a state governed by a Turkish emir and its main inhabitants were Turkish so it was an &quot;abode of peace&quot;. The Ottomans had to have special justification for conquering fellow Muslim Turkish principalities.

In the case of Karesi, the ruler had died and had left two sons whose claims to the post of emir were equally valid. So there was a fight between the armed supporters of the two claimant princes. Orhan&#x27;s pretext for invasion was that he was acting as a bringer of peace. In the end of the invasion by Ottoman troops the two brothers were pushed to the castle of their capital city of Pergamum (now Bergama). One was killed and the other was captured. The territories around Pergamum and Palaeocastro (Balıkesir) were annexed to Orhan&#x27;s domains. This conquest was particularly important since it brought Orhan&#x27;s territories to Çanakkale, the Anatolian side of the Dardanelles Straits.

With the conquest of Karesi, nearly the whole of northwestern Anatolia was included in the Ottoman Beylik, and the four cities of Bursa, Nicomedia, Nicaea, and Pergamum had become strongholds of its power. At this stage of his conquests, Orhan&#x27;s Ottoman Principality had four provinces:
#Original land grant area of Söğüt and Eskişehir;
#&quot;Hüdavendigar&quot; (Domain of the Sultan) area of Bursa and İznik;
#&quot;Koca Eli&quot; peninsular area around İzmit;
#former principality of Karesi around Balıkesir and Bergama.

===Consolidation period===

A twenty-year period of peace followed the acquisition of Karesi. During this time, the Ottoman sovereign was actively occupied in perfecting the civil and military institutions which his brother had introduced, in securing internal order, in founding and endowing mosques and schools, and in the construction of vast public edifices, many of which still stand. Orhan did not continue with any other conquests in Anatolia except taking over Ankara from the commercial-religious fraternity guild of Ahis.

The general diffusion of Turkish populations over Anatolia, before Osman&#x27;s time, was in main part a push from the Mongol conquest of Central Asia, Iran and then East Anatolia. Turkish peoples had founded a number of principalities after the demise of the Anatolian Sultanate of Rum, after its defeat by the Ilkhanate Mongols. Although they were all of Turkish stock, they were all rivals for dominant status in Anatolia.

After the Byzantine defeat of the Battle of Pelekanon, Orhan developed friendly relations with Andronicus III Palaeologus, and maintained them with some of his successors. Therefore, the Ottoman power experienced a twenty-year period of general repose.

However, as the Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347 dissipated the last resources of the Byzantine Empire, the auxiliary armies of the Emirs of Turkish principalities were frequently called over and employed in Europe. In 1346, Emperor John VI Cantacuzene recognised Orhan as the most powerful sovereign of the Turks. He aspired to attach the Ottoman forces permanently to his interests, and hoped to achieve this by giving his second daughter, Theodora, in marriage to their ruler, despite differences of creed and the disparity of age. However, in Byzantine and in Western European history, dynastic marriages were quite usual and there are many examples which were much more strange.

The splendour of the wedding between Orhan and Theodora at Selymbria (Silivri) is elaborately described by Byzantine writers. In the following year, Orhan and Theodora visited his imperial father-in-law at Üsküdar, (then Chrysopolis) the suburb of Constantinople on the Asiatic side of the Bosporus where there was a display of festive splendor. However, this close relationship soured when Byzantines suffered from marauding migrant Turcoman bands that had crossed the Marmara Sea and Dardanelles and pillaged several towns in Thrace. After a series of such raids, the Byzantines had to use superior forces to deal with them.

Ibn Battuta gave the following account of Orhan during his reign: 

===Decline of Byzantine Empire===

During Orhan&#x27;s reign as the Ottoman emir, the Byzantine Empire declined – partly due to the ambitions of Italian maritime states and to the aggression of the Turcomans and other Turcoman states, but also due to civil wars within the empire.

During these years the Byzantine Empire became so weak that commercial supremacy in the surrounding seas around it became a bone of contention for the Italian maritime commercial city states. The Republic of Genoa possessed Galata, a separate Genoese city across the Golden Horn from Constantinople itself. The Genoese had fought the Byzantines earlier in 1348 when the Byzantines had decreased their customs tariffs in order to attract trade to the Byzantine side of the Golden Horn. In 1352 the rivalry for trade led to a war between Genoa and Venice. The Genoese, in resisting a Venetian fleet attacking their ships in the Golden Horn, bombarded the sea walls of Constantinople and pushed the Byzantines to ally with the Venetians. The Venetians assembled a large naval force, including hired fleets from Peter IV of Aragon and from the Byzantine Empire of John VI Cantacuzene. The sea battle between the Venetian fleet under the command of Niccolo Pisani and the Genoese fleet under Paganino Doria led to defeat of Venetians and their Byzantine allies. Orhan opposed the Venetians, whose fleets and piratical raids were disrupting his seaward provinces, and who had met his diplomatic overtures with contempt. The Venetians were allies of John VI, so Orhan sent an auxiliary force across the straits to Galata, which there co-operated with the Genoese.

In the midst of the distress and confusion that the Byzantine Empire now suffered, Orhan&#x27;s eldest son, Suleyman Pasha, captured the Castle of Tzympe (Cinbi) in a bold move which gave the Turks a permanent foothold on the European side of the Dardanelles Straits. He also started to settle migrant Turcomans and town-dwelling Turks in the strategic city and castle of Gelibolu (Gallipoli), which had been devastated by a severe earthquake and was therefore evacuated by its inhabitants. Suleyman refused various financial inducements offered by John VI to empty the castle and the city. The emperor pleaded with his son-in-law Orhan to meet personally and discuss the matter, but the request was either rejected or could not be carried out due to Orhan&#x27;s age and ill-health.

This military situation remained unresolved, in part because of the eruption of hostilities between John VI and his co-emperor and son-in-law John V Palaeologus. John V was dismissed from his imperial post and exiled to Tenedos; Cantacuzene&#x27;s son Matthew was crowned as the co-emperor. But very soon John V returned from exile with Venetian help and conducted a coup, taking over the government of Constantinople. Although the two men came to an agreement to share power, John VI resigned from his imperial post and became a monk. Each of these two contestants for power was continually soliciting Orhan&#x27;s aid against the other, and Orhan supported whichever side would benefit the Ottomans.

===Last years===
Orhan was the longest living and one of the longest reigning of the future Ottoman Sultans. In his last years he had left most of the powers of state in the hands of his second son Murad and lived a secluded life in Bursa.

In 1356 Orhan and Theodora&#x27;s son, Halil, was abducted somewhere on the Bay of Izmit. A Genoese commercial boat captain, which was conducting acts of piracy alongside commercial activity, was able to capture the young prince and take him over to Phocaea on the Aegean Sea, which was under Genoese rule. Orhan was very much upset by this kidnapping and conducted talks with his brother-in-law and now sole Byzantine Emperor John V Palaeologos. As to the agreement, John V with a Byzantine naval fleet went to Phocaea, paid the ransom demanded of 100,000 &quot;hyperpyra&quot;, and brought Halil back to Ottoman territory.

In 1357 Orhan&#x27;s eldest and most experienced son and likely heir, Suleyman Pasha, died after injuries sustained from a fall from a horse near Bolayir on the coast of the sea of Marmara. The horse that Suleyman fell from was buried alongside him and their tombs can still be seen today. Orhan was said to have been greatly affected by the death of his son.

Orhan died soon after, likely from natural causes. It seems rather likely that the death of his son was taxing on his health, however. Orhan died in 1362, in Bursa, at the age of eighty, after a reign of thirty-six years. He is buried in the türbe (tomb) with his wife and children, called &quot;Gümüşlü Kumbet&quot; in Bursa.

==Family==
===Consorts=== 
Orhan had at least seven consorts: 
* Bayalun Hatun. She is also called, among the different variants, Baylun, Bilun, Suilun, Biliven and Niliven. Maybe she was the daughter of the &quot;tekfur&quot; of Bilecik who was kidnapped by the Ottomans during the attack on her father&#x27;s fortress and given to Orhan as his concubine in 1299. In 1331, she was the consort of Orhan who welcomed Ibn Battuta to Bursa.
* Efendize Hatun. Also called Efendi, Eftendize or Efendire Hatun, was the daughter of Akbaşlı Günduz Bey, Osman I&#x27;s brother, and so Orhan&#x27;s cousin. She was the mother of Süleyman Pasha, the eldest and favorite Orhan&#x27;s son.
* Asporça Hatun. Noblewoman of Byzantine-Greek origins, born Holofira, Olivera or Glafira. She was Orhan&#x27;s first legal wife and mother of two sons and two daughters. 
* Melek Hatun. She was the daughter of Melik Bey, son of Osman I, and thus the niece of Orhan. She was mother of Sultan Hatun. 
* Nilüfer Hatun. Christian slave of Greek descent, mother of Orhan&#x27;s successor Murad I.
* Theodora Kantakouzene. Daughter of John VI Kantakouzenos and Orhan&#x27;s second legal wife, she married Orhan in 1346. Remained a Christian after her marriage. Mother of Halil Bey.
* Theodora Uroš (died in 1352/1354). Stefan IV Dušan and Helena of Bulgaria&#x27;s daughter. She married Orhan around 1351, when he was seventy, while she was twelve.

===Sons===
Orhan had at least six sons: 
* Süleyman Pasha (1306–1357) - with Efendize Hatun. Orhan&#x27;s favorite son, he was at the head of the expansion campaigns in Thrace and Rumelia. He died of wounds sustained after a fall from his horse. 
* Ibrahim Bey (1310–1362, buried in Osman I&#x27;s türbe) - with Asporça Hatun. Governor of Eskişehir, was executed by the order of his half-brother Murad I.
* Şerefullah Bey - with Asporça Hatun.
* Kasım Bey (d. 1346).
* Murad I (1326–1389) - with Nilüfer Hatun. Sultan of the Ottoman Empire after his father. 
* Halil Bey (1347–1362) - with Theodora Kantakouzene. As a child, he was kidnapped by Genoese pirates and ransomed with the help of John V Palaeologus, his mother&#x27;s brother-in-law. Subsequently, Halil married John&#x27;s daughter, Irene, and had two sons. At his father&#x27;s death, he was executed by his half-brother, the new Sultan Murad I.

===Daughters===
Orhan had at least four daughters: 
*Hatice Hatun. She married Süleyman Bey, son of Saru Batu Savci Bey and cousin of Orhan. They had two sons, Hamza Bey (who had a son, Mehmed Bey) and Mustafa Bey (who had a son, Osman Bey), and two daughters, Ilaldi Hatun and Fatma Hatun.
* Selçuk Hatun - with Asporça Hatun. She married Süleyman Bey, son of Mehmed of Aydin. 
* Fatma Hatun - with Asporça Hatun. Buried in her father tomb (Bursa). 
* &quot;Fülane&quot; Sultan Hatun (1324-1347) - with Melek Hatun.

== See also ==

* Orhan Gazi Mosque

==References==
* Incorporates text from &quot;History of Ottoman Turks&quot; (1878)
==External links==

*A listing of descendants of Ertuğrul, alongside other royalty</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="0" end="11" title="Orhan" label="Orhan Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="30" end="36" title="Orhan" label="Orkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="64" end="92" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="129" end="134" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="150" end="157" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="256" end="264" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="305" end="314" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q964226" start="351" end="360" title="Battle of Pelekanon" label="Pelekanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="373" end="390" title="list of Byzantine emperors" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37063" start="391" end="417" title="Andronikos III Palaiologos" label="Andronikos III Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q941887" start="456" end="464" title="Karasids" label="Karasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q199723" start="468" end="477" title="Balıkesir" label="Balıkesir"/>
<link wikidata="Q400290" start="486" end="490" title="Ahis" label="Ahis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="494" end="500" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="591" end="609" title="John V Palaiologos" label="John V Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658255" start="642" end="674" title="Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347" label="Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347"/>
<link wikidata="Q37084" start="687" end="708" title="John VI Kantakouzenos" label="John VI Kantakouzenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812195" start="730" end="738" title="Theodora Kantakouzene (wife of Orhan)" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q240407" start="810" end="825" title="Anna of Savoy" label="empress dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491574" start="849" end="855" title="Byzantine Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147501" start="864" end="896" title="Byzantine civil war of 1352–1357" label="Byzantine civil war of 1352–1357"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="940" end="946" title="John V Palaiologos" label="John V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188870" start="996" end="1001" title="Çimpe" label="Çimpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="1045" end="1054" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q216907" start="1063" end="1071" title="Gelibolu" label="Gelibolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087653" start="1120" end="1134" title="Süleyman Pasha (son of Orhan)" label="Süleyman Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q916266" start="1136" end="1153" title="fall of Gallipoli" label="occupied the town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="1246" end="1257" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812344" start="1295" end="1303" title="Turkoman (ethnonym)" label="Turcoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q720989" start="1550" end="1558" title="Alaeddin Pasha" label="Alaeddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="1807" end="1812" title="Bursa, Turkey" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="1964" end="1970" title="Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="2444" end="2455" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="2554" end="2561" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="2820" end="2841" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q243245" start="2994" end="3002" title="Ertuğrul" label="Ertuğrul"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="3007" end="3014" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053800" start="3391" end="3395" title="Yaya (military)" label="Yaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572401" start="3670" end="3690" title="Çandarlı Kara Halil Hayreddin Pasha" label="Kara Khalil Çandarlı"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="3993" end="4002" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="4054" end="4063" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="4569" end="4581" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170514" start="4648" end="4657" title="Mehmed IV" label="Mehmed IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4712" end="4721" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q856171" start="4788" end="4795" title="Mudanya" label="Mudanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="4826" end="4831" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="4839" end="4853" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053643" start="4889" end="4898" title="Konur Alp" label="Konur Alp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4954" end="4963" title="Akça Koca" label="Akça Koca"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988510" start="4975" end="4982" title="Sanjak of Kocaeli" label="Kocaeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043387" start="5011" end="5028" title="Abdurrahman Gazi" label="Abdurrahman Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099263" start="5092" end="5106" title="Siege of Bursa" label="captured Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q677097" start="5159" end="5170" title="Evrenos Bey" label="Evrenos Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422839" start="5493" end="5513" title="Siege of Nicaea (1331)" label="laid siege to Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5530" end="5544" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q37063" start="5599" end="5613" title="Andronikos III Palaiologos" label="Andronikos III"/>
<link wikidata="Q964226" start="5688" end="5707" title="battle of Pelekanon" label="battle of Pelekanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217125" start="5970" end="5976" title="İznik" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422839" start="6006" end="6022" title="Siege of Nicaea (1331)" label="three-year siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422572" start="6053" end="6079" title="Siege of Nicomedia" label="captured Nicomedia in 1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q241631" start="6336" end="6340" title="Şile" label="Şile"/>
<link wikidata="Q455458" start="6399" end="6405" title="Amasra" label="Amasra"/>
<link wikidata="Q199723" start="6647" end="6656" title="Balıkesir" label="Balıkesir"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="6959" end="6963" title="emir" label="emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q737822" start="7547" end="7554" title="Bergama" label="Bergama"/>
<link wikidata="Q199723" start="7650" end="7659" title="Balıkesir" label="Balıkesir"/>
<link wikidata="Q199712" start="7785" end="7794" title="Çanakkale" label="Çanakkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="7822" end="7841" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="8843" end="8849" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="9177" end="9193" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="9219" end="9228" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q964226" start="9368" end="9387" title="Battle of Pelekanon" label="Battle of Pelekanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37063" start="9429" end="9455" title="Andronicus III Palaeologus" label="Andronicus III Palaeologus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658255" start="9604" end="9636" title="Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347" label="Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347"/>
<link wikidata="Q37084" start="9821" end="9840" title="John VI Cantacuzene" label="John VI Cantacuzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812195" start="10030" end="10038" title="Theodora Kantakouzene, wife of Orhan" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q732028" start="10343" end="10350" title="Silivri" label="Silivri"/>
<link wikidata="Q326339" start="10479" end="10486" title="Üsküdar" label="Üsküdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812344" start="10707" end="10715" title="Turkoman (ethnonym)" label="Turcoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="10901" end="10912" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812344" start="11187" end="11195" title="Turkoman (ethnonym)" label="Turcoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="11447" end="11464" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q501817" start="11475" end="11481" title="Galata" label="Galata"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="11518" end="11529" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q327513" start="11574" end="11611" title="Byzantine–Genoese War (1348–1349)" label="fought the Byzantines earlier in 1348"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="11797" end="11803" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q336823" start="12059" end="12077" title="Peter IV of Aragon" label="Peter IV of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37084" start="12111" end="12130" title="John VI Cantacuzene" label="John VI Cantacuzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797448" start="12195" end="12209" title="Niccolo Pisani" label="Niccolo Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360412" start="12238" end="12252" title="Paganino Doria" label="Paganino Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188870" start="12756" end="12762" title="Tzympe" label="Tzympe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216907" start="12981" end="12989" title="Gelibolu" label="Gelibolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="12991" end="13000" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q211817" start="13614" end="13621" title="Ancient Tenedos" label="Tenedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q329708" start="13646" end="13653" title="Matthew Cantacuzene" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="14295" end="14300" title="Murad I" label="Murad"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="14330" end="14335" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812195" start="14356" end="14364" title="Theodora Kantakouzene (wife of Orhan)" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404816" start="14377" end="14382" title="Halil Bey (son of Orhan)" label="Halil"/>
<link wikidata="Q129649" start="14421" end="14426" title="Izmit" label="Izmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q428732" start="14588" end="14595" title="Phocaea" label="Phocaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127441" start="14901" end="14910" title="hyperpyron" label="hyperpyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="15483" end="15488" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q838159" start="15567" end="15572" title="türbe" label="türbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036539" start="15867" end="15873" title="tekfur" label="tekfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208006" start="15883" end="15890" title="Bilecik" label="Bilecik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="16069" end="16080" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043070" start="16178" end="16196" title="Gündüz Alp" label="Akbaşlı Günduz Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002551" start="16332" end="16345" title="Asporça Hatun" label="Asporça Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q468123" start="16632" end="16645" title="Nilüfer Hatun" label="Nilüfer Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812195" start="16725" end="16746" title="Theodora Kantakouzene (wife of Orhan)" label="Theodora Kantakouzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q37084" start="16760" end="16781" title="John VI Kantakouzenos" label="John VI Kantakouzenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="16944" end="16959" title="Stefan Dušan" label="Stefan IV Dušan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655693" start="16964" end="16982" title="Helena of Bulgaria, Empress of Serbia" label="Helena of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087653" start="17118" end="17132" title="Süleyman Pasha (son of Orhan)" label="Süleyman Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="17255" end="17262" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="17414" end="17423" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="17544" end="17551" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404816" start="17636" end="17645" title="Halil Bey (son of Orhan)" label="Halil Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="17766" end="17784" title="John V Palaeologus" label="John V Palaeologus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579565" start="18085" end="18104" title="Saru Batu Savcı Bey" label="Saru Batu Savci Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q717112" start="18356" end="18361" title="Aydinids" label="Aydin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038154" start="18521" end="18538" title="Orhan Gazi Mosque" label="Orhan Gazi Mosque"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22494" wikidata="Q172056" url="?curid=22494" title="Osman II">
<text>Osman II ( &quot;‘Osmān-i sānī&quot;; ; 3 November 1604 – 20 May 1622), also known as Osman the Young (), was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 26 February 1618 until his regicide on 20 May 1622.

==Early life==
Osman II was born at Topkapı Palace, Constantinople, the son of Sultan Ahmed I (1603–17) and one of his consorts Mahfiruz Hatun. According to later traditions, at a young age, his mother had paid a great deal of attention to Osman&#x27;s education, as a result of which Osman II became a known poet and was believed to have mastered many languages, including Arabic, Persian, Greek, Latin, and Italian; although this has since been refuted. Osman was born eleven months after his father Ahmed&#x27;s transition to the throne. He was trained in the palace. According to foreign observers, he was one of the most cultured of Ottoman princes.

Osman&#x27;s failure to capture the throne at the death of his father Ahmed might have been caused by the absence of a mother to lobby in his favour; his own mother was probably already dead or in exile.

==Reign==
Osman II ascended the throne at the age of 14 as the result of a coup d&#x27;état against his uncle Mustafa I &quot;the Mad&quot; (1617–1618, 1622–1623). Despite his youth, Osman II soon sought to assert himself as a ruler, and after securing the empire&#x27;s eastern border by signing a peace treaty (Treaty of Serav) with Safavid Persia, he personally led the Ottoman campaign against Poland and King Sigismund III during the Moldavian Magnate Wars, also having his younger brother Mehmed strangled just before he left Istanbul on campaign. Forced to sign a humiliating peace treaty with the Poles after the Battle of Khotyn (Chocim) in September–October, 1621, Osman II returned home to Constantinople in shame, blaming the cowardice of the Janissaries and the insufficiency of his statesmen for his humiliation.

The basic and exceptional weakness from which Osman II suffered was the conspicuous absence of a female power basis in the harem. From 1620 until Osman&#x27;s death, a governess (&quot;daye hatun&quot;, lit. wet-nurse) was appointed as a stand-in valide, and she could not counterbalance the contriving of Mustafa I&#x27;s mother in the Old Palace. Although he did have a loyal chief black eunuch at his side, this could not compensate for the absence of what in the politics of that period was a winning combination, valide sultan–chief black eunuch, especially in the case of a young and very ambitious ruler. According to Piterberg, Osman II did not have haseki sultan, opposite with Peirce who claim that Ayşe was Osman&#x27;s haseki. But it is clear that Ayşe was politically insignificant and she couldn&#x27;t be a valide support for Osman&#x27;s reign.In the autumn of 1620, Özi Beylerbeyi İskender Pasha seized the secret letter sent by Transylvanian Prince Bethlen Gabor to Istanbul and sent it to Poland, and Osman also became a veteran of the people around him. He decided to embark on a Polish expedition. Continuing preparations for the Polish campaign, neither cold nor famine nor the English ambassador John Eyre could deter Osman. The ambassador of Sigismund III, the King of Poland, was brought into Istanbul despite the severe colds. The janissaries and army were not willing to go on a campaign, regardless of their conditions.
==Attempted reforms==
After the death of Suleiman I the empire, a period of hugely increased power of the Janissary corps, local leaders and jurists over the internal and external affairs of the empire had persisted, paired with a great decline in the power of the sultan, who by this point was little more than a figurehead. This was showcased in 1618, by the deposition of sultan Mustafa I after only three months in power by the chief harem eunuch, Mustafa Agha, showing another example of the vastly weakened sultanate. According to one Ottoman chronicler, the &#x27;weak-mindedness and deranged nature&#x27; of the sultan was clear. In public he reportedly would gesture repeatedly as if throwing coins onto the ground, possibly meaning he was traumatized by throwing coins to the Janissaries. Sultans had become empty shells of power, whose deposition and execution had become legal, at least according to many scholars of the time.

Upon Osman&#x27;s return to the Ottoman capital of Istanbul, the young sultan hoped to retake power over the empire from the hands of the Janissaries and jurists, recentralising power in the sultan. He was aiming to dissolve the Janissary corps and replace it with a new, more loyal army equipped with muskets and recruited from peasants and nomads of Anatolia and Syria, as well as Arab, Kurdish and Druze mercenaries. He also wished to relocate the Ottoman capital to Damascus, and planned to take the Hajj to Mecca, which no other sultan had ever done. The Janissaries and jurists strongly opposed his &#x27;turn to the East&#x27;, and the Janissaries feared the threat of a new army replacing them. Osman&#x27;s ideas had made him many enemies in the empire.

===Great winter of 1621===
Following the murder of Şehzade Mehmed on 12 January 1621, a heavy snow started falling in Istanbul. The people of Istanbul were drastically affected by the cold, which increased local violence on 24 January, more so than the palace murder. This is the biggest natural disaster that concerns the capital in Osman&#x27;s four-year short reign. Bostanzade Yahya Efendi, one of those who lived through this cold, remarked that the Golden Horn and the Bosphorus were covered with ice from the end of January to beginning of February: &quot;Between Üsküdar and Beşiktaş, the men walk around and go to Üsküdar. They came from Istanbul on foot. And the year became a gala (famine).

It was snowing for 15 days, that the frosts were frozen from the severity of the cold, but the river was open between Sarayburnu and Üsküdar. For this natural disaster, thirty thousand froze between Üsküdar and Istanbul from the cold,&quot; said Haşimi Çelebi, &quot;The road became Üsküdar, the Mediterranean froze a thousand thirty&quot;. As a result of the inconvenience of the Zahire ships, there was a complete famine in Istanbul, and 75 dirhams of bread jumped to one akche, and the oak of the meat to 15 akches.

==Death==

Due to these reforms seeking a counterweight to Janissary influence, as well as Osman II closing the Janissary coffee shops (the gathering points for conspiracies against the throne), the very day Osman was due to set out recruiting his new, more loyal army a palace uprising by the janissaries began with the Janissaries killing the chief harem eunuch Suleiman Agha, then located and promptly imprisoned the young sultan in Yedikule Fortress in Istanbul, where Osman II was strangled to death. After Osman&#x27;s death, his ear was cut off (and possibly his nose) and presented to Halime Sultan and Sultan Mustafa I to confirm his death and Mustafa would no longer need to fear his nephew. It was the first time in the Ottoman history that a sultan was executed by the janissaries.

This disaster is one of the most discussed topics in Ottoman history. Hasanbegzade, Karaçelebizade, Solakzade, Peçevi, Müneccimbaşı and Naima dates, in the Fezleke of Katip Çelebi, detailed and some of them were narrated in a story style.

==Family==
===Consorts===
Osman II had at least four consorts:
*Ayşe Sultan or Ayşe Hatun. Nothing is known about her except her name and her role is controversial. According to some historians like Leslie Pierce, she was Osman&#x27;s Haseki, but according to others, like Pitemberg, she wasn’t. Finally, some historians identify her as Pertev Mehmed&#x27;s granddaughter, and therefore as a free woman and Osman&#x27;s first legal wife. She died in Old Palace in 1640.
* Meylişah Hatun, also called Meleksima Hatun, Mehlikaya Hatun or Mehlika Hatun. Before entering the harem she was a slave of the Grand Vizier Kuyucu Murad Paşah. Favorite of Osman, maybe Russian, and mother of his eldest son, Şehzade Ömer. According to a minor version, after Kuyucu Murad&#x27;s death, she was freed and adopted by the kızları agasi, and was therefore a free woman when she met Osman, who therefore married her legally in order to have her. She was his most beloved and influential consort, but fell out of grace following the accidental death of her son. Accused of the incident by a grieving Osman, who did not want to see her again, she was expelled from court and died in exile.
*&quot;Fülane&quot; Hatun. The unnamed daughter of an astrologer and granddaughter of Pertev Mehmed Pasha, she was a free muslim woman and Osman&#x27;s first legal wife. Some identify her with Ayşe Sultan/Hatun, but her identity is not yet known with certainty. Their marriage on 7 February 1622 was extremely controversial, because contrary to the tradition for a sultan marrying a muslim ottoman woman of free birth.
* Rukiye Akile Hatun, daughter of Şeyhülislam Hocazade Esad Efendi, she was a free muslim woman and Osman&#x27;s second legal wife.
===Sons===
Osman II had at least two sons:
*Şehzade Ömer (20 October 1621, Constantinople – 5 February 1622, Edirne. Buried with his father in the Blue Mosque) – with Meylişah Hatun. News of his birth reached his father in Edirne, while he was returning from the Polish Campaign. To celebrate the event, he invited the court to join him there, including the child with his mother, and organized a party that included a reenactment of his battles in Poland which Meylişah and Ömer witnessed, but during the re-enactment a stray bullet hit the infant killing him. Another version is that the baby died from the shock caused by the noise of the guns. Later, rumors also spread that the prince was deliberately killed. In any case, his mother was accused of the incident and was exiled.
*Şehzade Mustafa (November 1622, Constantinople – 1623, Constantinople. Buried with his father in the Blue Mosque) - maybe with Akile Hatun. Twin of Zeynep Sultan, born after the dethronement and killing of his father, his mother&#x27;s identity is uncertain. Maybe he was killed by order of Halime Sultan, who acted as regent for her son and Osman&#x27;s uncle, the new Sultan Mustafa I, while some others indicated he died of natural causes.

===Daughters===
Osman II had at least a daughter:
*Zeynep Sultan (November 1622, Constantinople – 1623, Constantinople. Buried with her father in the Blue Mosque) - maybe with Akile Hatun. Twin of Şehzade Mustafa, born after the dethronement and killing of her father, her mother&#x27;s identity is uncertain. She died as newborn of unknown causes.

== In popular culture ==
In the 2015 Turkish television series &quot;Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem&quot;, Osman II was portrayed by actor Taner Ölmez.

==See also==
*Transformation of the Ottoman Empire

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
*
*Çiçek, Fikri (2014). An examination of daily politics and factionalism at the Ottoman Imperial court in relation to the regicide of Osman II (r. 1618-22). Istanbul Şehir University.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172056" start="0" end="8" title="Osman II" label="Osman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q172056" start="86" end="101" title="Osman II" label="Osman the Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="114" end="142" title="sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475448" start="175" end="183" title="regicide" label="regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="237" end="251" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="253" end="267" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="287" end="294" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682717" start="329" end="343" title="Mahfiruz Hatun" label="Mahfiruz Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="575" end="581" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="583" end="590" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="592" end="597" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="599" end="604" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="610" end="617" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1137" end="1153" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="1172" end="1181" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356821" start="1375" end="1390" title="Treaty of Serav" label="Treaty of Serav"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="1397" end="1411" title="Safavid Persia" label="Safavid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="1460" end="1466" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="1476" end="1489" title="Sigismund III" label="Sigismund III"/>
<link wikidata="Q897720" start="1501" end="1523" title="Moldavian Magnate Wars" label="Moldavian Magnate Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q860981" start="1683" end="1708" title="Battle of Khotyn (1621)" label="Battle of Khotyn (Chocim)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1763" end="1777" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="1817" end="1828" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="2196" end="2205" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="2408" end="2421" title="valide sultan" label="valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="2548" end="2561" title="haseki sultan" label="haseki sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206358" start="2599" end="2603" title="Ayşe Sultan (Haseki of Osman II)" label="Ayşe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244362" start="2836" end="2856" title="Prince of Transylvania" label="Transylvanian Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q313494" start="2857" end="2870" title="Bethlen Gabor" label="Bethlen Gabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2898" end="2904" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28075573" start="3109" end="3118" title="John Eyre (died 1639)" label="John Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="3175" end="3189" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="3379" end="3389" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="3444" end="3453" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="3479" end="3486" title="jurists" label="jurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="3720" end="3729" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="3782" end="3788" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="4329" end="4337" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="4580" end="4587" title="muskets" label="muskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4630" end="4638" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="4643" end="4648" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4661" end="4665" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673783" start="4667" end="4674" title="Kurdish population" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="4679" end="4684" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066242" start="4685" end="4696" title="Sekban" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="4748" end="4756" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="4782" end="4786" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="4790" end="4795" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q21528449" start="5093" end="5107" title="Şehzade Mehmed (son of Ahmed I)" label="Şehzade Mehmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="6171" end="6179" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q572664" start="6188" end="6195" title="dirhams" label="dirhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q424754" start="6219" end="6224" title="akche" label="akche"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274030" start="6543" end="6570" title="Janissary revolts" label="uprising by the janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q632795" start="6701" end="6718" title="Yedikule Fortress" label="Yedikule Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="6858" end="6871" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="6883" end="6892" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206358" start="7364" end="7375" title="Ayşe Sultan (Haseki of Osman II)" label="Ayşe Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59057" start="7535" end="7541" title="Haseki" label="Haseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000313" start="7750" end="7760" title="Eski Saray" label="Old Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7772" end="7786" title="Meylişah Hatun" label="Meylişah Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="7900" end="7912" title="Grand vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585494" start="7913" end="7931" title="Kuyucu Murad Pasha" label="Kuyucu Murad Paşah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896780" start="8107" end="8120" title="Kizlar Agha" label="kızları agasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026764" start="8892" end="8910" title="Akile Hatun" label="Rukiye Akile Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410729" start="8924" end="8935" title="Şeyhülislam" label="Şeyhülislam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29861653" start="8936" end="8956" title="Hocazade Esad Efendi" label="Hocazade Esad Efendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639997" start="9066" end="9078" title="Şehzade Ömer" label="Şehzade Ömer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="9097" end="9111" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="9131" end="9137" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="9169" end="9180" title="Blue Mosque, Istanbul" label="Blue Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088718" start="10097" end="10110" title="Halime Sultan" label="Halime Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174798" start="10183" end="10192" title="Mustafa I" label="Mustafa I"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10669" end="10691" title="Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem" label="Muhteşem Yüzyıl: Kösem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17046369" start="10731" end="10742" title="Taner Ölmez" label="Taner Ölmez"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220521" start="10759" end="10795" title="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire" label="Transformation of the Ottoman Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22496" wikidata="Q1323362" url="?curid=22496" title="Oberon (programming language)">
<text>Oberon is a general-purpose programming language first published in 1987 by Niklaus Wirth and the latest member of the Wirthian family of ALGOL-like languages (Euler, ALGOL W, Pascal, Modula, and Modula-2). Oberon was the result of a concentrated effort to increase the power of Modula-2, the direct successor of Pascal, and simultaneously to reduce its complexity. Its principal new feature is the concept of data type extension of record types. It permits constructing new data types on the basis of existing ones and to relate them, deviating from the dogma of strict static typing of data. Type extension is Wirth&#x27;s way of inheritance reflecting the viewpoint of the parent site. Oberon was developed as part of the implementation of an operating system, also named Oberon at ETH Zurich in Switzerland. The name was inspired both by the Voyager space probe&#x27;s pictures of the moon of the planet Uranus, named Oberon, and because Oberon is famous as the king of the elves.

Oberon was maintained by Wirth and the latest Project Oberon compiler update is dated 6 March 2020.

==Design==
Oberon is designed with a motto attributed to Albert Einstein in mind: &quot;Make things as simple as possible, but not simpler.&quot; The principal guideline was to concentrate on features that are basic and essential and to omit ephemeral issues. Another factor was recognition of the growth of complexity in languages such as C++ and Ada. In contrast to these, Oberon emphasizes the use of the library concept to extend the language. Enumeration and subrange types, which were present in Modula-2, were omitted, and set types are limited to sets of integers. All imported items must be qualified by the name of the module where they are declared. Low-level facilities are highlighted by only allowing them to be used in a module which includes the identifier codice_1 in its import list. Strict type checking, even across modules, and index checking at runtime, null pointer checking, and the safe type extension concept largely allow programming to rely on the language rules alone.

The intent of this strategy was to produce a language that is easier to learn, simpler to implement, and very efficient. Oberon compilers have been viewed as compact and fast, while providing code quality comparable to commercial compilers.

==Characteristics==
Features characterizing the Oberon language include:
* Case sensitive syntax with uppercase keywords
* Type-extension with type test
* Modules and separate compiling
* String operations
* Isolating unsafe code
* Support for system programming

==Object orientation==
Oberon supports extension of record types for the construction of abstractions and heterogeneous structures. In contrast to the later dialects, Oberon-2 and Active Oberon, the original Oberon lacks a dispatch mechanism as a language feature but has it as a programming technique or design pattern. This gives great flexibility in OOP. In the Oberon operating system, two programming techniques are used together for the dispatch call: Method suite and Message handler.

===Method suite===
In this technique, a table of procedure variables is defined and a global variable of this type is declared in the extended module and assigned back in the generic module:

 MODULE Figures; &quot;(* Abstract module *)&quot;
 TYPE
 Figure* = POINTER TO FigureDesc;
 Interface* = POINTER TO InterfaceDesc;
 InterfaceDesc* = RECORD
 draw* : PROCEDURE (f : Figure);
 clear* : PROCEDURE (f : Figure);
 mark* : PROCEDURE (f : Figure);
 move* : PROCEDURE (f : Figure; dx, dy : INTEGER);
 END;
 FigureDesc* = RECORD
 if : Interface;
 END;
 PROCEDURE Init* (f : Figure; if : Interface);
 BEGIN
 f.if := if
 END Init;
 PROCEDURE Draw* (f : Figure);
 BEGIN
 f.if.draw(f)
 END Draw;
 &quot;(* Other procedures here *)&quot;
 END Figures.

We extend the generic type Figure to a specific shape:

 MODULE Rectangles;
 IMPORT Figures;
 TYPE
 Rectangle* = POINTER TO RectangleDesc;
 RectangleDesc* = RECORD
 (Figures.FigureDesc)
 x, y, w, h : INTEGER;
 END;
 VAR
 if : Figures.Interface;
 PROCEDURE New* (VAR r : Rectangle);
 BEGIN
 NEW(r);
 Figures.Init(r, if)
 END New;
 PROCEDURE Draw* (f : Figure);
 VAR
 r : Rectangle;
 BEGIN
 r := f(Rectangle); &quot;(* f AS Rectangle *)&quot;
 END Draw;
 (* Other procedures here *)
 BEGIN &quot;(* Module initialisation *)&quot;
 NEW(if);
 if.draw := Draw;
 if.clear := Clear;
 if.mark := Mark;
 if.move := Move
 END Rectangles.

Dynamic dispatch is only done via procedures in Figures module that is the generic module.

===Message handler===
This technique consists of replacing the set of methods with a single procedure, which discriminates among the various methods:

 MODULE Figures; &quot;(* Abstract module *)&quot;
 TYPE
 Figure* = POINTER TO FigureDesc;
 Message* = RECORD END;
 DrawMsg* = RECORD (Message) END;
 ClearMsg* = RECORD (Message) END;
 MarkMsg* = RECORD (Message) END;
 MoveMsg* = RECORD (Message) dx*, dy* : INTEGER END;
 Handler* = PROCEDURE (f : Figure; VAR msg : Message);
 FigureDesc* = RECORD
 &quot;(* Abstract *)&quot;
 handle : Handler;
 END;
 PROCEDURE Handle* (f : Figure; VAR msg : Message);
 BEGIN
 f.handle(f, msg)
 END Handle;
 PROCEDURE Init* (f : Figure; handle : Handler);
 BEGIN
 f.handle := handle
 END Init;
 END Figures.

We extend the generic type Figure to a specific shape:

 MODULE Rectangles;
 IMPORT Figures;
 TYPE
 Rectangle* = POINTER TO RectangleDesc;
 RectangleDesc* = RECORD
 (Figures.FigureDesc)
 x, y, w, h : INTEGER;
 END;
 PROCEDURE Draw* (r : Rectangle);
 BEGIN
 END Draw;
 &quot;(* Other procedures here *)&quot;
 PROCEDURE Handle* (f: Figure; VAR msg: Figures.Message);
 VAR
 r : Rectangle;
 BEGIN
 r := f(Rectangle);
 IF msg IS Figures.DrawMsg THEN Draw(r)
 ELSIF msg IS Figures.MarkMsg THEN Mark(r)
 ELSIF msg IS Figures.MoveMsg THEN Move(r, msg(Figures.MoveMsg).dx, msg(Figures.MoveMsg).dy)
 ELSE (* ignore *)
 END
 END Handle;
 PROCEDURE New* (VAR r : Rectangle);
 BEGIN
 NEW(r);
 Figures.Init(r, Handle)
 END New;
 END Rectangles.

In the Oberon operating system both of these techniques are used for dynamic dispatch. The first one is used for a known set of methods; the second is used for any new methods declared in the extension module. For example, if the extension module Rectangles were to implement a new Rotate() procedure, within the Figures module it could only be called via a message handler.

==Implementations and variants==

===Oberon===
No-cost implementations of Oberon (the language) and Oberon (the operating system) can be found on the Internet (several are from ETHZ itself).

===Oberon-2===

A few changes were made to the first released specification. For example, object-oriented programming (OOP) features were added, the codice_2 loop was reinstated. The result was &quot;Oberon-2&quot;. One release, named &quot;Native Oberon&quot; which includes an operating system, and can directly boot on IBM PC compatible class hardware. A .NET implementation of Oberon with some added minor .NET-related extensions was also developed at ETHZ. In 1993, an ETHZ university spin-off company brought a dialect of Oberon-2 to the market named &quot;Oberon-L&quot;. In 1997, it was renamed &quot;Component Pascal&quot;.

Oberon-2 compilers developed by ETH include versions for Microsoft Windows, Linux, Solaris, and classic Mac OS. Implementations from other sources exist for some other operating systems, including Atari TOS and AmigaOS.

There is an Oberon-2 Lex scanner and Yacc parser by Stephen J Bevan of Manchester University, UK, based on the one in the Mössenböck and Wirth reference. It is at version 1.4.

Other compilers include Oxford Oberon-2, which also understands Oberon-07, and Vishap Oberon. The latter is based on Josef Templ&#x27;s Oberon to C language source-to-source compiler (transpiler) named Ofront, which in turn is based on the OP2 Compiler developed by Regis Crelier at ETHZ.

===Oberon-07===
Oberon-07, defined by Niklaus Wirth in 2007 and revised in 2008, 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 is based on the original version of Oberon rather than Oberon-2. The main changes are: explicit numeric conversion functions (e.g., codice_3 and codice_4) must be used; the codice_5, codice_6 and codice_7 statements were omitted; codice_8 statements were extended; codice_9 statements can be used for type extension tests; codice_10 statements can only be connected to the end of a function; imported variables and structured value parameters are read-only; and, arrays can be assigned without using codice_11.

Oberon-07 compilers have been developed for use with many different computer systems. Wirth&#x27;s compiler targets a reduced instruction set computer (RISC) processor of his own design that was used to implement the 2013 version of the Project Oberon operating system on a Xilinx field-programmable gate array (FPGA) Spartan-3 board. Ports of the RISC processor to FPGA Spartan-6, Spartan-7, Artix-7 and a RISC emulator for Windows (compilable on Linux and macOS, and binaries available for Windows) also exist. OBNC compiles via C and can be used on any Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) compatible operating system. The commercial Astrobe implementation targets STM ARM Cortex-M0, M3, M4, M7 and Raspberry Pi RP2040 and RP2350 microcontrollers. The Patchouli compiler produces 64-bit Windows binaries. Oberon-07M produces 32-bit Windows binaries and implements revision 2008 of the language. Akron&#x27;s produces binaries for both Windows and Linux. OberonJS translates Oberon to JavaScript. There is online IDE for Oberon. oberonc is an implementation for the Java virtual machine.

===Active Oberon===
Active Oberon is yet another variant of Oberon, which adds objects (with object-centered access protection and local activity control), system-guarded assertions, preemptive priority scheduling and a changed syntax for methods (named &quot;type-bound procedures&quot; in Oberon vocabulary). Objects may be active, which means that they may be threads or processes. Further, Active Oberon has a way to implement operators (including overloading), an advanced syntax for using arrays (see OberonX language extensions and Proceedings of the 7th Joint Modular Languages Conference 2006 Oxford, UK), and knows about namespaces. The operating system A2 (formerly &quot;Active Object System&quot; (AOS), then &quot;Bluebottle&quot;), especially the kernel, synchronizes and coordinates different active objects.

ETHZ has released Active Oberon which supports active objects, and the operating systems based thereon (Active Object System (AOS), Bluebottle, A2), and environment (JDK, HTTP, FTP, etc.) for the language. As with many prior designs from ETHZ, versions of both are available for download on the Internet. As of 2003, supported central processing units (CPUs) include single and dual core x86, and StrongARM.

===Related languages===
Development continued on languages in this family. A further extension of Oberon-2 was originally named Oberon/L but later renamed to Component Pascal (CP). CP was developed for Windows and classic Mac OS by Oberon microsystems, a commercial spin-off company from ETHZ, and for .NET by Queensland University of Technology. Further, the languages &quot;Lagoona&quot; and &quot;Obliq&quot; carry Oberon methods into specialized areas.

Later .NET development efforts at ETHZ focused on a new language named Zonnon. This includes the features of Oberon and restores some from Pascal (enumerated types, built-in IO) but has some syntactic differences. Other features include support for active objects, operator overloading, and exception handling.

Oberon-V (originally named Seneca, after Seneca the Younger) is a descendant of Oberon designed for numerical applications on supercomputers, especially vector or pipelined architectures. It includes array constructors and an codice_12 statement.

==See also==
* Oberon (operating system)
* A2 (operating system)

==Resources==
===General===
* &quot;Official website (latest available copy at archive org)&quot; at ETH-Zürich
* &quot;Niklaus Wirth&#x27;s Oberon Page&quot; at ETH-Zürich
* &quot;Oberon Page&quot; at SSW, Linz
* &quot;Oberon: The Programming Language&quot; at Ulm
* &quot;Project Oberon, The Design of an Operating System and a Compiler&quot;, book in PDF by Niklaus Wirth and Jürg Gutknecht, 2005 Edition
* &quot;Oberon Language Genealogy&quot;
* &quot;Astrobe&quot; ARM Oberon-07 Development System
* &quot;Oberon System V4 for HP OpenVMS Alpha&quot; with source code upward-compatible 64 bit addressing
* &quot;64 bit Oberon-2 compiler&quot; for OpenVMS Alpha
* &quot;Oxford Oberon-2 Compiler&quot; and its User Manual
* &quot;Free Oberon-07 IDE&quot; Free Oberon-07 IDE for Windows, Macintosh, and Linux with syntax colouring, semantic navigation and source code debugger
* &quot;Oberon article by Joseph Templ&quot; in the January 1994 issue of Dr.Dobbs

===Evolution of Oberon===
* &quot;Modula-2 and Oberon&quot; Wirth (2005)
* &quot;The Programming Language Oberon&quot; Wirth, (1988/90)
* &quot;The Programming Language Oberon (Oberon-7, Revised Oberon)&quot; Wirth, (2016, most current language report)
* &quot;Differences between Oberon-07 and Oberon&quot; Wirth (2011)
* &quot;The Programming Language Oberon-2&quot; H. Mössenböck, N. Wirth, Institut für Computersysteme, ETH Zürich, January 1992
* &quot;Differences between Oberon and Oberon-2&quot; Mössenböck and Wirth (1991)
* &quot;What&#x27;s New in Component Pascal&quot; (Changes from Oberon-2 to CP), Pfister (2001)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1323362" start="0" end="6" title="Oberon (programming language)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="28" end="48" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q92604" start="76" end="89" title="Niklaus Wirth" label="Niklaus Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="138" end="143" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q907880" start="160" end="165" title="Euler (programming language)" label="Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538458" start="167" end="174" title="ALGOL W" label="ALGOL W"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="176" end="182" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428476" start="184" end="190" title="Modula" label="Modula"/>
<link wikidata="Q777358" start="196" end="204" title="Modula-2" label="Modula-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q777358" start="279" end="287" title="Modula-2" label="Modula-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="313" end="319" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="410" end="419" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470517" start="433" end="439" title="Record (computer science)" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="571" end="584" title="static typing" label="static typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="746" end="762" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999119" start="775" end="781" title="Oberon (operating system)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942" start="785" end="795" title="ETH Zurich" label="ETH Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="799" end="810" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="908" end="914" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332" start="922" end="928" title="Oberon (moon)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="1144" end="1159" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1427" end="1430" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="1435" end="1438" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="1495" end="1502" title="Library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="1896" end="1909" title="type checking" label="type checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099515" start="1936" end="1950" title="index checking" label="index checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="1954" end="1961" title="Runtime (program lifecycle phase)" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848926" start="1963" end="1975" title="null pointer" label="null pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="3134" end="3143" title="Subroutine" label="procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="3144" end="3153" title="Variable (computer science)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143344" start="3171" end="3186" title="global variable" label="global variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268939" start="4460" end="4476" title="Dynamic dispatch" label="Dynamic dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="6687" end="6714" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251260" start="6797" end="6805" title="Oberon-2" label="Oberon-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999119" start="6838" end="6851" title="Native Oberon" label="Native Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="6919" end="6936" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289" start="6955" end="6959" title=".NET Framework" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896797" start="7076" end="7095" title="university spin-off" label="university spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121719" start="7206" end="7222" title="Component Pascal" label="Component Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="7288" end="7305" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="7307" end="7312" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="7314" end="7321" title="Oracle Solaris" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="7327" end="7341" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574899" start="7428" end="7437" title="Atari TOS" label="Atari TOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="7442" end="7449" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q306650" start="7473" end="7476" title="Lex (software)" label="Lex"/>
<link wikidata="Q305932" start="7489" end="7493" title="Yacc" label="Yacc"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="7494" end="7500" title="parser" label="parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583975" start="7574" end="7584" title="Hanspeter Mössenböck" label="Mössenböck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="7775" end="7776" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990416" start="7786" end="7811" title="source-to-source compiler" label="source-to-source compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q189376" start="8663" end="8695" title="reduced instruction set computer" label="reduced instruction set computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999119" start="8782" end="8796" title="Project Oberon" label="Project Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="8826" end="8855" title="field-programmable gate array" label="field-programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="9003" end="9008" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="9138" end="9143" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="9539" end="9549" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="9620" end="9640" title="Java virtual machine" label="Java virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q344108" start="9663" end="9676" title="Active Oberon" label="Active Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9903" end="9924" title="Oberon-2#Type-bound procedures" label="type-bound procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q873636" start="10274" end="10283" title="namespace" label="namespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q885978" start="10307" end="10309" title="A2 (operating system)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="10405" end="10411" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q344108" start="10487" end="10500" title="Active Oberon" label="Active Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="10796" end="10819" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="10857" end="10860" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q296778" start="10866" end="10875" title="StrongARM" label="StrongARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121719" start="11036" end="11052" title="Component Pascal" label="Component Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="11092" end="11106" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144750" start="11188" end="11223" title="Queensland University of Technology" label="Queensland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075164" start="11278" end="11283" title="Obliq" label="Obliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q219959" start="11407" end="11413" title="Zonnon" label="Zonnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="11689" end="11707" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="11774" end="11787" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192422" start="11811" end="11820" title="Pipeline (computing)" label="pipelined"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999119" start="11911" end="11936" title="Oberon (operating system)" label="Oberon (operating system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q885978" start="11939" end="11960" title="A2 (operating system)" label="A2 (operating system)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22497" wikidata="Q178570" url="?curid=22497" title="OpenGL">
<text>OpenGL (Open Graphics Library) is a cross-language, cross-platform application programming interface (API) for rendering 2D and 3D vector graphics. The API is typically used to interact with a graphics processing unit (GPU), to achieve hardware-accelerated rendering.

Silicon Graphics, Inc. (SGI) began developing OpenGL in 1991 and released it on June 30, 1992. It is used for a variety of applications, including computer-aided design (CAD), video games, scientific visualization, virtual reality, and flight simulation. Since 2006, OpenGL has been managed by the non-profit technology consortium Khronos Group.

==Design==

The OpenGL specification describes an abstract application programming interface (API) for drawing 2D and 3D graphics. It is designed to be implemented mostly or entirely using hardware acceleration such as a GPU, although it is possible for the API to be implemented entirely in software running on a CPU.

The API is defined as a set of functions which may be called by the client program, alongside a set of named integer constants (for example, the constant GL_TEXTURE_2D, which corresponds to the decimal number 3553). Although the function definitions are superficially similar to those of the programming language C, they are language-independent. As such, OpenGL has many language bindings, some of the most noteworthy being the JavaScript binding WebGL (API, based on OpenGL ES 2.0, for 3D rendering from within a web browser); the C bindings WGL, GLX and CGL; the C binding provided by iOS; and the Java and C bindings provided by Android.

In addition to being language-independent, OpenGL is also cross-platform. The specification says nothing on the subject of obtaining and managing an OpenGL context, leaving this as a detail of the underlying windowing system. For the same reason, OpenGL is purely concerned with rendering, providing no APIs related to input, audio, or windowing.

===Development===
OpenGL is no longer in active development, whereas between 2001 and 2014, OpenGL specification was updated mostly on a yearly basis, with two releases (3.1 and 3.2) taking place in 2009 and three (3.3, 4.0 and 4.1) in 2010. The latest OpenGL specification 4.6 was released in 2017 after a three-year break, and was limited to inclusion of eleven existing ARB and EXT extensions into the core profile.

Active development of OpenGL was dropped in favor of the Vulkan API, released in 2016, and codenamed glNext during initial development. In 2017, Khronos Group announced that OpenGL ES would not have new versions
 and has since concentrated on development of Vulkan and other technologies. As a result, certain capabilities offered by modern GPUs, e.g. ray tracing, are not supported by the OpenGL standard. However, support for newer features might be provided through the vendor-specific OpenGL extensions.

New versions of the OpenGL specifications are released by the Khronos Group, each of which extends the API to support various new features. The details of each version are decided by consensus between the Group&#x27;s members, including graphics card manufacturers, operating system designers, and general technology companies such as Mozilla and Google.

In addition to the features required by the core API, graphics processing unit (GPU) vendors may provide additional functionality in the form of &quot;extensions&quot;. Extensions may introduce new functions and new constants, and may relax or remove restrictions on existing OpenGL functions. Vendors can use extensions to expose custom APIs without needing support from other vendors or the Khronos Group as a whole, which greatly increases the flexibility of OpenGL. All extensions are collected in, and defined by, the OpenGL Registry.

Each extension is associated with a short identifier, based on the name of the company which developed it. For example, Nvidia&#x27;s identifier is NV, which is part of the extension name codice_1, the constant codice_2, and the function codice_3. If multiple vendors agree to implement the same functionality using the same API, a shared extension may be released, using the identifier EXT. In such cases, it could also happen that the Khronos Group&#x27;s Architecture Review Board gives the extension their explicit approval, in which case the identifier ARB is used.

The features introduced by each new version of OpenGL are typically formed from the combined features of several widely implemented extensions, especially extensions of type ARB or EXT.

==Documentation==
The OpenGL Architecture Review Board released a series of manuals along with the specification which have been updated to track changes in the API. These are commonly referred to by the colors of their covers:

;The Red Book
:OpenGL Programming Guide, 9th Edition. 
:The Official Guide to Learning OpenGL, Version 4.5 with SPIR-V
;The Orange Book
:OpenGL Shading Language, 3rd edition. 
:A tutorial and reference book for GLSL.

Historic books (pre-OpenGL 2.0):

;The Green Book
:OpenGL Programming for the X Window System. 
:A book about X11 interfacing and OpenGL Utility Toolkit (GLUT).
;The Blue Book
:OpenGL Reference manual, 4th edition. 
:Essentially a hard-copy printout of the Unix manual (man) pages for OpenGL.
:Includes a poster-sized fold-out diagram showing the structure of an idealised OpenGL implementation.
;The Alpha Book (white cover)
:OpenGL Programming for Windows 95 and Windows NT. 
:A book about interfacing OpenGL with Microsoft Windows.
OpenGL&#x27;s documentation is also accessible via its official webpage.

==Associated libraries==
The earliest versions of OpenGL were released with a companion library called the OpenGL Utility Library (GLU). It provided simple, useful features which were unlikely to be supported in contemporary hardware, such as tessellating, and generating mipmaps and primitive shapes. The GLU specification was last updated in 1998 and depends on OpenGL features which are now deprecated.

===Context and window toolkits===
Given that creating an OpenGL context is quite a complex process, and given that it varies between operating systems, automatic OpenGL context creation has become a common feature of several game-development and user-interface libraries, including SDL, Allegro, SFML, FLTK, and Qt. A few libraries have been designed solely to produce an OpenGL-capable window. The first such library was OpenGL Utility Toolkit (GLUT), later superseded by freeglut. GLFW is a newer alternative.
* These toolkits are designed to create and manage OpenGL windows, and manage input, but little beyond that.
:* GLFW – A cross-platform windowing and keyboard-mouse-joystick handler; is more game-oriented
:* freeglut – A cross-platform windowing and keyboard-mouse handler; its API is a superset of the GLUT API, and it is more stable and up to date than GLUT
:* OpenGL Utility Toolkit (GLUT) – An old windowing handler, no longer maintained.
* Several &quot;multimedia libraries&quot; can create OpenGL windows, in addition to input, sound and other tasks useful for game-like applications
:* Allegro 5 – A cross-platform multimedia library with a C API focused on game development
:* Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL) – A cross-platform multimedia library with a C API
:* SFML – A cross-platform multimedia library with a C++ API and multiple other bindings to languages such as C#, Java, Haskell, and Go
* Widget toolkits
:* FLTK – A small cross-platform C++ widget library
:* Qt – A cross-platform C++ widget toolkit. It provides many OpenGL helper objects, which even abstract away the difference between desktop GL and OpenGL ES
:* wxWidgets – A cross-platform C++ widget toolkit

===Extension loading libraries===
Given the high workload involved in identifying and loading OpenGL extensions, a few libraries have been designed which load all available extensions and functions automatically. Examples include OpenGL Easy Extension library (GLEE), OpenGL Extension Wrangler Library (GLEW) and glbinding. Extensions are also loaded automatically by most language bindings, such as Java OpenGL, PyOpenGL and WebGL.

===Implementations===

Mesa 3D is an open-source implementation of OpenGL. It can do pure software rendering, and it may also use hardware acceleration on BSD, Linux, and other platforms by taking advantage of the Direct Rendering Infrastructure. As of version 20.0, it implements version 4.6 of the OpenGL standard.

==History==
In the 1980s, developing software that could function with a wide range of graphics hardware was a challenge without a cross-platform library. Software developers wrote custom interfaces and drivers for each piece of hardware. This was expensive and resulted in multiplication of effort.

By the early 1990s, Silicon Graphics (SGI) was a leader in 3D graphics for workstations. Their IRIS GL API became the industry standard, as IRIS GL was considered easier to use, and it supported immediate mode rendering, therefore being faster than competitors like PHIGS.

SGI&#x27;s competitors (including Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard and IBM) were also able to bring to market 3D hardware supported by extensions made to the PHIGS standard, which pressured SGI to open source a version of IRIS GL as a public standard called OpenGL.

However, SGI had many customers for whom the change from IRIS GL to OpenGL would demand significant investment. Moreover, IRIS GL had API functions that were irrelevant to 3D graphics. For example, it included a windowing, keyboard and mouse API, in part because it was developed before the X Window System and Sun&#x27;s NeWS. IRIS GL libraries also were unsuitable for opening due to licensing and patent issues. These factors required SGI to continue to support the advanced and proprietary Iris Inventor and Iris Performer programming APIs while market support for OpenGL matured.

One of the restrictions of IRIS GL was that it only provided access to features supported by the underlying hardware. If the graphics hardware did not support a feature natively, then the application could not use it. OpenGL overcame this problem by providing software implementations of features unsupported by hardware, allowing applications to use advanced graphics on relatively low-powered systems. OpenGL standardized access to hardware, pushed the development responsibility of hardware interface programs (device drivers) to hardware manufacturers, and delegated windowing functions to the underlying operating system. With so many different kinds of graphics hardware, getting them all to speak the same language in this way had a remarkable impact by giving software developers a higher-level platform for 3D-software development.

In 1992, SGI led the creation of the OpenGL Architecture Review Board (OpenGL ARB), the group of companies that would maintain and expand the OpenGL specification in the future. Two years later, they also played with the idea of releasing something called &quot;OpenGL++&quot; which included elements such as a scene-graph API (presumably based on their Performer technology). The specification was circulated among a few interested parties – but never turned into a product.

Released in 1996, Microsoft&#x27;s Direct3D eventually became the main competitor of OpenGL. Over 50 game developers signed an open letter to Microsoft, released on June 12, 1997, calling on the company to actively support OpenGL. On December 17, 1997, Microsoft and SGI initiated the Fahrenheit project, which was a joint effort with the goal of unifying the OpenGL and Direct3D interfaces (and adding a scene-graph API too). In 1998, Hewlett-Packard joined the project. It initially showed some promise of bringing order to the world of interactive 3D computer graphics APIs, but on account of financial constraints at SGI, strategic reasons at Microsoft, and a general lack of industry support, it was abandoned in 1999.

In July 2006, the OpenGL Architecture Review Board voted to transfer control of the OpenGL API standard to the Khronos Group.

=== Industry support ===

Despite the emergence of newer graphics APIs like its successor Vulkan or Metal, OpenGL continues to be a widely used standard. This continued relevance is supported by several factors: ongoing development with new extensions and driver optimizations, its cross-platform compatibility, and the availability of compatibility layers like ANGLE and Zink. These layers allow OpenGL to run efficiently on top of Vulkan and Metal, offering a pathway for continued use or gradual transitions for developers.

However, the graphics API landscape has been shifting, where some companies are moving away from OpenGL. Back in June 2018, Apple has deprecated OpenGL APIs on all of their platforms (iOS, macOS and tvOS), strongly encouraging developers to use their proprietary Metal API, which was introduced in 2014.

Game developers have also begun to adopt newer APIs. id Software, who has been using OpenGL in their games since the late 1990s in games such as GLQuake or some games of the Doom franchise, transitioned away to its successor Vulkan in its id Tech 7 engine in 2016. They first supported Vulkan in an update for their id Tech 6 engine. The company&#x27;s first licensed use of OpenGL was in its Quake II engine, also known as id Tech 2. In March 2023, Valve removed OpenGL support from Dota 2 in favor of Vulkan. Atypical Games, with support from Samsung, updated their game engine to use Vulkan, rather than OpenGL, across all non-Apple platforms.

The Khronos Group, the consortium responsible for OpenGL&#x27;s development, has stopped providing support for OpenGL. It has not received a number of modern graphics technologies, such as Ray Tracing, on-GPU video decoding, anti-aliasing algorithms with deep learning
like as Nvidia DLSS and AMD FSR

Google&#x27;s Fuchsia OS, while using Vulkan natively and requiring a Vulkan-conformant GPU, still intends to support OpenGL on top of Vulkan via the ANGLE translation layer.

==Version history==
The first version of OpenGL, version 1.0, was released on June 30, 1992, by Mark Segal and Kurt Akeley. Since then, OpenGL has occasionally been extended by releasing a new version of the specification. Such releases define a baseline set of features which all conforming graphics cards must support, and against which new extensions can more easily be written. Each new version of OpenGL tends to incorporate several extensions which have widespread support among graphics-card vendors, although the details of those extensions may be changed.

===OpenGL 2.0===
&quot;Release date&quot;: September 7, 2004

OpenGL 2.0 was originally conceived by 3Dlabs to address concerns that OpenGL was stagnating and lacked a strong direction. 3Dlabs proposed a number of major additions to the standard. Most of these were, at the time, rejected by the ARB or otherwise never came to fruition in the form that 3Dlabs proposed. However, their proposal for a C-style shading language was eventually completed, resulting in the current formulation of the OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL or GLslang). Like the assembly-like shading languages it was replacing, it allowed replacing the fixed-function vertex and fragment pipe with shaders, though this time written in a C-like high-level language.

The design of GLSL was notable for making relatively few concessions to the limits of the hardware then available. This harked back to the earlier tradition of OpenGL setting an ambitious, forward-looking target for 3D accelerators rather than merely tracking the state of currently available hardware. The final OpenGL 2.0 specification includes support for GLSL.

===Longs Peak and OpenGL 3.0===
Before the release of OpenGL 3.0, the new revision had the codename Longs Peak. At the time of its original announcement, Longs Peak was presented as the first major API revision in OpenGL&#x27;s lifetime. It consisted of an overhaul to the way that OpenGL works, calling for fundamental changes to the API.

The draft introduced a change to object management. The GL 2.1 object model was built upon the state-based design of OpenGL. That is, to modify an object or to use it, one needs to bind the object to the state system, then make modifications to the state or perform function calls that use the bound object.

Because of OpenGL&#x27;s use of a state system, objects must be mutable. That is, the basic structure of an object can change at any time, even if the rendering pipeline is asynchronously using that object. A texture object can be redefined from 2D to 3D. This requires any OpenGL implementations to add a degree of complexity to internal object management.

Under the Longs Peak API, object creation would become atomic, using templates to define the properties of an object which would be created with one function call. The object could then be used immediately across multiple threads. Objects would also be immutable; however, they could have their contents changed and updated. For example, a texture could change its image, but its size and format could not be changed.

To support backwards compatibility, the old state based API would still be available, but no new functionality would be exposed via the old API in later versions of OpenGL. This would have allowed legacy code bases, such as the majority of CAD products, to continue to run while other software could be written against or ported to the new API.

Longs Peak was initially due to be finalized in September 2007 under the name OpenGL 3.0, but the Khronos Group announced on October 30 that it had run into several issues that it wished to address before releasing the specification. As a result, the spec was delayed, and the Khronos Group went into a media blackout until the release of the final OpenGL 3.0 spec.

The final specification proved far less revolutionary than the Longs Peak proposal. Instead of removing all immediate mode and fixed functionality (non-shader mode), the spec included them as deprecated features. The proposed object model was not included, and no plans have been announced to include it in any future revisions. As a result, the API remained largely the same with a few existing extensions being promoted to core functionality. Among some developer groups this decision caused something of an uproar, with many developers professing that they would switch to DirectX in protest. Most complaints revolved around the lack of communication by Khronos to the development community and multiple features being discarded that were viewed favorably by many. Other frustrations included the requirement of DirectX 10 level hardware to use OpenGL 3.0 and the absence of geometry shaders and instanced rendering as core features.

Other sources reported that the community reaction was not quite as severe as originally presented, with many vendors showing support for the update.

===OpenGL 3.0===
&quot;Release date&quot;: August 11, 2008

OpenGL 3.0 introduced a deprecation mechanism to simplify future revisions of the API. Certain features, marked as deprecated, could be completely disabled by requesting a &quot;forward-compatible context&quot; from the windowing system. OpenGL 3.0 features could still be accessed alongside these deprecated features, however, by requesting a &quot;full context&quot;.

Deprecated features include:
* All fixed-function vertex and fragment processing
* Direct-mode rendering, using glBegin and glEnd
* Display lists
* Indexed-color rendering targets
* OpenGL Shading Language versions 1.10 and 1.20

===OpenGL 3.1===
&quot;Release date&quot;: March 24, 2009

OpenGL 3.1 fully removed all of the features which were deprecated in version 3.0, with the exception of wide lines. From this version onwards, it&#x27;s not possible to access new features using a &quot;full context&quot;, or to access deprecated features using a &quot;forward-compatible context&quot;. An exception to the former rule is made if the implementation supports the ARB_compatibility extension, but this is not guaranteed.

Hardware support: Mesa supports ARM Panfrost with Version 21.0.

===OpenGL 3.2===
&quot;Release date&quot;: August 3, 2009

OpenGL 3.2 further built on the deprecation mechanisms introduced by OpenGL 3.0, by dividing the specification into a &quot;core profile&quot; and &quot;compatibility profile&quot;. Compatibility contexts include the previously removed fixed-function APIs, equivalent to the ARB_compatibility extension released alongside OpenGL 3.1, while core contexts do not. OpenGL 3.2 also included an upgrade to GLSL version 1.50.

===OpenGL 3.3===
&quot;Release date:&quot; March 11, 2010

Mesa supports software Driver SWR, softpipe and for older Nvidia cards with NV50.

===OpenGL 4.0===
&quot;Release date&quot;: March 11, 2010

OpenGL 4.0 was released alongside version 3.3. It was designed for hardware able to support Direct3D 11.

As in OpenGL 3.0, this version of OpenGL contains a high number of fairly inconsequential extensions, designed to thoroughly expose the abilities of Direct3D 11-class hardware. Only the most influential extensions are listed below.

Hardware support: Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer, AMD Radeon HD 5000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), Intel HD Graphics in Intel Ivy Bridge processors and newer.

===OpenGL 4.1===
&quot;Release date&quot;: July 26, 2010

Hardware support: Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer, AMD Radeon HD 5000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), Intel HD Graphics in Intel Ivy Bridge processors and newer.
* Minimum &quot;maximum texture size&quot; is 16,384 × 16,384 for GPUs implementing this specification.

===OpenGL 4.2===
&quot;Release date:&quot; August 8, 2011
* Support for shaders with atomic counters and load-store-atomic read-modify-write operations to one level of a texture
* Drawing multiple instances of data captured from GPU vertex processing (including tessellation), to enable complex objects to be efficiently repositioned and replicated
* Support for modifying an arbitrary subset of a compressed texture, without having to re-download the whole texture to the GPU for significant performance improvements

Hardware support: Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer, AMD Radeon HD 5000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), and Intel HD Graphics in Intel Haswell processors and newer. (Linux Mesa: Ivy Bridge and newer)

===OpenGL 4.3===
&quot;Release date:&quot; August 6, 2012
* Compute shaders leveraging GPU parallelism within the context of the graphics pipeline
* Shader storage buffer objects, allowing shaders to read and write buffer objects like image load/store from 4.2, but through the language rather than function calls.
* Image format parameter queries
* ETC2/EAC texture compression as a standard feature
* Full compatibility with OpenGL ES 3.0 APIs
* Debug abilities to receive debugging messages during application development
* Texture views to interpret textures in different ways without data replication
* Increased memory security and multi-application robustness

Hardware support: AMD Radeon HD 5000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), Intel HD Graphics in Intel Haswell processors and newer. (Linux Mesa: Ivy Bridge without stencil texturing, Haswell and newer), Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer. VIRGL Emulation for virtual machines supports 4.3+ with Mesa 20.

===OpenGL 4.4===
&quot;Release date:&quot; July 22, 2013
* Enforced buffer object usage controls
* Asynchronous queries into buffer objects
* Expression of more layout controls of interface variables in shaders
* Efficient binding of multiple objects simultaneously

Hardware support: AMD Radeon HD 5000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), Intel HD Graphics in Intel Broadwell processors and newer (Linux Mesa: Haswell and newer), Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer, Tegra K1.

===OpenGL 4.5===
&quot;Release date:&quot; August 11, 2014
* Direct State Access (DSA) – object accessors enable state to be queried and modified without binding objects to contexts, for increased application and middleware efficiency and flexibility.
* Flush Control – applications can control flushing of pending commands before context switching – enabling high-performance multithreaded applications;
* Robustness – providing a secure platform for applications such as WebGL browsers, including preventing a GPU reset affecting any other running applications;
* OpenGL ES 3.1 API and shader compatibility – to enable the easy development and execution of the latest OpenGL ES applications on desktop systems.

Hardware support: AMD Radeon HD 5000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), Intel HD Graphics in Intel Broadwell processors and newer (Linux Mesa: Haswell and newer), Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer, Tegra K1, and Tegra X1.

===OpenGL 4.6===
&quot;Release date:&quot; July 31, 2017
* more efficient, GPU-sided, geometry processing
* more efficient shader execution ()
* more information through statistics, overflow query and counters
* higher performance through no error handling contexts
* clamping of polygon offset function, solves a shadow rendering problem
* SPIR-V shaders
* Improved anisotropic filtering

Hardware support: AMD Radeon HD 7000 series and newer (FP64 shaders implemented by emulation on some TeraScale GPUs), Intel Haswell and newer, Nvidia GeForce 400 series and newer.

Driver support:
* Mesa 19.2 on Linux supports OpenGL 4.6 for Intel Broadwell and newer. Mesa 20.0 supports AMD Radeon GPUs, while support for Nvidia Kepler+ is in progress. Zink as Emulation Driver with 21.1 and software driver LLVMpipe also support with Mesa 21.0.
* AMD Adrenalin 18.4.1 Graphics Driver on Windows 7 SP1, 10 version 1803 (April 2018 update) for AMD Radeon HD 7700+, HD 8500+ and newer. Released April 2018.
* Intel 26.20.100.6861 graphics driver on Windows 10. Released May 2019.
* NVIDIA GeForce 397.31 Graphics Driver on Windows 7, 8, 10 x86-64 bit only, no 32-bit support. Released April 2018

== Alternative implementations ==
Apple deprecated OpenGL in iOS 12 and macOS 10.14 Mojave in favor of Metal, but it is still available as of macOS 14 Sonoma (including on Apple silicon devices). The latest version supported for OpenGL is 4.1 from 2011. A proprietary library from Molten – authors of MoltenVK – called MoltenGL, can translate OpenGL calls to Metal.

There are several projects that attempt to implement OpenGL on top of Vulkan. The Vulkan backend for Google&#x27;s ANGLE achieved OpenGL ES 3.1 conformance in July 2020. The Mesa3D project also includes such a driver, called &quot;Zink&quot;.

Microsoft&#x27;s Windows 11 on Arm added support for OpenGL 3.3 via GLon12, an open source OpenGL implementation on top DirectX 12 via Mesa Gallium.

==Vulkan==
Vulkan, formerly named the &quot;Next Generation OpenGL Initiative&quot; (glNext), is a ground-up redesign effort to unify OpenGL and OpenGL ES into one common API that will not be backwards compatible with existing OpenGL versions.

The initial version of Vulkan API was released on February 16, 2016.

==See also==

* ARB assembly language – OpenGL&#x27;s legacy low-level shading language
* Direct3D – main competitor of OpenGL
* Glide (API) – a graphics API once used on 3dfx Voodoo cards
* Metal (API) – a graphics API for iOS, macOS, tvOS, watchOS
* OpenAL – cross-platform audio library, designed to resemble OpenGL
* OpenGL ES – OpenGL for embedded systems
* OpenSL ES – API for audio on embedded systems, developed by the Khronos Group
* OpenVG – API for accelerated 2D graphics, developed by the Khronos Group
* RenderMan Interface Specification (RISpec) – Pixar&#x27;s open API for photorealistic off-line rendering
* VOGL – a debugger for OpenGL
* Vulkan – low-overhead, cross-platform 2D and 3D graphics API, the &quot;next generation OpenGL initiative&quot;
* Graphics pipeline
* WebGL
* WebGPU

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* OpenGL Overview and OpenGL.org&#x27;s Wiki with more information on OpenGL Language bindings
* SGI&#x27;s OpenGL website
* Khronos Group, Inc.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="0" end="6" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="8" end="29" title="OpenGL" label="Open Graphics Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486617" start="36" end="50" title="Language-independent specification" label="cross-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="52" end="66" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="67" end="100" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194763" start="121" end="123" title="2D computer graphics" label="2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="128" end="130" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="131" end="146" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="193" end="217" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="236" end="256" title="Hardware acceleration" label="hardware-accelerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="257" end="266" title="Rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="269" end="291" title="Silicon Graphics, Inc." label="Silicon Graphics, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="416" end="437" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="445" end="455" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737866" start="458" end="482" title="scientific visualization" label="scientific visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="484" end="499" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q214932" start="505" end="522" title="Flight simulator" label="flight simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="567" end="577" title="Non-profit organization" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="589" end="599" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138941" start="600" end="613" title="Khronos Group" label="Khronos Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="675" end="714" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface (API)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="805" end="826" title="hardware acceleration" label="hardware acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="837" end="840" title="GPU" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="930" end="933" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="967" end="976" title="Subroutine" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q760170" start="1039" end="1062" title="Enumerated type" label="named integer constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="1130" end="1137" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1249" end="1250" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q510878" start="1308" end="1324" title="language binding" label="language binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="1365" end="1375" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q375913" start="1384" end="1389" title="WebGL" label="WebGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137220" start="1405" end="1418" title="OpenGL ES 2.0" label="OpenGL ES 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="1451" end="1462" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949819" start="1480" end="1483" title="WGL (software)" label="WGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q604536" start="1485" end="1488" title="GLX" label="GLX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170180" start="1493" end="1496" title="Core OpenGL" label="CGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1524" end="1527" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="1537" end="1541" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="1569" end="1576" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190017" start="1787" end="1803" title="windowing system" label="windowing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19407678" start="2404" end="2410" title="Vulkan" label="Vulkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138941" start="2492" end="2505" title="Khronos Group" label="Khronos Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q619942" start="2699" end="2710" title="ray tracing (graphics)" label="ray tracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661" start="3191" end="3198" title="Mozilla" label="Mozilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="3203" end="3209" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="3266" end="3290" title="graphics processing unit" label="graphics processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="3873" end="3879" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779819" start="4952" end="4956" title="GLSL" label="GLSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q304094" start="5089" end="5111" title="OpenGL Utility Toolkit" label="OpenGL Utility Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="5216" end="5227" title="Unix manual" label="Unix manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025441" start="5675" end="5697" title="OpenGL Utility Library" label="OpenGL Utility Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357547" start="5811" end="5823" title="Tessellation (computer graphics)" label="tessellating"/>
<link wikidata="Q652419" start="5840" end="5846" title="mipmap" label="mipmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541599" start="5852" end="5868" title="geometric primitive" label="primitive shapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q280943" start="5962" end="5972" title="deprecation" label="deprecated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="6108" end="6124" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="6236" end="6245" title="library (computing)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q727439" start="6257" end="6260" title="Simple DirectMedia Layer" label="SDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503415" start="6262" end="6269" title="Allegro (software)" label="Allegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q919155" start="6271" end="6275" title="Simple and Fast Multimedia Library" label="SFML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331203" start="6277" end="6281" title="FLTK" label="FLTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="6287" end="6289" title="Qt (software)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q304094" start="6397" end="6419" title="OpenGL Utility Toolkit" label="OpenGL Utility Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948592" start="6448" end="6456" title="freeglut" label="freeglut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860238" start="6458" end="6462" title="GLFW" label="GLFW"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860238" start="6599" end="6603" title="GLFW" label="GLFW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948592" start="6695" end="6703" title="freeglut" label="freeglut"/>
<link wikidata="Q304094" start="6850" end="6872" title="OpenGL Utility Toolkit" label="OpenGL Utility Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503415" start="7081" end="7090" title="Allegro (software)" label="Allegro 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q727439" start="7173" end="7197" title="Simple DirectMedia Layer" label="Simple DirectMedia Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q919155" start="7258" end="7262" title="Simple and Fast Multimedia Library" label="SFML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331203" start="7412" end="7416" title="FLTK" label="FLTK"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="7464" end="7466" title="Qt (software)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q284982" start="7622" end="7631" title="wxWidgets" label="wxWidgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344699" start="7984" end="7993" title="glbinding" label="glbinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676666" start="8071" end="8082" title="Java OpenGL" label="Java OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q375913" start="8097" end="8102" title="WebGL" label="WebGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778544" start="8128" end="8135" title="Mesa (computer graphics)" label="Mesa 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="8142" end="8153" title="Open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="8260" end="8263" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="8265" end="8270" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227488" start="8319" end="8350" title="Direct Rendering Infrastructure" label="Direct Rendering Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="8744" end="8760" title="Silicon Graphics" label="Silicon Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654461" start="8819" end="8826" title="IRIS GL" label="IRIS GL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195287" start="8919" end="8933" title="Immediate mode (computer graphics)" label="immediate mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044144" start="8990" end="8995" title="PHIGS" label="PHIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="9032" end="9048" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="9050" end="9065" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="9070" end="9073" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="9557" end="9572" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582628" start="9588" end="9592" title="NeWS" label="NeWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798124" start="9760" end="9773" title="Open Inventor" label="Iris Inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10341077" start="9778" end="9792" title="Iris Performer" label="Iris Performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="10366" end="10379" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635732" start="10731" end="10763" title="OpenGL Architecture Review Board" label="OpenGL Architecture Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095790" start="10956" end="10964" title="OpenGL++" label="OpenGL++"/>
<link wikidata="Q10341077" start="11048" end="11057" title="Performer (Computer Graphics API)" label="Performer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="11189" end="11205" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q939208" start="11206" end="11214" title="Direct3D" label="Direct3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q646754" start="11298" end="11309" title="open letter" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429609" start="11456" end="11466" title="Fahrenheit graphics API" label="Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971152" start="12385" end="12390" title="ANGLE (software)" label="ANGLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="12675" end="12680" title="Apple Inc" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="12735" end="12738" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="12740" end="12745" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965967" start="12750" end="12754" title="tvOS" label="tvOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154350" start="12814" end="12823" title="Metal (API)" label="Metal API"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="12909" end="12920" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13001" end="13008" title="Quake (video game)#GLQuake" label="GLQuake"/>
<link wikidata="Q655219" start="13030" end="13044" title="Doom (franchise)" label="Doom franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q56091493" start="13095" end="13104" title="id Tech 7" label="id Tech 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041255" start="13172" end="13181" title="id Tech 6" label="id Tech 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231453" start="13249" end="13264" title="Quake II engine" label="Quake II engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13280" end="13289" title="Id Tech#id Tech 2" label="id Tech 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="13306" end="13311" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q771541" start="13340" end="13346" title="Dota 2" label="Dota 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138941" start="13508" end="13521" title="Khronos Group" label="Khronos Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q619942" start="13693" end="13704" title="Ray tracing (graphics)" label="Ray Tracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="13709" end="13712" title="GPU" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q127386817" start="13729" end="13742" title="spatial anti-aliasing" label="anti-aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="13743" end="13753" title="algorithm" label="algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q197536" start="13759" end="13772" title="deep learning" label="deep learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q91211157" start="13781" end="13792" title="Nvidia DLSS" label="Nvidia DLSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q26267190" start="13820" end="13827" title="Fuchsia (operating system)" label="Fuchsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446577" start="14093" end="14104" title="Kurt Akeley" label="Kurt Akeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q229401" start="14649" end="14655" title="3Dlabs" label="3Dlabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q779819" start="15068" end="15072" title="GLSL" label="GLSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q633182" start="15215" end="15221" title="shader" label="shader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317383" start="15749" end="15759" title="Longs Peak" label="Longs Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q513932" start="16713" end="16719" title="Linearizability" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="17317" end="17320" title="Computer-aided design" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770770" start="17726" end="17740" title="media blackout" label="media blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q188695" start="18366" end="18373" title="DirectX" label="DirectX"/>
<link wikidata="Q779819" start="19492" end="19515" title="OpenGL Shading Language" label="OpenGL Shading Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="21147" end="21165" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218505" start="21181" end="21202" title="Radeon HD 5000 series" label="Radeon HD 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="21277" end="21294" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="Intel HD Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="21304" end="21314" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="21421" end="21439" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218505" start="21455" end="21476" title="Radeon HD 5000 series" label="Radeon HD 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="21551" end="21568" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="Intel HD Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q70475" start="21578" end="21588" title="Ivy Bridge (microarchitecture)" label="Ivy Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="22260" end="22278" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218505" start="22294" end="22315" title="Radeon HD 5000 series" label="Radeon HD 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="22394" end="22411" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="Intel HD Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="22421" end="22428" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313447" start="22547" end="22561" title="Compute shader" label="Compute shader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388237" start="22837" end="22845" title="Ericsson Texture Compression" label="ETC2/EAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137220" start="22914" end="22927" title="OpenGL ES 3.0" label="OpenGL ES 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218505" start="23177" end="23198" title="Radeon HD 5000 series" label="Radeon HD 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="23273" end="23290" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="Intel HD Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="23300" end="23307" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="23408" end="23426" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218505" start="23793" end="23814" title="Radeon HD 5000 series" label="Radeon HD 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="23889" end="23906" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="Intel HD Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="23916" end="23925" title="Broadwell (microarchitecture)" label="Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="23987" end="24005" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24017" end="24025" title="Tegra#Tegra K1" label="Tegra K1"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218505" start="24764" end="24785" title="Radeon HD 5000 series" label="Radeon HD 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665604" start="24860" end="24877" title="Intel HD Graphics" label="Intel HD Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q764978" start="24887" end="24896" title="Broadwell (microarchitecture)" label="Broadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="24958" end="24976" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061159" start="24988" end="24996" title="Tegra K1" label="Tegra K1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535529" start="25099" end="25118" title="geometry processing" label="geometry processing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25154" end="25154" title="Glossary of computer graphics#azdo" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q5125465" start="25281" end="25289" title="Clamping (graphics)" label="clamping"/>
<link wikidata="Q861687" start="25293" end="25300" title="Polygon graphics" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25354" end="25360" title="Standard Portable Intermediate Representation#SPIR-V" label="SPIR-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q549215" start="25380" end="25401" title="anisotropic filtering" label="anisotropic filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q294758" start="25425" end="25446" title="Radeon HD 7000 series" label="Radeon HD 7000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q59069" start="25527" end="25534" title="Haswell (microarchitecture)" label="Haswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q137292" start="25553" end="25571" title="GeForce 400 series" label="GeForce 400 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778544" start="25602" end="25606" title="Mesa (computer graphics)" label="Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="25615" end="25620" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="25852" end="25855" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="25892" end="25901" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25902" end="25905" title="Windows 7#Service Pack 1" label="SP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="25907" end="25909" title="Windows 10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="26011" end="26016" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="26051" end="26061" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="26084" end="26090" title="Nvidia" label="NVIDIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q825762" start="26091" end="26098" title="GeForce" label="GeForce"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="26125" end="26134" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="26136" end="26137" title="Windows 8" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="26139" end="26141" title="Windows 10" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="26142" end="26148" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="26162" end="26168" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q280943" start="26239" end="26249" title="deprecation" label="deprecated"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154350" start="26302" end="26307" title="Metal (API)" label="Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119104560" start="26341" end="26349" title="MacOS Sonoma" label="macOS 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q406283" start="26371" end="26384" title="Apple silicon" label="Apple silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264041" start="26500" end="26508" title="MoltenVK" label="MoltenVK"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971152" start="26681" end="26686" title="ANGLE (software)" label="ANGLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778544" start="26740" end="26746" title="Mesa (computer graphics)" label="Mesa3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="26810" end="26819" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="26827" end="26837" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26945" end="26957" title="Mesa (computer graphics)#Gallium3D" label="Mesa Gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653581" start="27291" end="27312" title="ARB assembly language" label="ARB assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q939208" start="27365" end="27373" title="Direct3D" label="Direct3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323676" start="27404" end="27415" title="Glide (API)" label="Glide (API)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154350" start="27466" end="27477" title="Metal (API)" label="Metal (API)"/>
<link wikidata="Q910775" start="27527" end="27533" title="OpenAL" label="OpenAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137220" start="27596" end="27605" title="OpenGL ES" label="OpenGL ES"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095883" start="27638" end="27647" title="OpenSL ES" label="OpenSL ES"/>
<link wikidata="Q930132" start="27718" end="27724" title="OpenVG" label="OpenVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312795" start="27793" end="27826" title="RenderMan Interface Specification" label="RenderMan Interface Specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967183" start="27900" end="27904" title="VOGL" label="VOGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q19407678" start="27931" end="27937" title="Vulkan" label="Vulkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366289" start="28045" end="28062" title="Graphics pipeline" label="Graphics pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q375913" start="28065" end="28070" title="WebGL" label="WebGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q28957081" start="28073" end="28079" title="WebGPU" label="WebGPU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22498" wikidata="Q4130" url="?curid=22498" title="Orbit">
<text>In celestial mechanics, an orbit (also known as orbital revolution) is the curved trajectory of an object such as the trajectory of a planet around a star, or of a natural satellite around a planet, or of an artificial satellite around an object or position in space such as a planet, moon, asteroid, or Lagrange point. Normally, orbit refers to a regularly repeating trajectory, although it may also refer to a non-repeating trajectory. To a close approximation, planets and satellites follow elliptic orbits, with the center of mass being orbited at a focal point of the ellipse, as described by Kepler&#x27;s laws of planetary motion.

For most situations, orbital motion is adequately approximated by Newtonian mechanics, which explains gravity as a force obeying an inverse-square law. However, Albert Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity, which accounts for gravity as due to curvature of spacetime, with orbits following geodesics, provides a more accurate calculation and understanding of the exact mechanics of orbital motion.

==History==

Historically, the apparent motions of the planets were described by European and Arabic philosophers using the idea of celestial spheres. This model posited the existence of perfect moving spheres or rings to which the stars and planets were attached. It assumed the heavens were fixed apart from the motion of the spheres and was developed without any understanding of gravity. After the planets&#x27; motions were more accurately measured, theoretical mechanisms such as deferent and epicycles were added. Although the model was capable of reasonably accurately predicting the planets&#x27; positions in the sky, more and more epicycles were required as the measurements became more accurate, hence the model became increasingly unwieldy. Originally geocentric, it was modified by Copernicus to place the Sun at the centre to help simplify the model. The model was further challenged during the 16th century, as comets were observed traversing the spheres.
The basis for the modern understanding of orbits was first formulated by Johannes Kepler whose results are summarised in his three laws of planetary motion. First, he found that the orbits of the planets in our Solar System are elliptical, not circular (or epicyclic), as had previously been believed, and that the Sun is not located at the center of the orbits, but rather at one focus. Second, he found that the orbital speed of each planet is not constant, as had previously been thought, but rather that the speed depends on the planet&#x27;s distance from the Sun. Third, Kepler found a universal relationship between the orbital properties of all the planets orbiting the Sun. For the planets, the cubes of their distances from the Sun are proportional to the squares of their orbital periods. Jupiter and Venus, for example, are respectively about 5.2 and 0.723 AU distant from the Sun, their orbital periods respectively about 11.86 and 0.615 years. The proportionality is seen by the fact that the ratio for Jupiter, 5.23/11.862, is practically equal to that for Venus, 0.7233/0.6152, in accord with the relationship. Idealised orbits meeting these rules are known as Kepler orbits.

Isaac Newton demonstrated that Kepler&#x27;s laws were derivable from his theory of gravitation and that, in general, the orbits of bodies subject to gravity were conic sections (this assumes that the force of gravity propagates instantaneously). Newton showed that, for a pair of bodies, the orbits&#x27; sizes are in inverse proportion to their masses, and that those bodies orbit their common center of mass. Where one body is much more massive than the other (as is the case of an artificial satellite orbiting a planet), it is a convenient approximation to take the center of mass as coinciding with the center of the more massive body.

Advances in Newtonian mechanics were then used to explore variations from the simple assumptions behind Kepler orbits, such as the perturbations due to other bodies, or the impact of spheroidal rather than spherical bodies. Joseph-Louis Lagrange developed a new approach to Newtonian mechanics emphasizing energy more than force, and made progress on the three-body problem, discovering the Lagrangian points. In a dramatic vindication of classical mechanics, in 1846 Urbain Le Verrier was able to predict the position of Neptune based on unexplained perturbations in the orbit of Uranus.

Albert Einstein in his 1916 paper &quot;The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity&quot; explained that gravity was due to curvature of space-time and removed Newton&#x27;s assumption that changes in gravity propagate instantaneously. This led astronomers to recognize that Newtonian mechanics did not provide the highest accuracy in understanding orbits. In relativity theory, orbits follow geodesic trajectories which are usually approximated very well by the Newtonian predictions (except where there are very strong gravity fields and very high speeds) but the differences are measurable. Essentially all the experimental evidence that can distinguish between the theories agrees with relativity theory to within experimental measurement accuracy. The original vindication of general relativity is that it was able to account for the remaining unexplained amount in precession of Mercury&#x27;s perihelion first noted by Le Verrier. However, Newton&#x27;s solution is still used for most short term purposes since it is significantly easier to use and sufficiently accurate.

==Planetary orbits==

Within a planetary system, planets, dwarf planets, asteroids and other minor planets, comets, and space debris orbit the system&#x27;s barycenter in elliptical orbits. A comet in a parabolic or hyperbolic orbit about a barycenter is not gravitationally bound to the star and therefore is not considered part of the star&#x27;s planetary system. Bodies that are gravitationally bound to one of the planets in a planetary system, either natural or artificial satellites, follow orbits about a barycenter near or within that planet.

Owing to mutual gravitational perturbations, the eccentricities of the planetary orbits vary over time. Mercury, the smallest planet in the Solar System, has the most eccentric orbit. At the present epoch, Mars has the next largest eccentricity while the smallest orbital eccentricities are seen with Venus and Neptune.

As two objects orbit each other, the periapsis is that point at which the two objects are closest to each other and the apoapsis is that point at which they are the farthest. (More specific terms are used for specific bodies. For example, &quot;perigee&quot; and &quot;apogee&quot; are the lowest and highest parts of an orbit around Earth, while &quot;perihelion&quot; and &quot;aphelion&quot; are the closest and farthest points of an orbit around the Sun.)

In the case of planets orbiting a star, the mass of the star and all its satellites are calculated to be at a single point called the barycenter. The paths of all the star&#x27;s satellites are elliptical orbits about that barycenter. Each satellite in that system will have its own elliptical orbit with the barycenter at one focal point of that ellipse. At any point along its orbit, any satellite will have a certain value of kinetic and potential energy with respect to the barycenter, and the sum of those two energies is a constant value at every point along its orbit. As a result, as a planet approaches periapsis, the planet will increase in speed as its potential energy decreases; as a planet approaches apoapsis, its velocity will decrease as its potential energy increases.

==Principles==
There are a few common ways of understanding orbits:
* A force, such as gravity, pulls an object into a curved path as it attempts to fly off in a straight line.
* As the object is pulled toward the massive body, it falls toward that body. However, if it has enough tangential velocity it will not fall into the body but will instead continue to follow the curved trajectory caused by that body indefinitely. The object is then said to be orbiting the body.

The velocity relationship of two moving objects with mass can thus be considered in four practical classes, with subtypes:
; No orbit:
; Suborbital trajectories: Range of interrupted elliptical paths
; Orbital trajectories (or simply, orbits): 
; Open (or escape) trajectories: 

Orbital rockets are launched vertically at first to lift the rocket above the atmosphere (which causes frictional drag), and then slowly pitch over and finish firing the rocket engine parallel to the atmosphere to achieve orbit speed.

Once in orbit, their speed keeps them in orbit above the atmosphere. If e.g., an elliptical orbit dips into dense air, the object will lose speed and re-enter (i.e. fall). Occasionally a space craft will intentionally intercept the atmosphere, in an act commonly referred to as an aerobraking maneuver.

===Illustration===

As an illustration of an orbit around a planet, the Newton&#x27;s cannonball model may prove useful (see image below). This is a &#x27;thought experiment&#x27;, in which a cannon on top of a tall mountain is able to fire a cannonball horizontally at any chosen muzzle speed. The effects of air friction on the cannonball are ignored (or perhaps the mountain is high enough that the cannon is above the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, which is the same thing).

If the cannon fires its ball with a low initial speed, the trajectory of the ball curves downward and hits the ground (A). As the firing speed is increased, the cannonball hits the ground farther (B) away from the cannon, because while the ball is still falling towards the ground, the ground is increasingly curving away from it (see first point, above). All these motions are actually &quot;orbits&quot; in a technical sense—they are describing a portion of an elliptical path around the center of gravity—but the orbits are interrupted by striking the Earth.

If the cannonball is fired with sufficient speed, the ground curves away from the ball at least as much as the ball falls—so the ball never strikes the ground. It is now in what could be called a non-interrupted or circumnavigating, orbit. For any specific combination of height above the center of gravity and mass of the planet, there is one specific firing speed (unaffected by the mass of the ball, which is assumed to be very small relative to the Earth&#x27;s mass) that produces a circular orbit, as shown in (C).

As the firing speed is increased beyond this, non-interrupted elliptic orbits are produced; one is shown in (D). If the initial firing is above the surface of the Earth as shown, there will also be non-interrupted elliptical orbits at slower firing speed; these will come closest to the Earth at the point half an orbit beyond, and directly opposite the firing point, below the circular orbit.

At a specific horizontal firing speed called escape velocity, dependent on the mass of the planet and the distance of the object from the barycenter, an open orbit (E) is achieved that has a parabolic path. At even greater speeds the object will follow a range of hyperbolic trajectories. In a practical sense, both of these trajectory types mean the object is &quot;breaking free&quot; of the planet&#x27;s gravity, and &quot;going off into space&quot; never to return.

==Newton&#x27;s laws of motion==
===Newton&#x27;s law of gravitation and laws of motion for two-body problems===
In most situations, relativistic effects can be neglected, and Newton&#x27;s laws give a sufficiently accurate description of motion. The acceleration of a body is equal to the sum of the forces acting on it, divided by its mass, and the gravitational force acting on a body is proportional to the product of the masses of the two attracting bodies and decreases inversely with the square of the distance between them. To this Newtonian approximation, for a system of two-point masses or spherical bodies, only influenced by their mutual gravitation (called a two-body problem), their trajectories can be exactly calculated. If the heavier body is much more massive than the smaller, as in the case of a satellite or small moon orbiting a planet or for the Earth orbiting the Sun, it is accurate enough and convenient to describe the motion in terms of a coordinate system that is centered on the heavier body, and we say that the lighter body is in orbit around the heavier. For the case where the masses of two bodies are comparable, an exact Newtonian solution is still sufficient and can be had by placing the coordinate system at the center of the mass of the system.

===Defining gravitational potential energy===
Energy is associated with gravitational fields. A stationary body far from another can do external work if it is pulled towards it, and therefore has gravitational &quot;potential energy&quot;. Since work is required to separate two bodies against the pull of gravity, their gravitational potential energy increases as they are separated, and decreases as they approach one another. For point masses, the gravitational energy decreases to zero as they approach zero separation. It is convenient and conventional to assign the potential energy as having zero value when they are an infinite distance apart, and hence it has a negative value (since it decreases from zero) for smaller finite distances.

===Orbital energies and orbit shapes===
When only two gravitational bodies interact, their orbits follow a conic section. The orbit can be open (implying the object never returns) or closed (returning). Which it is depends on the total energy (kinetic + potential energy) of the system. In the case of an open orbit, the speed at any position of the orbit is at least the escape velocity for that position, in the case of a closed orbit, the speed is always less than the escape velocity. Since the kinetic energy is never negative if the common convention is adopted of taking the potential energy as zero at infinite separation, the bound orbits will have negative total energy, the parabolic trajectories zero total energy, and hyperbolic orbits positive total energy.

An open orbit will have a parabolic shape if it has the velocity of exactly the escape velocity at that point in its trajectory, and it will have the shape of a hyperbola when its velocity is greater than the escape velocity. When bodies with escape velocity or greater approach each other, they will briefly curve around each other at the time of their closest approach, and then separate, forever.

All closed orbits have the shape of an ellipse. A circular orbit is a special case, wherein the foci of the ellipse coincide. The point where the orbiting body is closest to Earth is called the perigee, and when orbiting a body other than earth it is called the periapsis (less properly, &quot;perifocus&quot; or &quot;pericentron&quot;). The point where the satellite is farthest from Earth is called the apogee, apoapsis, or sometimes apifocus or apocentron. A line drawn from periapsis to apoapsis is the &quot;line-of-apsides&quot;. This is the major axis of the ellipse, the line through its longest part.

===Kepler&#x27;s laws===
Bodies following closed orbits repeat their paths with a certain time called the period. This motion is described by the empirical laws of Kepler, which can be mathematically derived from Newton&#x27;s laws. These can be
formulated as follows:

# The orbit of a planet around the Sun is an ellipse, with the Sun in one of the focal points of that ellipse. [This focal point is actually the barycenter of the Sun-planet system; for simplicity, this explanation assumes the Sun&#x27;s mass is infinitely larger than that planet&#x27;s.] The planet&#x27;s orbit lies in a plane, called the orbital plane. The point on the orbit closest to the attracting body is the periapsis. The point farthest from the attracting body is called the apoapsis. There are also specific terms for orbits about particular bodies; things orbiting the Sun have a perihelion and aphelion, things orbiting the Earth have a perigee and apogee, and things orbiting the Moon have a perilune and apolune (or periselene and aposelene respectively). An orbit around any star, not just the Sun, has a periastron and an apastron.
# As the planet moves in its orbit, the line from the Sun to the planet sweeps a constant area of the orbital plane for a given period of time, regardless of which part of its orbit the planet traces during that period of time. This means that the planet moves faster near its perihelion than near its aphelion, because at the smaller distance it needs to trace a greater arc to cover the same area. This law is usually stated as &quot;equal areas in equal time.&quot;
# For a given orbit, the ratio of the cube of its semi-major axis to the square of its period is constant.

===Limitations of Newton&#x27;s law of gravitation===
Note that while bound orbits of a point mass or a spherical body with a Newtonian gravitational field are closed ellipses, which repeat the same path exactly and indefinitely, any non-spherical or non-Newtonian effects (such as caused by the slight oblateness of the Earth, or by relativistic effects, thereby changing the gravitational field&#x27;s behavior with distance) will cause the orbit&#x27;s shape to depart from the closed ellipses characteristic of Newtonian two-body motion. The two-body solutions were published by Newton in Principia in 1687. In 1912, Karl Fritiof Sundman developed a converging infinite series that solves the three-body problem; however, it converges too slowly to be of much use. Except for special cases like the Lagrangian points, no method is known to solve the equations of motion for a system with four or more bodies.

===Approaches to many-body problems===
Rather than an exact closed form solution, orbits with many bodies can be approximated with arbitrarily high accuracy. These approximations take two forms:
:One form takes the pure elliptic motion as a basis and adds perturbation terms to account for the gravitational influence of multiple bodies. This is convenient for calculating the positions of astronomical bodies. The equations of motion of the moons, planets, and other bodies are known with great accuracy, and are used to generate tables for celestial navigation. Still, there are secular phenomena that have to be dealt with by post-Newtonian methods.
:The differential equation form is used for scientific or mission-planning purposes. According to Newton&#x27;s laws, the sum of all the forces acting on a body will equal the mass of the body times its acceleration (&quot;F = ma&quot;). Therefore accelerations can be expressed in terms of positions. The perturbation terms are much easier to describe in this form. Predicting subsequent positions and velocities from initial values of position and velocity corresponds to solving an initial value problem. Numerical methods calculate the positions and velocities of the objects a short time in the future, then repeat the calculation ad nauseam. However, tiny arithmetic errors from the limited accuracy of a computer&#x27;s math are cumulative, which limits the accuracy of this approach.

Differential simulations with large numbers of objects perform the calculations in a hierarchical pairwise fashion between centers of mass. Using this scheme, galaxies, star clusters and other large assemblages of objects have been simulated.

==Formulation==
=== Newtonian analysis of orbital motion ===
The following derivation applies to such an elliptical orbit. We start only with the Newtonian law of gravitation stating that the gravitational acceleration towards the central body is related to the inverse of the square of the distance between them, namely

: formula_1

where &quot;F&quot;2 is the force acting on the mass &quot;m&quot;2 caused by the gravitational attraction mass &quot;m&quot;1 has for &quot;m&quot;2, &quot;G&quot; is the universal gravitational constant, and &quot;r&quot; is the distance between the two masses centers.

From Newton&#x27;s Second Law, the summation of the forces acting on &quot;m&quot;2 related to that body&#x27;s acceleration:

: formula_2

where &quot;A&quot;2 is the acceleration of &quot;m&quot;2 caused by the force of gravitational attraction &quot;F&quot;2 of &quot;m&quot;1 acting on &quot;m&quot;2.

Combining Eq. 1 and 2:

: formula_3

Solving for the acceleration, &quot;A&quot;2:

: formula_4

where formula_5 is the standard gravitational parameter, in this case formula_6. It is understood that the system being described is &quot;m&quot;2, hence the subscripts can be dropped.

We assume that the central body is massive enough that it can be considered to be stationary and we ignore the more subtle effects of general relativity.

When a pendulum or an object attached to a spring swings in an ellipse, the inward acceleration/force is proportional to the distance formula_7 Due to the way vectors add, the component of the force in the formula_8 or in the formula_9 directions are also proportionate to the respective components of the distances, formula_10. Hence, the entire analysis can be done separately in these dimensions. This results in the harmonic parabolic equations formula_11 and formula_12 of the ellipse.

The location of the orbiting object at the current time formula_13 is located in the plane using vector calculus in polar coordinates both with the standard Euclidean basis and with the polar basis with the origin coinciding with the center of force. Let formula_14 be the distance between the object and the center and formula_15 be the angle it has rotated. Let formula_8 and formula_9 be the standard Euclidean bases and let formula_18 and formula_19 be the radial and transverse polar basis with the first being the unit vector pointing from the central body to the current location of the orbiting object and the second being the orthogonal unit vector pointing in the direction that the orbiting object would travel if orbiting in a counter clockwise circle. Then the vector to the orbiting object is

: formula_20

We use formula_21 and formula_22 to denote the standard derivatives of how this distance and angle change over time. We take the derivative of a vector to see how it changes over time by subtracting its location at time formula_13 from that at time formula_24 and dividing by formula_25. The result is also a vector. Because our basis vector formula_26 moves as the object orbits, we start by differentiating it. From time formula_13 to formula_24, the vector formula_26 keeps its beginning at the origin and rotates from angle formula_15 to formula_31 which moves its head a distance formula_32 in the perpendicular direction formula_33 giving a derivative of formula_34.

: formula_35

We can now find the velocity and acceleration of our orbiting object.
: formula_36

The coefficients of formula_26 and formula_33 give the accelerations in the radial and transverse directions. As said, Newton gives this first due to gravity is formula_39 and the second is zero.


Equation (2) can be rearranged using integration by parts.

: formula_40

We can multiply through by formula_14 because it is not zero unless the orbiting object crashes.
Then having the derivative be zero gives that the function is a constant.

which is actually the theoretical proof of Kepler&#x27;s second law (A line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time). The constant of integration, &quot;h&quot;, is the angular momentum per unit mass.

In order to get an equation for the orbit from equation (1), we need to eliminate time. (See also Binet equation.)
In polar coordinates, this would express the distance formula_14 of the orbiting object from the center as a function of its angle formula_15. However, it is easier to introduce the auxiliary variable formula_44 and to express formula_45 as a function of formula_15. Derivatives of formula_47 with respect to time may be rewritten as derivatives of formula_48 with respect to angle.

: formula_49
: formula_50 (reworking (3))
: formula_51

Plugging these into (1) gives

: formula_52
So for the gravitational force – or, more generally, for &quot;any&quot; inverse square force law – the right hand side of the equation becomes a constant and the equation is seen to be the harmonic equation (up to a shift of origin of the dependent variable). The solution is:

:formula_53

where &quot;A&quot; and &quot;θ&quot;0 are arbitrary constants. This resulting equation of the orbit of the object is that of an ellipse in Polar form relative to one of the focal points. This is put into a more standard form by letting formula_54 be the eccentricity, which when rearranged we see:
:formula_55

Note that by letting formula_56 be the semi-major axis and letting formula_57 so the long axis of the ellipse is along the positive &quot;x&quot; coordinate we yield:
:formula_58

When the two-body system is under the influence of torque, the angular momentum &quot;h&quot; is not a constant. After the following calculation:
:formula_59

we will get the Sturm-Liouville equation of two-body system. 
===Relativistic orbital motion===
The above classical (Newtonian) analysis of orbital mechanics assumes that the more subtle effects of general relativity, such as frame dragging and gravitational time dilation are negligible. Relativistic effects cease to be negligible when near very massive bodies (as with the precession of Mercury&#x27;s orbit about the Sun), or when extreme precision is needed (as with calculations of the orbital elements and time signal references for GPS satellites.).

==Specification==
Six parameters are required to specify a Keplerian orbit about a body. For example, the three numbers that specify the body&#x27;s initial position, and the three values that specify its velocity will define a unique orbit that can be calculated forwards (or backwards) in time. However, traditionally the parameters used are slightly different.

The traditionally used set of orbital elements is called the set of Keplerian elements, after Johannes Kepler and his laws. The Keplerian elements are six:
* Inclination (&quot;i&quot;)
* Longitude of the ascending node (Ω)
* Argument of periapsis (ω)
* Eccentricity (&quot;e&quot;)
* Semimajor axis (&quot;a&quot;)
* Mean anomaly at epoch (&quot;M&quot;0).

In principle, once the orbital elements are known for a body, its position can be calculated forward and backward indefinitely in time. However, in practice, orbits are affected or perturbed, by other forces than simple gravity from an assumed point source (see the next section), and thus the orbital elements change over time.

Note that, unless the eccentricity is zero, &quot;a&quot; is not the average orbital radius. The time-averaged orbital distance is given by:

:formula_60

===Orbital planes===

The analysis so far has been two dimensional; it turns out that an unperturbed orbit is two-dimensional in a plane fixed in space, and thus the extension to three dimensions requires simply rotating the two-dimensional plane into the required angle relative to the poles of the planetary body involved.

The rotation to do this in three dimensions requires three numbers to uniquely determine; traditionally these are expressed as three angles.

===Orbital period===

The orbital period is simply how long an orbiting body takes to complete one orbit.

==Perturbations==

An orbital perturbation is when a force or impulse which is much smaller than the overall force or average impulse of the main gravitating body and which is external to the two orbiting bodies causes an acceleration, which changes the parameters of the orbit over time.

===Radial, prograde and transverse perturbations===
A small radial impulse given to a body in orbit changes the eccentricity, but not the orbital period (to first order). A prograde or retrograde impulse (i.e. an impulse applied along the orbital motion) changes both the eccentricity and the orbital period. Notably, a prograde impulse at periapsis raises the altitude at apoapsis, and vice versa and a retrograde impulse does the opposite. A transverse impulse (out of the orbital plane) causes rotation of the orbital plane without changing the period or eccentricity. In all instances, a closed orbit will still intersect the perturbation point.

===Orbital decay===

If an orbit is about a planetary body with a significant atmosphere, its orbit can decay because of drag. Particularly at each periapsis, the object experiences atmospheric drag, losing energy. Each time, the orbit grows less eccentric (more circular) because the object loses kinetic energy precisely when that energy is at its maximum. This is similar to the effect of slowing a pendulum at its lowest point; the highest point of the pendulum&#x27;s swing becomes lower. With each successive slowing more of the orbit&#x27;s path is affected by the atmosphere and the effect becomes more pronounced. Eventually, the effect becomes so great that the maximum kinetic energy is not enough to return the orbit above the limits of the atmospheric drag effect. When this happens the body will rapidly spiral down and intersect the central body.

The bounds of an atmosphere vary wildly. During a solar maximum, the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere causes drag up to a hundred kilometres higher than during a solar minimum.

Some satellites with long conductive tethers can also experience orbital decay because of electromagnetic drag from the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. As the wire cuts the magnetic field it acts as a generator, moving electrons from one end to the other. The orbital energy is converted to heat in the wire.

Orbits can be artificially influenced through the use of rocket engines which change the kinetic energy of the body at some point in its path. This is the conversion of chemical or electrical energy to kinetic energy. In this way changes in the orbit shape or orientation can be facilitated.

Another method of artificially influencing an orbit is through the use of solar sails or magnetic sails. These forms of propulsion require no propellant or energy input other than that of the Sun, and so can be used indefinitely. See statite for one such proposed use.

Orbital decay can occur due to tidal forces for objects below the synchronous orbit for the body they&#x27;re orbiting. The gravity of the orbiting object raises tidal bulges in the primary, and since below the synchronous orbit, the orbiting object is moving faster than the body&#x27;s surface the bulges lag a short angle behind it. The gravity of the bulges is slightly off of the primary-satellite axis and thus has a component along with the satellite&#x27;s motion. The near bulge slows the object more than the far bulge speeds it up, and as a result, the orbit decays. Conversely, the gravity of the satellite on the bulges applies torque on the primary and speeds up its rotation. Artificial satellites are too small to have an appreciable tidal effect on the planets they orbit, but several moons in the Solar System are undergoing orbital decay by this mechanism. Mars&#x27; innermost moon Phobos is a prime example and is expected to either impact Mars&#x27; surface or break up into a ring within 50 million years.

Orbits can decay via the emission of gravitational waves. This mechanism is extremely weak for most stellar objects, only becoming significant in cases where there is a combination of extreme mass and extreme acceleration, such as with black holes or neutron stars that are orbiting each other closely.

===Oblateness===
The standard analysis of orbiting bodies assumes that all bodies consist of uniform spheres, or more generally, concentric shells each of uniform density. It can be shown that such bodies are gravitationally equivalent to point sources.

However, in the real world, many bodies rotate, and this introduces oblateness and distorts the gravity field, and gives a quadrupole moment to the gravitational field which is significant at distances comparable to the radius of the body. In the general case, the gravitational potential of a rotating body such as, e.g., a planet is usually expanded in multipoles accounting for the departures of it from spherical symmetry. From the point of view of satellite dynamics, of particular relevance are the so-called even zonal harmonic coefficients, or even zonals, since they induce secular orbital perturbations which are cumulative over time spans longer than the orbital period. They do depend on the orientation of the body&#x27;s symmetry axis in the space, affecting, in general, the whole orbit, with the exception of the semimajor axis.

===Multiple gravitating bodies===

The effects of other gravitating bodies can be significant. For example, the orbit of the Moon cannot be accurately described without allowing for the action of the Sun&#x27;s gravity as well as the Earth&#x27;s. One approximate result is that bodies will usually have reasonably stable orbits around a heavier planet or moon, in spite of these perturbations, provided they are orbiting well within the heavier body&#x27;s Hill sphere.

When there are more than two gravitating bodies it is referred to as an n-body problem. Most n-body problems have no closed form solution, although some special cases have been formulated.

===Light radiation and stellar wind===
For smaller bodies particularly, light and stellar wind can cause significant perturbations to the attitude and direction of motion of the body, and over time can be significant. Of the planetary bodies, the motion of asteroids is particularly affected over large periods when the asteroids are rotating relative to the Sun.

==Strange orbits==
Mathematicians have discovered that it is possible in principle to have multiple bodies in non-elliptical orbits that repeat periodically, although most such orbits are not stable regarding small perturbations in mass, position, or velocity. However, some special stable cases have been identified, including a planar figure-eight orbit occupied by three moving bodies. Further studies have discovered that nonplanar orbits are also possible, including one involving 12 masses moving in 4 roughly circular, interlocking orbits topologically equivalent to the edges of a cuboctahedron.

Finding such orbits naturally occurring in the universe is thought to be extremely unlikely, because of the improbability of the required conditions occurring by chance.

==Astrodynamics==

Orbital mechanics or astrodynamics is the application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft. The motion of these objects is usually calculated from Newton&#x27;s laws of motion and Newton&#x27;s law of universal gravitation. It is a core discipline within space mission design and control. Celestial mechanics treats more broadly the orbital dynamics of systems under the influence of gravity, including spacecraft and natural astronomical bodies such as star systems, planets, moons, and comets. Orbital mechanics focuses on spacecraft trajectories, including orbital maneuvers, orbit plane changes, and interplanetary transfers, and is used by mission planners to predict the results of propulsive maneuvers. General relativity is a more exact theory than Newton&#x27;s laws for calculating orbits, and is sometimes necessary for greater accuracy or in high-gravity situations (such as orbits close to the Sun).

==Earth orbits==

* Low Earth orbit (LEO): Geocentric orbits with altitudes up to 2,000 km (0–1,240 miles).
* Medium Earth orbit (MEO): Geocentric orbits ranging in altitude from 2,000 km (1,240 miles) to just below geosynchronous orbit at . Also known as an intermediate circular orbit. These are &quot;most commonly at , or , with an orbital period of 12 hours.&quot;
* Both geosynchronous orbit (GSO) and geostationary orbit (GEO) are orbits around Earth matching Earth&#x27;s sidereal rotation period. All geosynchronous and geostationary orbits have a semi-major axis of . All geostationary orbits are also geosynchronous, but not all geosynchronous orbits are geostationary. A geostationary orbit stays exactly above the equator, whereas a geosynchronous orbit may swing north and south to cover more of the Earth&#x27;s surface. Both complete one full orbit of Earth per sidereal day (relative to the stars, not the Sun).
* High Earth orbit: Geocentric orbits above the altitude of geosynchronous orbit 35,786 km (22,240 miles).

==Scaling in gravity==
The gravitational constant &quot;G&quot; has been calculated as:
* (6.6742 ± 0.001) × 10−11 (kg/m3)−1s−2.

Thus the constant has dimension density−1 time−2. This corresponds to the following properties.

Scaling of distances (including sizes of bodies, while keeping the densities the same) gives similar orbits without scaling the time: if for example distances are halved, masses are divided by 8, gravitational forces by 16 and gravitational accelerations by 2. Hence velocities are halved and orbital periods and other travel times related to gravity remain the same. For example, when an object is dropped from a tower, the time it takes to fall to the ground remains the same with a scale model of the tower on a scale model of the Earth.

Scaling of distances while keeping the masses the same (in the case of point masses, or by adjusting the densities) gives similar orbits; if distances are multiplied by 4, gravitational forces and accelerations are divided by 16, velocities are halved and orbital periods are multiplied by 8.

When all densities are multiplied by 4, orbits are the same; gravitational forces are multiplied by 16 and accelerations by 4, velocities are doubled and orbital periods are halved.

When all densities are multiplied by 4, and all sizes are halved, orbits are similar; masses are divided by 2, gravitational forces are the same, gravitational accelerations are doubled. Hence velocities are the same and orbital periods are halved.

In all these cases of scaling. if densities are multiplied by 4, times are halved; if velocities are doubled, forces are multiplied by 16.

These properties are illustrated in the formula (derived from the formula for the orbital period)

:formula_61

for an elliptical orbit with semi-major axis &quot;a&quot;, of a small body around a spherical body with radius &quot;r&quot; and average density &quot;ρ&quot;, where &quot;T&quot; is the orbital period. See also Kepler’s third law.

==Tidal locking==

Some bodies are tidally locked with other bodies, meaning that one side of the celestial body is permanently facing its host object. This is the case for Earth-Moon and Pluto-Charon system.

==See also==

* Ephemeris is a compilation of positions of naturally occurring astronomical objects as well as artificial satellites in the sky at a given time or times.
* Free drift
* Klemperer rosette
* List of orbits
* Molniya orbit
* Orbit determination
* Orbital spaceflight
* Perifocal coordinate system
* Polar orbit
* Radial trajectory
* Rosetta orbit
* VSOP model
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Discusses new algorithms for determining the orbits of both natural and artificial celestial bodies.

==External links==
* CalcTool: Orbital period of a planet calculator. Has wide choice of units. Requires JavaScript.
* Java simulation on orbital motion. Requires Java.
* NOAA page on Climate Forcing Data includes (calculated) data on Earth orbit variations over the last 50 million years and for the coming 20 million years
* On-line orbit plotter. Requires JavaScript.
* Orbital Mechanics (Rocket and Space Technology)
* Orbital simulations by Varadi, Ghil and Runnegar (2003) provide another, slightly different series for Earth orbit eccentricity, and also a series for orbital inclination. Orbits for the other planets were also calculated, by , but only the eccentricity data for Earth and Mercury are available online.
* Understand orbits using direct manipulation . Requires JavaScript and Macromedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="3" end="22" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="27" end="32" title="Orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="48" end="66" title="Orbit" label="orbital revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="82" end="92" title="trajectory" label="trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q223557" start="99" end="105" title="physical body" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="134" end="140" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="164" end="181" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="208" end="228" title="satellite" label="artificial satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="304" end="318" title="Lagrange point" label="Lagrange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="494" end="508" title="elliptic orbit" label="elliptic orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="520" end="534" title="barycenter" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="598" end="636" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s laws of planetary motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="705" end="724" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="741" end="748" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="771" end="789" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="800" end="815" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="823" end="851" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="903" end="912" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="936" end="944" title="geodesic" label="geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119786" start="1177" end="1194" title="celestial spheres" label="celestial spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="1531" end="1552" title="deferent and epicycle" label="deferent and epicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="1810" end="1820" title="geocentric model" label="geocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="1841" end="1851" title="Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="2090" end="2105" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2228" end="2240" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="2261" end="2269" title="circle" label="circular"/>
<link wikidata="Q961202" start="2274" end="2283" title="epicycle" label="epicyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568" start="2398" end="2403" title="focus (geometry)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="2886" end="2888" title="astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="3194" end="3207" title="Kepler orbits" label="Kepler orbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="3210" end="3222" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="3294" end="3305" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="3373" end="3386" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="3557" end="3561" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="3606" end="3620" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="4077" end="4098" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="4111" end="4123" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="new approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="4127" end="4146" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q607699" start="4208" end="4226" title="three-body problem" label="three-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="4244" end="4261" title="Lagrangian points" label="Lagrangian points"/>
<link wikidata="Q104154" start="4321" end="4338" title="Urbain Le Verrier" label="Urbain Le Verrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="4375" end="4382" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="4434" end="4440" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="4443" end="4458" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="4587" end="4597" title="space-time" label="space-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="4810" end="4827" title="relativity theory" label="relativity theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5321" end="5360" title="Tests of general relativity#Perihelion precession of Mercury" label="precession of Mercury&amp;#x27;s perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="5562" end="5578" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="5589" end="5601" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="5604" end="5612" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="5624" end="5636" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="5639" end="5644" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q275450" start="5651" end="5663" title="space debris" label="space debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="5688" end="5698" title="Barycentric coordinates (astronomy)" label="barycenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="5702" end="5718" title="elliptical orbit" label="elliptical orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247097" start="5734" end="5743" title="Parabolic trajectory" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755058" start="5747" end="5757" title="Hyperbolic trajectory" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="5988" end="5995" title="natural satellite" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="5999" end="6020" title="satellite" label="artificial satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="6100" end="6127" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="gravitational perturbations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="6133" end="6147" title="eccentricity (orbit)" label="eccentricities"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="6188" end="6195" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="6283" end="6288" title="Epoch (astronomy)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="6290" end="6294" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="6385" end="6390" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="6395" end="6402" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="6442" end="6451" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="6525" end="6533" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7478" end="7487" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7581" end="7589" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120776025" start="7935" end="7954" title="tangential velocity" label="tangential velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q832435" start="8265" end="8288" title="Sub-orbital spaceflight" label="Suborbital trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247097" start="8375" end="8404" title="escape orbit" label="Open (or escape) trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586653" start="9020" end="9044" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s cannonball" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="9103" end="9121" title="thought experiment" label="thought experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261398" start="10473" end="10487" title="circular orbit" label="circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="10947" end="10962" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247097" start="11093" end="11107" title="parabolic trajectory" label="parabolic path"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755058" start="11166" end="11189" title="hyperbolic trajectory" label="hyperbolic trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="11550" end="11568" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="12047" end="12063" title="two-body problem" label="two-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="12342" end="12359" title="coordinate system" label="coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="12733" end="12752" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="12877" end="12893" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="13516" end="13529" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="13645" end="13651" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="13653" end="13660" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="13663" end="13679" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166530" start="13781" end="13796" title="escape velocity" label="escape velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="14343" end="14352" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="14622" end="14629" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="14777" end="14784" title="perigee" label="perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="14989" end="14995" title="apogee" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231242" start="15097" end="15112" title="line of apsides" label="line-of-apsides"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="15500" end="15503" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q809690" start="15610" end="15620" title="barycenter" label="barycenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="15628" end="15645" title="Solar System" label="Sun-planet system"/>
<link wikidata="Q800358" start="15807" end="15820" title="Orbital plane (astronomy)" label="orbital plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16059" end="16069" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16074" end="16082" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16117" end="16124" title="perigee" label="perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16129" end="16135" title="apogee" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="16161" end="16165" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16173" end="16181" title="perilune" label="perilune"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16186" end="16193" title="apolune" label="apolune"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16198" end="16208" title="periselene" label="periselene"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16213" end="16222" title="aposelene" label="aposelene"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="16258" end="16262" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16288" end="16298" title="periastron" label="periastron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16306" end="16314" title="apastron" label="apastron"/>
<link wikidata="Q800358" start="16418" end="16431" title="Orbital plane (astronomy)" label="orbital plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16593" end="16603" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="16618" end="16626" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="16835" end="16850" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="17019" end="17048" title="Newtonian gravitational field" label="Newtonian gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="17060" end="17067" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="17214" end="17219" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="17227" end="17247" title="Theory of relativity" label="relativistic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="17381" end="17388" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="17418" end="17433" title="two-body motion" label="two-body motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="17486" end="17495" title="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Principia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733149" start="17514" end="17534" title="Karl Fritiof Sundman" label="Karl Fritiof Sundman"/>
<link wikidata="Q607699" start="17590" end="17608" title="three-body problem" label="three-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="17696" end="17712" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="18063" end="18075" title="perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="18338" end="18344" title="ephemeris" label="tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="18349" end="18369" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763933" start="18388" end="18405" title="secular phenomena" label="secular phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621284" start="18436" end="18450" title="Parameterized post-Newtonian formalism" label="post-Newtonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="18465" end="18486" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10167591" start="18945" end="18966" title="initial value problem" label="initial value problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="19643" end="19652" title="classical mechanics" label="Newtonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q579338" start="20532" end="20564" title="standard gravitational parameter" label="standard gravitational parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="20830" end="20848" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="21440" end="21455" title="vector calculus" label="vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="21459" end="21476" title="polar coordinates" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="21747" end="21756" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21826" end="21831" title="Polar coordinate system#Vector calculus" label="polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="23424" end="23448" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s second law" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s second law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010521" start="23593" end="23623" title="specific relative angular momentum" label="angular momentum per unit mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q497603" start="23724" end="23738" title="Binet equation" label="Binet equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190070" start="24415" end="24432" title="harmonic oscillator" label="harmonic equation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24646" end="24653" title="ellipse#Polar form relative to focus" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="24772" end="24784" title="eccentricity (orbit)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="25285" end="25294" title="classical mechanics" label="Newtonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842433" start="25308" end="25325" title="orbital mechanics" label="orbital mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="25366" end="25384" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149343" start="25394" end="25408" title="frame dragging" label="frame dragging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188682" start="25413" end="25440" title="gravitational time dilation" label="gravitational time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006428" start="25544" end="25578" title="Kepler problem in general relativity" label="precession of Mercury&amp;#x27;s orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="25660" end="25676" title="orbital elements" label="orbital elements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25708" end="25711" title="Global Positioning System#Relativity" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946193" start="25786" end="25801" title="Keplerian orbit" label="Keplerian orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="26160" end="26178" title="Orbital elements" label="Keplerian elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="26250" end="26261" title="Inclination" label="Inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q270897" start="26280" end="26311" title="Longitude of the ascending node" label="Longitude of the ascending node"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269302" start="26318" end="26339" title="Argument of periapsis" label="Argument of periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="26346" end="26358" title="orbital eccentricity" label="Eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="26377" end="26391" title="Semimajor axis" label="Semimajor axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216715" start="26410" end="26422" title="Mean anomaly" label="Mean anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="26426" end="26431" title="Epoch (astronomy)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="26632" end="26641" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886678" start="27025" end="27036" title="perturbation theory" label="unperturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q104486" start="27913" end="27925" title="Eccentricity (mathematics)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="27939" end="27953" title="orbital period" label="orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q312021" start="27974" end="27982" title="Direct motion" label="prograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q312021" start="27986" end="27996" title="Retrograde motion" label="retrograde"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="28094" end="28108" title="orbital period" label="orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="28141" end="28150" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="28174" end="28182" title="apoapsis" label="apoapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q800358" start="28314" end="28327" title="Orbital plane (astronomy)" label="orbital plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884964" start="28349" end="28355" title="Orbit (dynamics)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="28573" end="28577" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="28600" end="28609" title="periapsis" label="periapsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445154" start="29365" end="29378" title="solar maximum" label="solar maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="29604" end="29631" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q368891" start="30158" end="30168" title="solar sail" label="solar sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721907" start="30173" end="30186" title="magnetic sail" label="magnetic sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604443" start="30318" end="30325" title="statite" label="statite"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="30385" end="30396" title="tidal force" label="tidal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q940979" start="30420" end="30437" title="synchronous orbit" label="synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="30516" end="30527" title="tidal bulge" label="tidal bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="30995" end="31001" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="31256" end="31262" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="31421" end="31439" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="31620" end="31630" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="31635" end="31647" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="32011" end="32021" title="oblateness" label="oblateness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32066" end="32076" title="Quadropole#Gravitational quadrupole" label="quadrupole"/>
<link wikidata="Q210539" start="32901" end="32918" title="orbit of the Moon" label="orbit of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q498792" start="33247" end="33258" title="Hill sphere" label="Hill sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199050" start="33333" end="33347" title="n-body problem" label="n-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="33378" end="33398" title="Closed-form expression" label="closed form solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q654396" start="33533" end="33545" title="stellar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235286" start="33589" end="33597" title="attitude (geometry)" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="33708" end="33716" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q607699" start="34184" end="34203" title="Three-body problem" label="three moving bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="34362" end="34375" title="topology" label="topologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q847941" start="34405" end="34418" title="cuboctahedron" label="cuboctahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q184631" start="34668" end="34678" title="ballistics" label="ballistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="34683" end="34702" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="34754" end="34760" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="34772" end="34782" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="34839" end="34867" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="34872" end="34914" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of universal gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="35076" end="35083" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="35160" end="35166" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="35169" end="35173" title="Natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="35180" end="35185" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="35228" end="35240" title="trajectory" label="trajectories"/>
<link wikidata="Q801780" start="35252" end="35268" title="orbital maneuver" label="orbital maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q609089" start="35380" end="35400" title="Spacecraft propulsion" label="propulsive maneuvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="35402" end="35420" title="General relativity" label="General relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="35626" end="35641" title="Low Earth orbit" label="Low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="35649" end="35665" title="Geocentric orbit" label="Geocentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="35694" end="35696" title="km" label="km"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="35706" end="35710" title="mile" label="mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="35716" end="35734" title="Medium Earth orbit" label="Medium Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="35742" end="35758" title="Geocentric orbit" label="Geocentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="35791" end="35793" title="km" label="km"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="35801" end="35805" title="mile" label="mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="35822" end="35842" title="geosynchronous orbit" label="geosynchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="35865" end="35892" title="intermediate circular orbit" label="intermediate circular orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="35983" end="36003" title="geosynchronous orbit" label="geosynchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="36014" end="36033" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185981" start="36086" end="36103" title="sidereal rotation" label="sidereal rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="36163" end="36178" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218056" start="36537" end="36553" title="High Earth orbit" label="High Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579577" start="36555" end="36571" title="Geocentric orbit" label="Geocentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="36595" end="36615" title="geosynchronous orbit" label="geosynchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="36623" end="36625" title="km" label="km"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="36634" end="36638" title="mile" label="mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="36670" end="36692" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q102441924" start="36870" end="36877" title="Scale factor" label="Scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q254465" start="36963" end="36970" title="Similarity (geometry)" label="similar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38345" end="38375" title="Orbital period#Small body orbiting a central body" label="formula for the orbital period"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="38420" end="38435" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="38604" end="38622" title="Kepler’s third law" label="Kepler’s third law"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="38804" end="38808" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="38851" end="38860" title="Ephemeris" label="Ephemeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500211" start="39007" end="39017" title="Free drift" label="Free drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396596" start="39020" end="39037" title="Klemperer rosette" label="Klemperer rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467586" start="39040" end="39054" title="List of orbits" label="List of orbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063974" start="39057" end="39070" title="Molniya orbit" label="Molniya orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q302660" start="39073" end="39092" title="Orbit determination" label="Orbit determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q218455" start="39095" end="39114" title="Orbital spaceflight" label="Orbital spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168459" start="39117" end="39144" title="Perifocal coordinate system" label="Perifocal coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q746711" start="39147" end="39158" title="Polar orbit" label="Polar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280280" start="39161" end="39178" title="Radial trajectory" label="Radial trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368682" start="39181" end="39194" title="Rosetta orbit" label="Rosetta orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510793" start="39197" end="39207" title="VSOP model" label="VSOP model"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823458" start="39804" end="39808" title="Michael Ghil" label="Ghil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22499" wikidata="Q675614" url="?curid=22499" title="Off spin">
<text>Off spin is a type of spin bowling in cricket. A bowler who uses this technique is called an off spinner. Off spinners bowl with their right-arm and a finger spin action. Their normal delivery is called an off break, which spins from left to right (from the bowler&#x27;s perspective) when the ball bounces on the pitch. For a right-handed batsman, the ball breaks towards them from the off side, hence the name &#x27;off break&#x27;.

Off spinners bowl mostly off breaks, varying them by adjusting the line and length of the deliveries. Off spinners also bowl other types of delivery, which spin differently. Aside from these variations in spin, varying the speed, length and flight of the ball are also important for the off spinner.

The bowler with the most wickets in the history of both Test matches and ODIs, Muttiah Muralitharan, was an off spinner.

==History==
Although rare now, in the past there were bowlers who used the off-break action who deliberately did not impart any considerable spin on the ball but relied on line and length (or even speed variations) to frustrate batsmen. They endeavoured to pitch the ball in an area that the batsman was unable to play a scoring shot, even making last moment adjustments to &quot;follow&quot; a batsman should they move within the crease to negate the bowlers tactics. Whilst this is primarily a defensive style, wickets were achieved by forcing a batsman to make a rash stroke or even bowling at the stumps instead of the retreating batsman. Another wicket taking method was to impart more spin on the ball than usual, and surprise the batsman. An exponent of this style of bowling was &quot;Flat&quot; Jack Simmons who played for Lancashire and Tasmania in the 1970s and 1980s. With the advent of limited overs cricket promoting more adventurous batting styles and the use of ever heavier bats this style of bowling has declined, although some off-spinners will still use this tactic when the pitch is offering very little or no &quot;turn&quot;. It is a tactic often used by Kane Williamson when he bowls occasionally in limited overs format because his bowling style tends to be flatter and faster.

==Comparison with other types of spin bowling==

Off spin contrasts with leg spin, in which the ball spins from leg to off and which is bowled with a very different action (wrist spin). Off spin is generally considered less difficult to play than leg spin, as off breaks typically spin less than leg breaks, and do not generally possess the same loopy, potentially deceptive flight. In addition, off spinners tend to have a smaller repertoire of deliveries to choose from. For a right-handed batsman, the ball moves in towards the batsman&#x27;s body, meaning the batsman&#x27;s legs are usually in the path of the ball if it misses the bat or takes an edge. This makes it difficult for the bowler to get the batsman out bowled or caught from an off break, but it does mean there is a chance of leg before wicket, assuming the ball has not turned enough to miss the leg stump. However, the off spinner often bowls faster and more accurately than a leg spinner, and can therefore deceive the batsman with changes in the pace of the ball. A left-handed batsman has more difficulty facing off break bowling, because the ball moves away from his body. This means that any miscalculation can more easily result in an outside edge off the bat and a catch going to the wicket-keeper or slips fielders.

A left-handed bowler who bowls with the same (finger spin) action as an off spinner is known as a left-arm orthodox spin bowler. While the orthodox spinner has the same action as an off-spinner, the ball itself spins in the opposite direction (akin to a right arm leg spinner). Such a ball is not normally called an off break, but a &quot;left-arm orthodox spinner&quot;.

==Terminology==
Off spin: Sometimes the term off spin is used to mean the off break delivery. At other times the term off spin has a wider meaning, to include all deliveries bowled by an off spinner, including non-off break deliveries.

Off spinner: The term off spinner can be used to mean either the bowler or the off break delivery.

Offie: The term offie can also be used to mean either the bowler or the off break delivery.

==Technique==
An off break is bowled by holding the cricket ball in the palm of the hand with the seam running across under all the fingers. As the ball is released, the fingers roll down the right side of the ball (for a right-handed bowler), giving the ball a clockwise spin as seen from behind.

== Notable off spinners ==
Notable off spinners include:
*Muttiah Muralitharan of Sri Lanka, who has the most wickets in both ODIs and Test matches, 
*E. A. S. Prasanna and Srinivas Venkataraghavan, two of the legendary Indian spin quartet
*Harbhajan Singh of India
*Saqlain Mushtaq and Saeed Ajmal of Pakistan. Saqlain Mushtaq was credited with the invention of the &quot;doosra&quot;, which is bowled with a similar-looking action to the off break but spins the opposite way, just as the leg spinner&#x27;s googly turns the opposite way from his stock ball.
*Jim Laker and Graeme Swann of England 
*Nathan Lyon of Australia. 
*Tim May of Australia. He played 24 tests as well as being the Chief Executive of the  Australian Cricketers&#x27; Association and later the Federation of International Cricketers&#x27; Associations.
*Ajantha Mendis: inventor of the carrom ball
*Lance Gibbs: first spinner to pass 300 wickets
*Ravichandran Ashwin of India. Fastest Bowler to reach 250, 300 and 350 wickets in test cricket.
and more...

==Other deliveries bowled by off spin bowlers==
Another common weapon of the off spinner is the arm ball, which does not spin but goes straight on &quot;with the arm&quot;. More skilled offspinners also have the topspinner.

==See also==
*Cricket terminology
*Arm ball
*Doosra
*Leg break

==References==
== External links ==
* The Complete Guide to Bowling Off Spin - teamtechnology
* Off Spin Basics video - wisdomtalkies
* Off Spin Bowling - cricketcoachingblog </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q675614" start="0" end="8" title="Off spin" label="Off spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684170" start="22" end="34" title="spin bowling" label="spin bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="38" end="45" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q675614" start="93" end="104" title="Off spin" label="off spinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450246" start="151" end="162" title="finger spin" label="finger spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254073" start="184" end="192" title="Delivery (cricket)" label="delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q675614" start="206" end="215" title="Off spin" label="off break"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210687" start="314" end="319" title="cricket pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q810903" start="340" end="347" title="batsman" label="batsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671661" start="387" end="395" title="off side" label="off side"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553223" start="503" end="518" title="line and length" label="line and length"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553223" start="666" end="672" title="line and length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q489322" start="762" end="769" title="Dismissal (cricket)" label="wickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="793" end="805" title="Test cricket" label="Test matches"/>
<link wikidata="Q175157" start="810" end="814" title="One Day International" label="ODIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q379709" start="816" end="836" title="Muttiah Muralitharan" label="Muttiah Muralitharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115164" start="1663" end="1675" title="Jack Simmons (cricketer)" label="Jack Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532495" start="2037" end="2052" title="Kane Williamson" label="Kane Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480954" start="2236" end="2244" title="leg spin" label="leg spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480954" start="2459" end="2468" title="leg break" label="leg break"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783829" start="2958" end="2975" title="leg before wicket" label="leg before wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432265" start="3033" end="3038" title="stump (cricket)" label="stump"/>
<link wikidata="Q692525" start="3425" end="3438" title="wicket-keeper" label="wicket-keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14405936" start="3442" end="3447" title="slip (cricket)" label="slips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178987" start="3461" end="3472" title="left arm" label="left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q597080" start="3473" end="3479" title="bowler (cricket)" label="bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520158" start="3557" end="3579" title="left-arm orthodox spin" label="left-arm orthodox spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139973" start="4314" end="4326" title="cricket ball" label="cricket ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q379709" start="4619" end="4639" title="Muttiah Muralitharan" label="Muttiah Muralitharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="4643" end="4652" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520942" start="4712" end="4729" title="E. A. S. Prasanna" label="E. A. S. Prasanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157182" start="4734" end="4758" title="Srinivas Venkataraghavan" label="Srinivas Venkataraghavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250050" start="4781" end="4800" title="Indian spin quartet" label="Indian spin quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9475" start="4802" end="4817" title="Harbhajan Singh" label="Harbhajan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4821" end="4826" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349931" start="4828" end="4843" title="Saqlain Mushtaq" label="Saqlain Mushtaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535377" start="4848" end="4859" title="Saeed Ajmal" label="Saeed Ajmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349931" start="4873" end="4888" title="Saqlain Mushtaq" label="Saqlain Mushtaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630843" start="4934" end="4940" title="doosra" label="doosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174333" start="5070" end="5076" title="googly" label="googly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526029" start="5122" end="5131" title="Jim Laker" label="Jim Laker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047220" start="5136" end="5148" title="Graeme Swann" label="Graeme Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969217" start="5162" end="5173" title="Nathan Lyon" label="Nathan Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803918" start="5190" end="5197" title="Tim May" label="Tim May"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5275" end="5315" title=" Australian Cricketers&amp;#x27; Association" label=" Australian Cricketers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440828" start="5330" end="5387" title="Federation of International Cricketers&amp;#x27; Associations" label="Federation of International Cricketers&amp;#x27; Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480608" start="5390" end="5404" title="Ajantha Mendis" label="Ajantha Mendis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763849" start="5435" end="5446" title="Lance Gibbs" label="Lance Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007571" start="5483" end="5502" title="Ravichandran Ashwin" label="Ravichandran Ashwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792467" start="5688" end="5696" title="arm ball" label="arm ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825168" start="5804" end="5814" title="topspinner" label="topspinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178987" start="5831" end="5850" title="Cricket terminology" label="Cricket terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792467" start="5852" end="5860" title="Arm ball" label="Arm ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630843" start="5862" end="5868" title="Doosra" label="Doosra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480954" start="5870" end="5879" title="Leg break" label="Leg break"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22504" wikidata="Q93359" url="?curid=22504" title="O Canada">
<text>&quot;O Canada&quot; () is the national anthem of Canada. The song was originally commissioned by Lieutenant Governor of Quebec Théodore Robitaille for the 1880 Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day ceremony; Calixa Lavallée composed the music, after which French-language words were written by the poet and judge Sir Adolphe-Basile Routhier. 

The original French lyrics were translated to English in 1906. Multiple English versions ensued, with Robert Stanley Weir&#x27;s 1908 version (which was not a translation of the French lyrics) gaining the most popularity; the Weir lyrics eventually served as the basis for the official lyrics enacted by Parliament. Weir&#x27;s English-language lyrics have been revised three times, most recently when &quot;An Act to amend the National Anthem Act (gender)&quot; was enacted in 2018. The French lyrics remain unaltered. 

&quot;O Canada&quot; had served as a &quot;de facto&quot; national anthem since 1939, officially becoming the country&#x27;s national anthem in 1980 when Canada&#x27;s &quot;National Anthem Act&quot; received royal assent and became effective on July 1 as part of that year&#x27;s Dominion Day (today&#x27;s Canada Day) celebrations.

==Melody==
&quot;O Canada&quot; is a 28-bar song originally written in the key of F major for four voices and piano, as a march in 4/4 time to be played &quot;&quot; (&quot;majestic and resolved&quot;). The original manuscript has been lost.

&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\clef treble \key f \major \tempo 4=100 \set Staff.midiInstrument = &quot;clarinet&quot; {
 \set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t
 \override Score.BarNumber #&#x27;transparent = ##t
 \time 4/4
 \transpose c c&#x27;
 \relative
 { a2 c4. c8 | f,2. g4 | a bes c d | g,2. r4 | a2 b4. b8 | c2. d4 | e e d d | c2. \bar&quot; \break
 g8. a16 | bes4. a8 g4 a8. bes16 | c4. bes8 a4 bes8. c16 | d4 c bes a | g2. g8. a16 | bes4. a8 g4 a8. bes16 | c4. bes8 a4 \bar&quot; \break
 a | g c c8 b a b | c2. r4 | a2 c4. c8 | f,2. r4 | bes2 d4. d8 | g,2. r4 | \break
 c2 cis4. cis8 | d4 bes a g | f2 g | a2. r4 | c2 f4. f8 | d4 bes a g | c2 e, | f1 \bar &quot;|.&quot;}
 }
&lt;/score&gt;

Musicologist Ross Duffin has argued that Lavallée constructed the melody for &quot;O Canada&quot; by adapting material by Mozart (&quot;March of the Priests&quot;, measures 1–8), Wagner (&quot;Wach auf, es nahet gen den Tag&quot;, measures 9–16), Liszt (&quot;Festklänge&quot;, measures 17–20), and Matthias Keller (&quot;The American Hymn&quot;, measures 21–28).

==Lyrics==
The National Anthem Act established set lyrics for &quot;O Canada&quot; in Canada&#x27;s two official languages, English and French. However, the two sets of lyrics are not translations of each other.

The lyrics are as follows:

&lt;poem style=&quot;float:left; margin-left:1em;&quot;&gt;
English lyrics
O Canada!
Our home and native land!
True patriot love in all of us command.
With glowing hearts we see thee rise,
The True North strong and free!
From far and wide, 
O Canada, we stand on guard for thee.
God keep our land glorious and free!
𝄆 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee. 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem lang=&quot;fr&quot; style=&quot;margin-left:1em; float:left;&quot;&gt;French lyrics
&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem style=&quot;float:left; margin-left:1em;&quot;&gt;English translation by the parliamentaryTranslation Bureau
O Canada!
Land of our ancestors
Glorious deeds circle your brow
For your arm knows how to wield the sword
Your arm knows how to carry the cross;
Your history is an epic
Of brilliant deeds
And your valour steeped in faith
𝄆 Will protect our homes and our rights. 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:1em; float:left;&quot;&gt;IPA transcription
[o ka.na.da]
[tɛ.ʁə də no.z‿a.jø]
[tɔ̃ fʁɔ̃.t‿ɛ sɛ̃ də flœ.ʁɔ̃ glɔ.ʁi.ø]
[kaʁ tɔ̃ bʁa sɛ pɔʁ.te l‿e.pe.ə]
[il sɛ pɔʁ.te la kʁwa]
[tɔ̃.n‿is.twa.ʁ‿ɛ.t‿y.n‿e.pɔ.pe.ə]
[de ply bʁi.jɑ̃.z‿ɛks.plwa]
[e ta va.lœʁ də fwa tʁɑ̃.pe.ə]
𝄆 [pʁɔ.te.ʒə.ʁa no fwa.je.z‿e no dʁwa] 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:1em; float:left;&quot;&gt;Bilingual version 1
O Canada!
Our home and native land!
True patriot love in all of us command.

God keep our land glorious and free!
𝄆 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee. 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:1em; float:left;&quot;&gt;Bilingual version 2

God keep our land glorious and free!
𝄆 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee. 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;
The line &quot;The True North strong and free&quot; is based on Lord Tennyson&#x27;s description of Canada as &quot;that true North, whereof we lately heard / A strain to shame us&quot;. In the context of Tennyson&#x27;s poem &quot;To the Queen&quot;, the word &quot;true&quot; means &quot;loyal&quot; or &quot;faithful&quot;.

The lyrics and melody of &quot;O Canada&quot; are both in the public domain, a status unaffected by the trademarking of the phrases &quot;with glowing hearts&quot; and &quot;&quot; for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver. Two provinces have adopted Latin translations of phrases from the English lyrics as their mottos: Manitoba— (Glorious and Free)—and Alberta— (Strong and Free). Similarly, the Canadian Army&#x27;s motto is (we stand on guard for thee).

===Translations===
The lyrics have been translated into several indigenous languages of Canada, including Inuktitut, Ojibwe, Cree and Mi&#x27;kmaq. There is also a trilingual version, in English, French and Inuktitut.

==History==
The French lyrics of &quot;O Canada&quot; were written by Sir Adolphe-Basile Routhier, to music composed by Calixa Lavallée, as a French Canadian patriotic song for the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society and first performed on June 24, 1880, at a Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day banquet in Quebec City. At that time, the &quot;Chant National&quot;, also by Routhier, was popular amongst Francophones as an anthem, while &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; and &quot;The Maple Leaf Forever&quot; had, since 1867, been competing as unofficial national anthems in English Canada. &quot;O Canada&quot; joined that fray when a group of school children sang it for the 1901 tour of Canada by the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall (later King George V and Queen Mary). This was the first known performance of the song outside Quebec.
Five years later, the Whaley and Royce company in Toronto published the music with the French text and a first translation into English by Thomas Bedford Richardson and, in 1908, &quot;Collier&#x27;s Weekly&quot; magazine held a competition to write new English lyrics for &quot;O Canada&quot;. The competition was won by Mercy E. Powell McCulloch, but her version never gained wide acceptance. In fact, many made English translations of Routhier&#x27;s words; however, the most popular version was created in 1908 by Robert Stanley Weir, a lawyer and Recorder of the City of Montreal. Weir&#x27;s lyrics from 1908 contained no religious references and used the phrase &quot;thou dost in us command&quot; before they were changed by Weir in 1913 to read &quot;in all thy sons command&quot;. In 1926, a fourth verse of a religious nature was added. A slightly modified version was officially published for the Diamond Jubilee of Confederation in 1927, and gradually it became the most widely accepted and performed version of this song.

The tune was thought to have become the &quot;de facto&quot; national anthem after King George VI remained at attention during its playing at the dedication of the National War Memorial in Ottawa, Ontario, on May 21, 1939; though George was actually following a precedent set by his brother, Edward, the previous king of Canada, when he dedicated the Canadian National Vimy Memorial in France in 1936. By-laws and practices governing the use of song during public events in municipalities varied; in Toronto, &quot;God Save the King&quot; or &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; was employed, while in Montreal it was &quot;O Canada&quot;.

Musicologist Ross Duffin has made an extended argument that Lavallée constructed the melody for &quot;O Canada&quot; by adapting material by Mozart (&quot;March of the Priests&quot;, measures 1–8), Liszt (&quot;Festklänge&quot;, measures 17–20), Wagner (&quot;Wach auf, es nahet gen den Tag&quot;, measures 9–16), and Matthias Keller (&quot;The American Hymn&quot;, measures 21–28).

===Adoption===
Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson in 1964 said one song would have to be chosen as the country&#x27;s national anthem and the government resolved to form a joint committee to review the status of the two musical works. The next year, Pearson put to the House of Commons a motion that &quot;the government be authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to provide that &#x27;O Canada&#x27; shall be the National Anthem of Canada while &#x27;God Save the Queen&#x27; shall be the Royal Anthem of Canada&quot;, of which parliament approved. In 1967, the Prime Minister advised Governor General Georges Vanier to appoint the Special Joint Committee of the Senate and House of Commons on the National and Royal Anthems; the group first met in February and, within two months, on April 12, 1967, presented its conclusion that &quot;O Canada&quot; should be designated as the national anthem and &quot;God Save the Queen&quot; as the royal anthem of Canada, one verse from each, in both official languages, to be adopted by parliament. The group was then charged with establishing official lyrics for each song. For &quot;O Canada&quot;, the Robert Stanley Weir version of 1908 was recommended for the English words, with a few minor changes: two of the &quot;stand on guard&quot; phrases were replaced with &quot;from far and wide&quot; and &quot;God keep our land&quot;.

In 1970, the Queen in Right of Canada purchased the right to the lyrics and music of &quot;O Canada&quot; from Gordon V. Thompson Music for $1. The song finally became the official national anthem in 1980 with the passage of the &quot;National Anthem Act.&quot; The Act replaced two of the repetitions of the phrase &quot;We stand on guard&quot; in the English lyrics, as had been proposed by the Senate Special Joint Committee. This change was controversial with traditionalists and, for several years afterwards, it was not uncommon to hear people still singing the old lyrics at public events. In contrast, the French lyrics are unchanged from the original version.

===Inclusive language debates===
In June 1990, Toronto City Council voted 12 to 7 in favour of recommending to the Canadian government that the phrase &quot;our home and native land&quot; be changed to &quot;our home and cherished land&quot; and that &quot;in all thy sons command&quot; be partly reverted to &quot;in all of us command&quot;. Councillor Howard Moscoe said that the words &quot;native land&quot; were not appropriate for the many Canadians who were not native-born and that the word &quot;sons&quot; implied &quot;that women can&#x27;t feel true patriotism or love for Canada&quot;. Senator Vivienne Poy similarly criticized the English lyrics of the anthem as being sexist and she introduced a bill in 2002 proposing to change the phrase &quot;in all thy sons command&quot; to &quot;in all of us command&quot;. In the late 2000s, the anthem&#x27;s religious references (to God in English and to the Christian cross in French) were criticized by secularists.

In the speech from the throne delivered by Governor General Michaëlle Jean on March 3, 2010, a plan to have parliament review the &quot;original gender-neutral wording of the national anthem&quot; was announced. However, three-quarters of Canadians polled after the speech objected to the proposal and, two days later, the prime minister&#x27;s office announced that the cabinet had decided not to change the original lyrics.

In another attempt to make the anthem gender-neutral, Liberal MP Mauril Bélanger introduced a private member&#x27;s bill in September 2014. His Bill C-624, &quot;An Act to amend the National Anthem Act (gender)&quot;, was defeated at second reading in April 2015. Following the 2015 federal election, Bélanger reintroduced the bill in the new parliament as Bill C-210 in January 2016. In June 2016, the bill passed its third reading with a vote of 225 to 74 in the House of Commons. The bill passed its third reading in the Senate with a voice vote on January 31, 2018, and received royal assent on February 7, 2018.

===Second, third and fourth stanzas: historical refrain===

Below are the second, third and fourth stanzas. These are rarely sung.

&lt;poem&gt;II
O Canada! Where pines and maples grow.
Great prairies spread and lordly rivers flow.
How dear to us thy broad domain,
From East to Western sea.
Thou land of hope for all who toil!
Thou True North, strong and free!
God keep our land glorious and free!
𝄆 O Canada, we stand on guard for thee. 𝄇

III
O Canada! Beneath thy shining skies
May stalwart sons, and gentle maidens rise,
To keep thee steadfast through the years
From East to Western sea.
Our own beloved native land!
Our True North, strong and free!

IV
Ruler supreme, who hearest humble prayer,
Hold our Dominion within thy loving care;
Help us to find, O God, in thee
A lasting, rich reward,
As waiting for the better Day,
We ever stand on guard.

&lt;/poem&gt;

===Original French version===
The first verse is the same. The other verses follow.

&lt;poem lang=&quot;fr&quot; style=&quot;float:left;&quot;&gt;II
Sous l&#x27;œil de Dieu, près du fleuve géant,
Le Canadien grandit en espérant.
Il est né d&#x27;une race fière,
Béni fut son berceau.
Le ciel a marqué sa carrière
Dans ce monde nouveau.
Toujours guidé par sa lumière,
𝄆 Il gardera l&#x27;honneur de son drapeau. 𝄇

III
De son patron, précurseur du vrai Dieu,
Il porte au front l&#x27;auréole de feu.
Ennemi de la tyrannie
Mais plein de loyauté,
Il veut garder dans l&#x27;harmonie,
Sa fière liberté;
Et par l&#x27;effort de son génie,
𝄆 Sur notre sol asseoir la vérité. 𝄇

IV
Amour sacré du trône et de l&#x27;autel,
Remplis nos cœurs de ton souffle immortel!
Parmi les races étrangères,
Notre guide est la loi :
Sachons être un peuple de frères,
Sous le joug de la foi.
Et répétons, comme nos pères,
𝄆 Le cri vainqueur : « Pour le Christ et le roi! » 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left:2em; float:left;&quot;&gt;II
Under the eye of God, near the giant river,
The Canadian grows hoping.
He was born of a proud race,
Blessed was his birthplace.
Heaven has noted his career
In this new world.
Always guided by its light,
𝄆 He will keep the honour of his flag. 𝄇

III
From his patron, the precursor of the true God,
He wears the halo of fire on his brow.
Enemy of tyranny
But full of loyalty,
He wants to keep in harmony,
His proud freedom;
And by the effort of his genius,
𝄆 Set on our ground the truth. 𝄇

IV
Sacred love of the throne and the altar,
Fill our hearts with your immortal breath!
Among the foreign races,
Our guide is the law:
Let us know how to be a people of brothers,
Under the yoke of faith.
And repeat, like our fathers,
𝄆 The battle cry: &quot;For Christ and King!&quot; 𝄇&lt;/poem&gt;

==Performances==

&quot;O Canada&quot; is routinely played before sporting events involving Canadian teams. Singers at such public events often mix the English and French lyrics to represent Canada&#x27;s linguistic duality. Other linguistic variations have also been performed: During the opening ceremonies of the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary, &quot;O Canada&quot; was sung in the southern Tutchone language by Yukon native Daniel Tlen. At a National Hockey League (NHL) game in Calgary, in February 2007, Cree singer Akina Shirt became the first person to perform &quot;O Canada&quot; in the Cree language at such an event.

Major League Baseball, Major League Soccer, the National Basketball Association, and the NHL all require venues to perform both the Canadian and American national anthems at games that involve teams from both countries (including all-star games), with the away team&#x27;s anthem being performed first, followed by the host country. The NHL&#x27;s Buffalo Sabres play both anthems before every home game, regardless of the opponent, in recognition of the team&#x27;s significant Canadian fanbase. Major League Baseball teams have played the song at games involving the Toronto Blue Jays and the former Montreal Expos, and National Basketball Association teams do so for games involving the Toronto Raptors, and previously, the Vancouver Grizzlies. Major League Soccer has the anthem performed at matches involving Toronto FC, CF Montréal, and Vancouver Whitecaps FC. In addition, in recognition of their Canadian fanbase, the Buffalo Bills of the National Football League plays &quot;O Canada&quot; before &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; at their home games, despite there being no Canadian-based NFL team. &quot;O Canada&quot; has also been performed during NHL Global Series games involving Canadian teams as well as NBA Global Games involving the Raptors and MLB World Tour games involving the Blue Jays.

==Laws and etiquette==

The &quot;National Anthem Act&quot; specifies the lyrics and melody of &quot;O Canada&quot;, placing both of them in the public domain, allowing the anthem to be freely reproduced or used as a base for derived works, including musical arrangements. There are no regulations governing the performance of &quot;O Canada&quot;, leaving citizens to exercise their best judgment. When it is performed at an event, traditional etiquette is to either start or end the ceremonies with the anthem, including situations when other anthems are played and for the audience to stand during the performance. Civilian men usually remove their hats, while women and children are not required to do so. Military men and women in uniform traditionally keep their hats on and offer the military salute during the performance of the anthem, with the salute offered in the direction of the Canadian Flag if one is present, and if not present it is offered standing at attention.

Presently, provincial regulations and policies in Manitoba, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario and Prince Edward Island mandate the national anthem to be played daily in public elementary and secondary schools. &quot;O Canada&quot; is to be played in British Columbia schools at least three times a year at assemblies. Other provinces and territories do not have provincially-mandated regulations and policies for playing the national anthem in schools.

==Adaptations==
In the 1950s, the melody of &quot;O Canada&quot; was adapted for the school anthem of the Ateneo de Manila University. Titled &quot;A Song for Mary&quot; or simply &quot;The Ateneo de Manila Graduation Hymn&quot;, the lyrics were written by James B. Reuter, SJ, and the original tune adapted by Col. José Manela Campaña, bandmaster of the defunct Philippine Constabulary Band.

==See also==

* Canadian patriotic music
* Honours music
* List of national anthems
* Music of Canada

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Anthems of Canada, Department of Canadian Heritage
* O Canada without lyrics
* Canadiana — The Bizarre History of &quot;O Canada&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93359" start="6" end="14" title="O Canada" label="O Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="31" end="46" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="50" end="56" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="98" end="127" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q505998" start="128" end="147" title="Théodore Robitaille" label="Théodore Robitaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="161" end="184" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027051" start="195" end="210" title="Calixa Lavallée" label="Calixa Lavallée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824752" start="304" end="327" title="Adolphe-Basile Routhier" label="Adolphe-Basile Routhier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436349" start="433" end="452" title="Robert Stanley Weir" label="Robert Stanley Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="896" end="904" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="1062" end="1074" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q639756" start="1134" end="1146" title="Canada Day" label="Dominion Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="1228" end="1231" title="bar (music)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211025" start="1310" end="1315" title="march (music)" label="march"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="1319" end="1327" title="4/4 time" label="4/4 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q119053415" start="2141" end="2152" title="Ross W. Duffin" label="Ross Duffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064" start="2264" end="2284" title="The Magic Flute" label="March of the Priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q115862168" start="3311" end="3329" title="Translation Bureau" label="Translation Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="3666" end="3669" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="4445" end="4465" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Lord Tennyson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="4771" end="4784" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="4898" end="4918" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633922" start="5031" end="5039" title="Coat of arms of Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060668" start="5065" end="5072" title="Coat of arms of Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="5108" end="5121" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334407" start="5233" end="5263" title="indigenous languages of Canada" label="indigenous languages of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="5275" end="5284" title="Inuktitut language" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="5286" end="5292" title="Ojibwe language" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="5294" end="5298" title="Cree language" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13321" start="5303" end="5315" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq language" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824752" start="5462" end="5485" title="Adolphe-Basile Routhier" label="Adolphe-Basile Routhier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027051" start="5508" end="5523" title="Calixa Lavallée" label="Calixa Lavallée"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="5530" end="5545" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487605" start="5569" end="5596" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="5640" end="5663" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="5675" end="5686" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="5811" end="5829" title="God Save the Queen" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q830364" start="5846" end="5868" title="The Maple Leaf Forever" label="The Maple Leaf Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q382834" start="5941" end="5955" title="English Canada" label="English Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494846" start="6066" end="6098" title="Duke of Cornwall" label="the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="6106" end="6119" title="George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="6124" end="6134" title="Mary of Teck" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="6252" end="6259" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109549" start="6387" end="6408" title="Collier&amp;#x27;s" label="Collier&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="6778" end="6786" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="7285" end="7293" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="7327" end="7336" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091081" start="7403" end="7424" title="National War Memorial (Canada)" label="National War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="7428" end="7434" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="7531" end="7537" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="7552" end="7566" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="king of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561040" start="7590" end="7621" title="Canadian National Vimy Memorial" label="Canadian National Vimy Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7887" end="7898" title="Ross Duffin" label="Ross Duffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="8288" end="8305" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="8852" end="8868" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q974089" start="8869" end="8883" title="Georges Vanier" label="Georges Vanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="8930" end="8936" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="8941" end="8957" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="9173" end="9191" title="God Save the Queen" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137588" start="9205" end="9217" title="Honors music" label="royal anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q233113" start="9253" end="9276" title="Official bilingualism in Canada" label="both official languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="9658" end="9682" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Queen in Right of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444341" start="10362" end="10382" title="Toronto City Council" label="Toronto City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="10430" end="10449" title="Government of Canada" label="Canadian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920458" start="10669" end="10682" title="Howard Moscoe" label="Howard Moscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="10914" end="10921" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937899" start="10922" end="10934" title="Vivienne Poy" label="Vivienne Poy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404524" start="10998" end="11004" title="Gender-neutral language" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="11231" end="11246" title="Christian cross" label="Christian cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="11277" end="11287" title="secularist" label="secularist"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="11298" end="11320" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="11334" end="11350" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q128933" start="11351" end="11365" title="Michaëlle Jean" label="Michaëlle Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530992" start="11436" end="11450" title="gender-neutral" label="gender-neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24569" start="11614" end="11642" title="Office of the Prime Minister (Canada)" label="prime minister&amp;#x27;s office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="11662" end="11669" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301645" start="11783" end="11798" title="Mauril Bélanger" label="Mauril Bélanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="11812" end="11838" title="private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private member&amp;#x27;s bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="11996" end="12017" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="2015 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="12183" end="12199" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="12242" end="12248" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147134" start="12256" end="12266" title="voice vote" label="voice vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="12301" end="12313" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q233113" start="15214" end="15246" title="Official bilingualism in Canada" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s linguistic duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9658" start="15339" end="15359" title="1988 Winter Olympics" label="1988 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28568" start="15418" end="15435" title="Tutchone language" label="Tutchone language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="15470" end="15492" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="15534" end="15538" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829051" start="15546" end="15557" title="Akina Shirt" label="Akina Shirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="15621" end="15634" title="Cree language" label="Cree language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="15654" end="15675" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="15677" end="15696" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="15702" end="15733" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="15799" end="15823" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="American national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647651" start="15884" end="15897" title="all-star game" label="all-star game"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="16002" end="16016" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="16151" end="16172" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="16223" end="16240" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="16256" end="16270" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="16276" end="16307" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q132880" start="16344" end="16359" title="Toronto Raptors" label="Toronto Raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307390" start="16381" end="16400" title="Vancouver Grizzlies" label="Vancouver Grizzlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="16402" end="16421" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327238" start="16468" end="16478" title="Toronto FC" label="Toronto FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q167615" start="16480" end="16491" title="CF Montréal" label="CF Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q196107" start="16497" end="16519" title="Vancouver Whitecaps FC" label="Vancouver Whitecaps FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="16580" end="16593" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="16601" end="16625" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="17113" end="17126" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q80110" start="17861" end="17874" title="Flag of Canada" label="Canadian Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q533235" start="18513" end="18540" title="Ateneo de Manila University" label="Ateneo de Manila University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18555" end="18570" title="Culture and traditions of the Ateneo de Manila#A Song for Mary" label="A Song for Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647833" start="18664" end="18679" title="James B. Reuter" label="James B. Reuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="18681" end="18683" title="Society of Jesus" label="SJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907736" start="18770" end="18798" title="Philippine Constabulary Band" label="Philippine Constabulary Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771607" start="18817" end="18841" title="Canadian patriotic music" label="Canadian patriotic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137588" start="18844" end="18857" title="Honours music" label="Honours music"/>
<link wikidata="Q233729" start="18860" end="18884" title="List of national anthems" label="List of national anthems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942037" start="18887" end="18902" title="Music of Canada" label="Music of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22506" wikidata="Q616591" url="?curid=22506" title="Oberlin College">
<text>Oberlin College is a private liberal arts college and conservatory of music in Oberlin, Ohio, United States. Founded in 1833, it is the oldest coeducational liberal arts college in the United States and the second-oldest continuously operating coeducational institute of higher learning in the world. The Oberlin Conservatory of Music is the oldest continuously operating conservatory in the United States.

In 1835, Oberlin became one of the first colleges in the United States to admit African Americans, and in 1837, the first to admit women (other than Franklin College&#x27;s brief experiment in the 1780s). It has been known since its founding for progressive student activism.

The College of Arts &amp; Sciences offers more than 60 majors, minors, and concentrations. Oberlin is a member of the Great Lakes Colleges Association and the Five Colleges of Ohio consortium.

==History==
Oberlin College was preceded by Oberlin Institute, founded in 1833. The college&#x27;s founders wrote voluminously and were featured prominently in the press, especially the abolitionist newspaper &quot;The Liberator&quot;, in which the name Oberlin occurred 352 times by 1865. Original documents and correspondence survive and are readily available. There is a &quot;wealth of primary documents and scholarly works&quot;. Robert Samuel Fletcher (class of 1920) published a history in 1943, that is a landmark and the point of departure of all subsequent studies of Oberlin&#x27;s history. His disciple Geoffrey Blodgett (1953) continued Fletcher&#x27;s work.

===Founding===
&quot;&#x27;Oberlin&#x27; was an idea before it was a place.&quot; It began in revelation and dreams: Yankees&#x27; motivation to emigrate west, attempting perfection in God&#x27;s eyes, &quot;educating a missionary army of Christian soldiers to save the world and inaugurate God&#x27;s government on earth, and the radical notion that slavery was America&#x27;s most horrendous sin that should be instantly repented of and immediately brought to an end.&quot; Its immediate background was the wave of Christian revivals in western New York State, in which Charles Finney was very much involved. &quot;Oberlin was the offspring of the revivals of 1830, &#x27;31, and &#x27;32.&quot; Oberlin founder John Jay Shipherd was an admirer of Finney, and visited him in Rochester, New York, when en route to Ohio for the first time. Finney invited Shipherd to stay with him as an assistant, but Shipherd &quot;felt that he had his own important part to play in bringing on the millennium, God&#x27;s triumphant reign on Earth. Finney&#x27;s desires were one thing, but Shipherd believed that the Lord&#x27;s work for him lay farther west.&quot; Shipherd attempted to convince Finney to accompany him west, which he did in 1835.

Oberlin was to be a pious, simple-living community in a sparsely populated area, of which the school, training ministers and missionaries, would be the centerpiece. The Oberlin Collegiate Institute was founded in 1833 by Shipherd and another Presbyterian minister, Philo Stewart, &quot;formerly a missionary among the Cherokees in Mississippi, and at that time residing in Mr. Shipherd&#x27;s family,&quot; who was studying Divinity with Shipherd. The institute was built on of land donated by Titus Street, founder of Streetsboro, Ohio, and Samuel Hughes, who lived in Connecticut. Shipherd and Stewert named their project after Alsatian minister Jean-Frédéric Oberlin, about whom a book had just been published, which Stewart was reading to Shipherd. Oberlin had brought social Christianity to an isolated region of France, just as they hoped to bring to the remote Western Reserve region of northeastern Ohio.

Their vision was:

Oberlin was very much a part of the Utopian perfectionist enthusiasm that swept the country in the 1830s. &quot;Shipherd came close to being a Christian communist, and as he traveled about the country signing up recruits for the Oberlin colony, he carried with him a copy of the Oberlin covenant, which each colonist was required to sign.&quot;

The terms of the Oberlin covenant, as summarized by Shipherd, were:

===Predecessor: The Oneida Institute===
The Lane Rebels are commonly mentioned in the early history of Oberlin. These original Oberlin students, who had little to do with Lane other than walking out on it, were carrying on a tradition that began at the Oneida Institute of Science and Industry, in Oneida County, New York, near Utica. Oneida was &quot;a hotbed of anti-slavery activity&quot;, &quot;abolitionist to the core, more so than any other American college.&quot; A fundraising trip to England sought funds for both colleges. Oberlin&#x27;s anti-slavery activities supplanted those of Oneida, which fell on hard times and closed in 1843. Funding previously provided by the philanthropist brothers Lewis and Arthur Tappan was transferred to Oberlin. Oberlin became the new &quot;academic powder keg for abolitionism.&quot;

Oneida was founded by George Washington Gale, of whom Oberlin President Charles Grandison Finney was a disciple. The institute&#x27;s second and final President, Beriah Green, moved to Oneida after he proved too abolitionist for Western Reserve College, Oberlin&#x27;s early competitor in the Ohio Western Reserve.

===The Lane Rebels enroll at Oberlin===
The charismatic Theodore Dwight Weld, after three years (1827–1830) studying with Gale at Oneida, was hired by the new Society for Promoting Manual Labor in Literary Institutions, a project of the Tappans. (By &quot;literary institutions&quot; what is meant is non-religious schools, as in &quot;In every literary institution there are a number of hours daily, in which nothing is required of the student.&quot;) He was charged with finding a site for &quot;a great national manual labor institution where training for the Western ministry could be provided for poor but earnest young men who had dedicated their lives to the home missionary cause in the vast valley of the Mississippi.&quot; By coincidence, the administrators of new and barely-functioning Lane Seminary, a manual labor school located just outside Cincinnati, were looking for students. Weld visited Cincinnati in 1832, determined that the school would do, got the approval of the Tappans, and by providing recommendations to them took over as &quot;de facto&quot; head of the Seminary, to the point of choosing the president (Lyman Beecher, after Finney turned it down) and telling the trustees whom to hire. He organized and led a group exodus of Oneida students, and others from upstate New York, to come to Lane. &quot;Lane was Oneida moved west.&quot;

This coincided with the emergence of &quot;immediatism&quot;: the call for immediate and uncompensated freeing of all slaves, which at the time was a radical idea, and the rejection of &quot;colonization&quot;, sending freed slaves to Africa by the American Colonization Society. &quot;The anti-slavery and the colonization questions had become exciting ones throughout the whole country, and the students deemed it to be their duty thoroughly to examine them, in view of their bearing upon their future responsibilities as ministers of the gospel.&quot; Shortly after their arrival at Lane, the Oneida contingent held a lengthy, well-publicized series of debates, over 18 days during February 1834, on the topic of abolition versus colonization, concluding with the endorsement of the former and rejection of the latter. (Although announced as debate, no one spoke in favor of colonization on any of the evenings.) The trustees and administrators of Lane, fearful of violence like the Cincinnati riots of 1829, prohibited off-topic discussions, even at meals. The Lane Rebels, including almost all of Lane&#x27;s theological students, among them the entire Oneida contingent, resigned &quot;en masse&quot; in December, and published a pamphlet explaining their decision. A trustee, Asa Mahan, resigned also, and the trustees fired John Morgan, a faculty member who supported the students.

A chance encounter with Shipherd, who was travelling around Ohio recruiting students for his new Collegiate Institute, led to the proposal that they come to Oberlin, along with Mahan and the fired Lane professor. They did so, but only after Oberlin agreed to their conditions:
* Oberlin, like Oneida, would admit African Americans on an equal basis. At the time, this was a radical and unpopular measure, even dangerous. Previous attempts at &quot;racially&quot; integrated schools, the Noyes Academy and the Canterbury Female Boarding School, had been met with violence that destroyed both schools. Refugees from both had enrolled at Oneida. No one was calling for racially integrated schools, except at Oneida.
:This measure caused the trustees &quot;a great struggle to overcome their prejudices&quot;. Moving their meeting to Elyria on January 1, 1835, at the Temperance House instead of Oberlin, so as to avoid a hostile and possibly disruptive audience, the trustees agreed to hire Mahan and Morgan, but took no action on the black question. They tabled it, until it was made clear that if they did not agree, they would lose the Tappans&#x27; money, the cadre of students, Mahan, Finney, and Shipherd himself, who threatened to quit and set forth at length the reasons Oberlin should educate blacks. The Trustees, meeting on February 9 in Shipherd&#x27;s house, reexamined the question, and it passed after Trustee Chairman John Keep broke a 3–3 tie vote.
* There would be no restrictions on discussion of slavery or any other topic.
* Asa Mahan, the Lane trustee who resigned with the students, would become president. This initiative came from the Oneida students, and Weld in particular.
* Professor John Morgan, fired by Lane for supporting the students, would be hired also.
* Under what Fletcher labeled the &quot;Finney compact&quot;, in sharp contrast with and in reaction to recent events at Lane, the internal affairs of the college were to be under faculty control, &quot;much to the irritation of our latter-day trustees, and occasionally our presidents and deans&quot;. This commitment to academic freedom was a key innovation in American higher education.

&quot;In the summer of 1835, they all arrived in Oberlin—President Mahan, Father Finney, Professor Morgan, the Lane rebels, the first black students, and the Tappans&#x27; money.&quot; The Oberlin Anti-Slavery Society, calling for &quot;immediate emancipation&quot;, was founded in June 1835. The names of Shipherd, Mahan, and Finney are first on its founding document, followed by names of the Oneida contingent.

Oberlin replaced Oneida as &quot;the hot-bed of Abolitionism&quot;, &quot;the most progressive college in the United States&quot;. Oberlin sent forth cadres of minister-abolitionists every year:

===19th century – post founding===
Asa Mahan (1799–1889) accepted the position of first president of the Oberlin Collegiate Institute in 1835, simultaneously serving as the chair of intellectual and moral philosophy and professor of theology. Mahan&#x27;s strong advocacy of immediatism—the immediate and complete freeing of all slaves—greatly influenced the philosophy of the college. The same year, two years after its founding, the school began admitting African Americans. The college experienced financial distress, and Rev. John Keep and William Dawes were sent to England to raise funds in 1839–40. A nondenominational seminary, Oberlin&#x27;s Graduate School of Theology (first called the undergraduate Theological Department), was established alongside the college in 1833. In 1965, the board of trustees voted to discontinue graduate instruction in theology at Oberlin, and in September 1966, six faculty members and 22 students merged with the Divinity School of Vanderbilt University. Oberlin&#x27;s role as an educator of African-American students prior to the Civil War and thereafter was significant. In 1844, Oberlin Collegiate Institute graduated its first black student, George Boyer Vashon, who later became one of the founding professors of Howard University and the first black lawyer admitted to the Bar in New York State.

The college&#x27;s treatment of African Americans was inconsistent. Although intensely anti-slavery, and admitting black students from 1835, the school began segregating its black students by the 1880s with the fading of evangelical idealism. Nonetheless, Oberlin graduates accounted for a significant percentage of African-American college graduates by the end of the 19th century. One such black alumnus was William Howard Day, who would go on to found Cleveland&#x27;s first black newspaper, &quot;The Aliened American&quot;. The college was listed as a National Historic Landmark on December 21, 1965, for its significance in admitting African Americans and women.

Oberlin is the oldest coeducational college in the United States, having admitted four women in 1837 to its two-year &quot;women&#x27;s program&quot;. These four women, who were the first to enter as full students, were Mary Kellogg (Fairchild), Mary Caroline Rudd, Mary Hosford, and Elizabeth Prall. All but Kellogg graduated. Mary Jane Patterson graduated with honors in 1862, the first black woman to earn a B.A. degree. Soon, women were fully integrated into the college, and comprised from a third to half of the student body. The religious founders, especially evangelical theologian Charles Grandison Finney, saw women as morally superior to men. Oberlin ceased operating for seven months in 1839 and 1840 due to lack of funds, making it the second-oldest continuously operating coeducational liberal arts college in the United States.

Mahan, who was often in conflict with faculty, resigned his position as president in 1850. Replacing him was famed abolitionist and preacher Charles Grandison Finney, a professor at the college since its founding, who served until 1866. At the same time, the institute was renamed Oberlin College, and in 1851 received a charter with that name. Under Finney&#x27;s leadership, Oberlin&#x27;s faculty and students increased their abolitionist activity. They participated with the townspeople in efforts to assist fugitive slaves on the Underground Railroad, where Oberlin was a stop, as well as to resist the Fugitive Slave Act. One historian called Oberlin &quot;the town that started the Civil War&quot; due to its reputation as a hotbed of abolitionism. In 1858, both students and faculty were involved in the controversial Oberlin–Wellington Rescue of a fugitive slave, which received national press coverage. Two participants in this raid, Lewis Sheridan Leary and John Anthony Copeland, along with another Oberlin resident, Shields Green, also participated in John Brown&#x27;s Raid on Harpers Ferry. This heritage was commemorated on campus by the 1977 installation of sculptor Cameron Armstrong&#x27;s &quot;Underground Railroad Monument&quot;, a railroad track rising from the ground toward the sky, and monuments to the Oberlin-Wellington Rescue and the Harper&#x27;s Ferry Raid, which followed an 1841 incident in which a group of &quot;fanatical abolition anarchists&quot; from Oberlin, using saws and axes, freed two captured fugitive slaves from the Lorain County jail.

In 1866, James Fairchild became Oberlin&#x27;s third president, and first alumnus to lead it. A committed abolitionist, Fairchild, at that point chair of theology and moral philosophy, had played a role in the Oberlin-Wellington Rescue, hiding fugitive slave John Price in his home. During Fairchild&#x27;s tenure, the faculty and physical plant of the college expanded dramatically. In 1889, he resigned as president but remained as chair of systematic theology. In 1896, Fairchild returned as acting president until 1898.

Oberlin College was prominent in sending Christian missionaries abroad. In 1881, students at Oberlin formed the Oberlin Band to journey as a group to remote Shanxi province in China. A total of 30 members of the Oberlin Band worked in Shanxi as missionaries over the next two decades. Ten died of disease, and in 1900, fifteen of the Oberlin missionaries, including wives and children, were killed by Boxers or Chinese government soldiers during the Boxer Rebellion. The Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association, an independent foundation, was established in their memory. The Association, with offices on campus, sponsors Oberlin graduates to teach in China, India, and Japan. It also hosts scholars and artists from Asia to spend time on the Oberlin campus.

===20th century===
Henry Churchill King became Oberlin&#x27;s sixth president in 1902. At Oberlin from 1884 onward, he taught in mathematics, philosophy, and theology. Robert K. Carr served as Oberlin College president from 1960 to 1970, during the tumultuous period of student activism. Under his presidency, the school&#x27;s physical plant added 15 new buildings. Under his leadership, student involvement in college affairs increased, with students serving on nearly all college committees as voting members (including the board of trustees). Despite these accomplishments, Carr clashed repeatedly with the students over the Vietnam War, and he left office in 1969 with history professor Ellsworth C. Clayton becoming acting president. Carr was forced to resign in 1970.

Oberlin (and Princeton) alumnus Robert W. Fuller&#x27;s commitment to educational reform—which he had already demonstrated as a Trinity College dean—led his alma mater to make him its tenth president in November 1970. At 33 years old, Fuller became one of the youngest college presidents in U.S. history. During his Oberlin presidency—a turbulent time at Oberlin and in higher education generally—Fuller reshaped the student body by tripling the enrollment of minorities at the college. He recruited and hired the first four African-American athletic coaches at a predominantly white American college or university, including Tommie Smith, the gold medalist sprinter from the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City.

In 1970, Oberlin made the cover of &quot;Life&quot; as one of the first colleges in the country to have co-ed dormitories. Fuller was succeeded by the longtime Dean of the Conservatory, Emil Danenberg, who served as president from 1975 to 1982, and died in office. In 1983, following a nationwide search, Oberlin hired S. Frederick Starr, an expert on Russian and Eurasian affairs and skilled musician, as its 12th president. Starr&#x27;s academic and musical accomplishments boded well for his stewardship of both the college and the Oberlin College Conservatory of Music. Despite increasing minority hiring, Starr&#x27;s tenure was marked by clashes with students over divestment from South Africa and the dismissal of a campus minister, as well as Starr&#x27;s reframing Oberlin as the &quot;Harvard of the Midwest&quot;. A particularly vitriolic clash with students on the front lawn of his home in April 1990 led Starr to take a leave of absence from July 1991 to February 1992. He resigned in March 1993, effective in June of that year.

===21st century===
Nancy Dye became the 13th president of Oberlin College in July 1994, succeeding the embattled Starr. Oberlin&#x27;s first female president, she oversaw the construction of new buildings, increased admissions selectivity, and helped increase the endowment with the largest capital campaign to that point. Dye was known for her accessibility and inclusiveness. Especially in her early years, she was a regular attendee at football games, concerts, and dorm parties. Dye served as president for nearly 13 years, resigning on June 30, 2007. Marvin Krislov served as president of the college from 2007 to 2017, moving on to assume the presidency of Pace University. On May 30, 2017, Carmen Twillie Ambar was announced as the 15th president of Oberlin College, becoming the first African-American person and second woman to hold the position.

Oberlin&#x27;s first and only hired trade union expert, Chris Howell, argued that the college engaged in &quot;illegal&quot; tactics to attempt to decertify its service workers&#x27; July 1999 vote to become members of United Automobile Workers union. Howell wrote that college workers sought the union&#x27;s representation in response to the administration&#x27;s effort to &quot;speed up work&quot; to meet a &quot;mounting budget crisis&quot;.

In February 2013, the college received significant press concerning its so-called &quot;No Trespass List&quot;, a secret list maintained by the college of individuals barred from campus without due process. Student activists and members of the surrounding town joined to form the One Town Campaign, which challenged this policy. On February 13, 2013, a forum at the Oberlin Public Library that attracted over 200 people, including members of the college administration, the Oberlin city council and national press, saw speakers compare the atmosphere of the college to &quot;a gated community&quot;.

In September 2014, on Rosh Hashanah, Oberlin Students for Free Palestine placed 2,133 black flags in the main square of the campus as a &quot;call to action&quot; in honor of the 2,133 Palestinians who died in the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict. In January 2016, hundreds of Oberlin alumni signed a letter to the Oberlin administration stating that this protest was an example of anti-Semitism on the campus. Oberlin SFP responded with their own letter, detailing why protest of Israel does not constitute anti-semitism. They wrote, &quot;Feeling discomfort because one must confront the realities of Operation Protective Edge carried out in the name of the safety of the Jewish people does not amount to anti-Semitism.&quot;

In early 2016, an Oberlin professor, Joy Karega, suggested Israel was behind 9/11 and blamed it for the Charlie Hebdo attacks and for ISIS, prompting a rebuke from faculty and administration. After five-and-a-half months of discussion, the school suspended and then fired her. The following week, the home of a Jewish professor at Oberlin was vandalized and a note that read &quot;Gas Jews Die&quot; was left on his front door.

Oberlin came under federal investigation in late 2023 by the Department of Education&#x27;s Office for Civil Rights for alleged breach of Title VI, which protects students from discrimination because of their religion. The focus of the investigation was on past statements of Professor Mohammad Jafar Mahallati, which some viewed as antisemitic.

====&quot;Gibson&#x27;s Bakery v. Oberlin College&quot;====

In 2016, a black Oberlin student was caught shoplifting two bottles of wine from Gibson&#x27;s Bakery and Market, a downtown Oberlin business. A scuffle ensued between Oberlin students and Gibson&#x27;s staff, and the students involved pled guilty to misdemeanor charges. Oberlin faculty and students subsequently staged large demonstrations urging a boycott of Gibson&#x27;s on the grounds that the store was racist, and Gibson&#x27;s sued alleging libel and other charges. In June 2019, the college was found liable for libel and tortious interference in a lawsuit initiated by the store; the bakery was awarded damages of $44 million by the jury, but a legal cap on damages reduced the award to $31.5 million. In October 2019, the college appealed the case to the Ohio District Courts of Appeals in Akron, Ohio. On March 31, 2022, the Court of Appeals unanimously dismissed both appeals, Oberlin and Gibson, upholding the jury verdict and Judge Miraldi&#x27;s decisions. The Supreme Court of Ohio chose to not accept the appeal and cross-appeal on August 29, 2022. In December 2022, Oberlin College paid Gibson&#x27;s Bakery $36.59 million, the entire amount due. &quot;We hope that the end of the litigation will begin the healing of our entire community&quot;, said the college.

==Academics==
Oberlin was ranked tied for the 55th-best national liberal arts college in the 2025 edition of &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;″s &quot;Best Colleges&quot; ranking.

&quot;Forbes&quot; ranked Oberlin 197th out of the top 500 rated private and public colleges and universities in America for the 2024-25 report. Oberlin was also ranked 46th among liberal arts universities and 29th in the Midwest. 

Of Oberlin&#x27;s nearly 3,000 students, nearly 2,400 are enrolled in the College of Arts &amp; Sciences, a little over 400 in the Conservatory of Music, and the remaining 180 or so in both College and Conservatory under the five-year Double-Degree program.

The College of Arts &amp; Sciences offers over 50 majors, minors, and concentrations. Its most popular undergraduate majors, based on 2023 graduates, were:
::Music Performance (89)
::Psychology (50)
::Biology (41)
::Economics (39)
::Politics (39)
::Environmental Studies (38)
::History (26)
::Neuroscience (26)

The Conservatory of Music is located on the college campus. Conservatory admission is selective, with over 1400 applicants worldwide auditioning for 120 seats. There are 500 performances yearly, most free of charge, with concerts and recitals almost daily. The Conservatory was one of the recipients of the 2009 National Medal of Arts. The Allen Memorial Art Museum, with over 13,000 holdings, was the first college art museum west of the Alleghenies.

===College Libraries===
The Oberlin College Libraries has branches for art, music, and science, a central storage facility, and the Mary Church Terrell Main Library. The libraries have collections of print and media materials and provide access to various online databases and journals. Beyond the 2.4 million-plus items available on campus, Oberlin students have access to more than 46 million volumes from over 85 Ohio institutions through the OhioLINK consortium. In the summer of 2007, the main level of the main library was converted into an Academic Commons that provides integrated learning support and is a hub of both academic and social activity.

===Experimental College===
The college&#x27;s &quot;Experimental College&quot; or ExCo program, a student-run department, allows any student or interested person to teach their own class for a limited amount of college credit. ExCo classes by definition focus on material not covered by existing departments or faculty.

===Winter term===
Oberlin&#x27;s Winter term, occurring each January, is described as &quot;a time for students to pursue interests outside of regular course offerings through immersive learning experiences.&quot; Students may work alone or in groups, either on or off campus, and may design their own project or pick from a list of projects and internships set up by the college each year. Students must complete a winter term project three years out of their four in the College of Arts and Sciences. Projects range from serious academic research with co-authorship in scientific journals, humanitarian projects, making films about historic Chicago neighborhoods, and learning how to bartend. A full-credit project is suggested to involve five to six hours per weekday.

===Creativity and Leadership===
Created in 2005 as a part of the Northeast Ohio Collegiate Entrepreneurship Program (NEOCEP), a Kauffman Campuses Initiative, and sponsored by the Burton D. Morgan and Ewing Marion Kauffman, the department is focused on supporting and highlighting entrepreneurship within the student body. This is done through a series of classes, symposia, Winter Term programs, grants, and fellowships available at no cost to current students and in some cases, recent alumni. One such opportunity is the Creativity and Leadership Fellowship, a one-year fellowship for graduating seniors that includes a stipend of up to $30,000 to advance an entrepreneurial venture.

In 2012, the Creativity and Leadership department announced LaunchU, a business accelerator open to Oberlin College students and alumni who are pursuing an entrepreneurial venture. The selective, three-week intensive program connects the participants with other entrepreneurs and business leaders chosen from the surrounding northeast Ohio region as well as the extensive Oberlin College alumni network. LaunchU culminates in a public pitch competition before a guest panel of investors, where the participants have the opportunity to be awarded up to $15,000 in funding. The winner of the 2014 LaunchU pitch competition was Chai Energy, a Los Angeles-based green energy startup focused on modernizing and personalizing home energy monitoring. In 2014, LaunchU announced the creation of an online network in order to build stronger connections between entrepreneurs within the Oberlin College students and alumni network with a focus on attracting younger alumni.

==Campus culture==
===Political activism===
The Oberlin student body has a long history of activism and a reputation for being notably liberal. The college was ranked among The Princeton Review&#x27;s list of &quot;Colleges with a Conscience&quot; in 2005.

In the 1960s, Memorial Arch became a rallying point for the college&#x27;s civil rights activists and its anti-war movement. Oberlin supplied a disproportionate number of participants in Mississippi Freedom Summer, rebuilt the Antioch Missionary Baptist Church in the Carpenters for Christmas project, supported NAACP sponsored sit-ins in Cleveland to integrate the building-trades, and with the SCLC participated in demonstrations at Hammermill Paper. In 1995, Emeritus Professor of Sociology (1966–2007) James Leo Walsh told &quot;The Oberlin Review&quot; that students &quot;carried out dozens of protests against the Vietnam war ranging from peaceful picketing to surrounding a local naval recruiter&#x27;s car&quot;. In November 2002, 100 college workers, students, and faculty held a &quot;mock funeral &#x27;for the spirit of Oberlin&#x27;&quot; in response to the administration&#x27;s laying off 11 workers and reducing the work hours of five other workers without negotiation with college unions. Oberlin Students have protested instances of fracking in Ohio such as &quot;the first natural gas and fracturing industry conference in the state,&quot; in 2011.

In 2004, student activism led to a campus-wide ban on sales of Coca-Cola products due to the company&#x27;s human and labor rights violations. However, the ban was revoked in spring 2014, and students may now buy Coca-Cola products from the student union.

In 2013, after the discovery of hateful messages and the alleged sighting of a person wearing KKK robes, president Marvin Krislov cancelled classes and called for a day of reflection and change. In a public statement, he stated that an investigation had identified two students believed to be largely responsible, who had been removed from campus. One of the students responsible said to police that he was &quot;doing it as a joke to see the college overreact to it&quot;.

During the fall 2014 semester, Oberlin&#x27;s Student Labor Action Coalition organized a petition to permit dining hall temporary workers working four-hour shifts to eat one meal from food the college throws out each day. The petition garnered over 1,000 signatures and resulted in workers obtaining the opportunity to put food into a management-given styrofoam container to eat after their shifts.

In May 2015, students temporarily took over their school&#x27;s administration building to protest a $2,300 increase in tuition cost between the 2015 and 2016 academic school years. Students initially proposed, &quot;... moving from providing merit aid to need-based scholarships, loosening on-campus dining and housing requirements, reducing food waste and temporary workers in Campus Dining Services ... &quot; to the school&#x27;s Vice President of Finance Mike Frandsen on Monday, April 27, 2015, in which their demands were declined for issue. $10,931,088 were allocated to management salaries for the 2013–2014 school year, much of which came from student tuition.

In December 2015, Oberlin&#x27;s Black Student Union issued a series of 50 specific demands of the college and conservatory including promoting certain black faculty to tenured positions, hiring more black faculty, firing other faculty members, and obtaining a $15 an hour minimum wage for all campus workers and guaranteed health care in their contracts. The board of trustees responded by appointing some of the individual faculty and by, &quot;reviewing the allocation of faculty positions with consideration of how they will contribute to interactional diversity in the curriculum&quot; in the college&#x27;s 2016–2021 strategic plan. The college opposed firing any employees in response and neglected to issue formal responses to many of the other demands, though it has sought to cut wages and health care funds for administrators, office workers and library support staff during contract negotiations with the Office and Professional Employees International Union. Many campus workers still earn the minimum wage. Over 75 students protested the college&#x27;s attempt to alter administrator, office worker and library support staff contracts during spring 2016 contract negotiations.

The pro-Israel advocacy group Alums for Campus Fairness has called on Oberlin to address alleged anti-Semitic hate speech directed at Jewish students.

===Student Cooperative Association===
The Oberlin Student Cooperative Association, or OSCA, is a non-profit corporation that houses 174 students in four housing co-ops and feeds 594 students in eight dining co-ops. Its budget is more than $2 million, making it the third-largest of its kind in North America behind the Berkeley Student Cooperative and the Inter-Cooperative Council of Ann Arbor.

OSCA is entirely student-run, with all participating students working as cooks, buyers, administrators, and coordinators. Every member is required to do at least one hour per week of cleaning if they are able, encouraging accountability for the community and the space. Most decisions within OSCA are made by modified consensus. Oberlin bans all fraternities and sororities, making the co-ops the largest student-organized social system at the college. In addition to OSCA&#x27;s four housing/dining and three dining-only cooperatives, Brown Bag Co-op is an OSCA-backed grocery that sells personal servings of food at bulk prices. OSCA also funds the Nicaragua Sister Partnership (NICSIS), a &quot;sister cooperative&quot; with Nicaragua&#x27;s National Union of Farmers and Ranchers (UNAG). Outside of OSCA, other Oberlin co-ops include the Bike Co-op, Pottery Co-op, and SWAP: The Oberlin Book Co-op.

In the spring of 2013, the Board of Directors of OSCA made a decision in a closed-door meeting to remove the Kosher-Halal Co-op from the Association after disputes over budgets and kitchen inspections. Although KHC served both Kosher and Halal food, the membership was predominantly Jewish, and some alumni wrote that they believed the expulsion to be anti-Semitic in nature.

===Music===
In addition to Oberlin Conservatory, Oberlin has musical opportunities available for amateur musicians and students in the college. Oberlin Steel, a steel pan ensemble founded around 1980, plays calypso/soca music from Trinidad and Tobago and has been performing at Oberlin&#x27;s Commencement Illumination event for over 30 years. Oberlin College Taiko, founded in 2008, explores and shares Japanese taiko drumming as both a traditional and contemporary art form. The entirely student-run Oberlin College Marching Band (OCMB), founded in 1998, performs at various sporting events including football games, women&#x27;s rugby, and pep rallies throughout the year. There are a number of a cappella groups, including: Pitch Please (all gender, all genre), the Obertones (men and nonbinary), Nothing But Treble (women and nonbinary), the Acapelicans (women and nonbinary), &#x27;Round Midnight (all gender, jazz/folk). Other notable music organizations include the Black Musicians Guild and the Arts and Sciences Orchestra. Students in the college can form chamber groups and receive coaching through the Conservatory. Student composers also provide a demand for musicians to perform their work.

===Film===
Thomas Edison&#x27;s moving picture show was shown in Oberlin in February 1900. Just seven years later, Oberlin&#x27;s Apollo Theater opened, installing sound equipment for the 1928 release of &quot;The Jazz Singer&quot;, the first &quot;talkie&quot;. The theater has since been a mainstay in the Oberlin community at its comfortable locale on south campus, and in 2012 (after a year of renovations) became the centerpiece for The Danny DeVito and Rhea Perlman Cinema Studies Center for Media Education and Production. The area above the theatre includes editing labs, an animation area, a recording studio and small projection screening room.

==Sustainability==
In 2006, Oberlin became one of the charter institutions to sign the ACUPCC and set a target climate neutrality date for 2025. Oberlin&#x27;s innovative Adam Joseph Lewis Center For Environmental Studies, a building the Department of Energy labeled as one of the &quot;milestone&quot; buildings of the 20th century, incorporates a photovoltaic array, the biggest of its kind in Ohio at the time. The AJLC also features a Living Machine, garden, orchard, and parking-lot solar array.

The school utilizes biodiesel, hybrid, and electric vehicles for various purposes, offers financial support to a local transit company providing public transportation to the school, and has been home to the Oberlin Bike Co-op, a cooperatively run bicycle center, since 1986. Each residence hall monitors and displays real time and historic electricity and water use. Some dorms also have special lamps which display a color depending on how real time energy use compares to the average historic energy use. The school&#x27;s Campus Committee on Shareholder Responsibility provides students, faculty, and staff with the opportunity to make suggestions and decisions on proxy votes. A student board, the Oberlin College Green EDGE Fund, manages a set of accounts to support local sustainability, resource efficiency, and carbon offsetting projects. The Green EDGE Fund, created in 2007, allocates grants for environmental sustainability projects and verifiable carbon offsetting projects within the Oberlin community, as well as loans from a revolving fund for projects at Oberlin College that reduce resource consumption and have calculable financial savings for the college.

In 2007, Oberlin received a grade of &quot;B+&quot; from the Sustainable Endowments Institute&#x27;s annual College Sustainability Report Card, and was featured among schools as a &quot;Campus Sustainability Leader&quot;. In 2008, Oberlin received an &quot;A−&quot; on the annual College Sustainability Report Card. It was also listed as the school with the greenest conscience by Plenty in their green campuses ratings. In 2011, the college received an A on the Sustainability Report card. Oberlin College participated in AASHE&#x27;s Sustainability Tracking, Assessment, and Rating System (STARS) in early 2012. Oberlin College was one of only 43 institutions to receive a grade of Gold in STARS.

According to a 2010 article in &quot;The Oberlin Review&quot;, renovated dorms may use more electricity. This is the case for several dorms renovated during the summer of 2008. The college architect, Steve Varelmann, has called the numbers &quot;erratic and possibly unreliable&quot;. According to Varelmann, a possible explanation for this phenomenon is that previously non-functioning equipment started functioning again after the renovation. Students may also be at fault for their behavior: &quot;What electronic devices are they using? Are they voluntarily reducing light usage? Are spaces experiencing increased use due to the improvements achieved from the renovation?&quot; John Scofield, professor of physics at Oberlin concluded that &quot;We are building more and more efficient buildings, yet we&#x27;re using more energy.&quot;

==Campus publications and media==
Oberlin students publish a wide variety of periodicals. The college&#x27;s largest publications are &quot;The Oberlin Review&quot; and &quot;The Grape&quot;. &quot;The Oberlin Review&quot; is a traditional weekly newspaper, focusing on current events, with a circulation of around 1,700. There is also a newspaper pertaining to the interests of students of color, called &quot;BIPOC Lenses&quot;.

Magazines on campus include &quot;Wilder Voice&quot;, a magazine for creative nonfiction and long-form journalism, &quot;The Plum Creek Review&quot;, a literary review containing student-written fiction, poetry, translations, and visual art, &quot;Headwaters Magazine&quot;, an environmental magazine, and &quot;The Synapse&quot;, a science magazine. &quot;Spiral&quot; is a magazine focused on genre fiction. The college also produces a quarterly alumni magazine, while the Conservatory publishes its own magazine once a year.

The WOBC News Corps, a news division of WOBC-FM created in February 2010, produces local news segments that air bi-hourly. WOBC, a large student organization with significant non-student membership, also maintains an online blog that focuses on music and local events.

==Athletics==
The school&#x27;s varsity sports teams are the Yeomen and Yeowomen. The name Yeomen arose in the early 1900s as a result of blending the former team moniker with the school&#x27;s official motto. Early on in the program, football players and other athletes were known simply as Oberlin Men or &quot;O&quot; Men. Eventually, as the athletic department became more cohesive, the Yeomen mascot was adopted, drawing on the phonetic sound of &quot;O&quot; Men and the schools official motto of &quot;Learning and Labor&quot;. As women&#x27;s sports became more prevalent, &quot;Yeowomen&quot; was adopted to describe the mascot representing women&#x27;s athletics. In 2014, the school announced that the albino squirrel will be its official mascot, although teams will continue to be referred to as &quot;yeomen&quot; and &quot;yeowomen&quot;.

Oberlin participates in the NCAA&#x27;s Division III and the North Coast Athletic Conference (NCAC), a conference which includes Kenyon College, Denison University, Wooster College, Wabash College and others. Basketball guard Joshua Friedkin, who played for Oberlin for four seasons, plays in the Israeli Premier Basketball League. Kenyon has traditionally been Oberlin&#x27;s biggest rival. In 2022, leaders of the Athletic Department and various club sports spoke out in favor of increased institutional support for the teams, requesting that the college provide access to professional sports trainers and team transportation. The college also hosts several private sports teams, including the Oberlin Ultimate team.

Oberlin also has 17 club sports, including ice hockey, fencing, ultimate frisbee, rugby, equestrian, tennis, volleyball, and in martial arts such as Brazilian jiu-jitsu and aikido.

===Baseball===

On May 8, 2015, the Oberlin baseball team won the championship of the NCAC. The championship was the first for Oberlin as a baseball team since it joined the NCAC in 1984.

===Football===

Oberlin&#x27;s football team was the first team coached by John Heisman, who led the team to a 7–0 record in 1892. Oberlin is the last college in Ohio to beat Ohio State (winning 7–6 in 1921). Though in modern times, the football team was more famous for losing streaks of 40 games (1992–1996) and 44 games (1997–2001), the Yeomen have enjoyed limited success in recent years.

===Cheerleading===
In 2011, Oberlin began its most recent attempt to feature a cheerleading squad. In 2006, a cheerleader fell from atop a pyramid at a football game, initiating the demise of Oberlin&#x27;s Cheerleading Club. That injury prompted the school to restrict the club&#x27;s activities, prohibiting stunting and tumbling, after which participation fizzled out. The club&#x27;s charter, however, remained intact and was used to bring the squad back in 2011. Tryouts were held in the spring of 2011, and the cheerleading team went active at Oberlin&#x27;s first home football game that Fall, a 42–0 win over Kenyon College. The squad also cheers for the basketball team and participates in spirit building and service events across campus and in the community.

===Fencing===
Oberlin has a club fencing team known as the Flaming Blades that practices and competes in foil, épée, and saber. They compete in the Midwestern Fencing Conference, Club Fencing Championships, USFA tournaments, and USCFC tournaments.

===Ultimate===
Oberlin has both men&#x27;s and a women&#x27;s Ultimate club teams, known as the Flying Horsecows and the Preying Manti, respectively. The Horsecows have made trips to College Nationals in 1992, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2010, 2018, and 2022. The Manti qualified for Nationals for the first time in 1997 and have been recently in 2010, 2013, 2016, and 2018. The Manti won the Division III national championship on May 19, 2019, defeating the top-ranked Bates Cold Front by a score of 13–7. The Horsecows placed 5th nationally in 2022, the highest finish in program history.

===Rock climbing===
Oberlin has a student-run rock climbing wall, located in Phillips Gymnasium. It features a 25-foot wall for top-roping and lead climbing, and a 360 square foot bouldering cave. Students also run experimental college classes in beginning and intermediate rock climbing.

==Notable people==
Since its founding, Oberlin alumni and faculty include 16 Rhodes Scholars, 20 Truman Scholars, 15 MacArthur fellows, 4 Rome Prize winners, and 4 Nobel Prize laureates. As of 2024, Oberlin was associated with more MacArthur fellows than any other liberal arts college. Additionally, it is the third highest producer of Fulbright scholars among undergraduate institutions.


==See also==
* Mount Oberlin (Glacier National Park) – named after the college
* New-York Central College, McGrawville
* Oberlin College Press

==References==
==Further reading==
* Barnard, John. &quot;From evangelicalism to progressivism at Oberlin College, 1866–1917&quot; (The Ohio State University Press, 1969). full text online free 
* Fletcher, Robert Samuel. &quot;A history of Oberlin College: From its foundation through the Civil War&quot; (Oberlin, 1943).
* Hogeland, Ronald W. &quot;Coeducation of the Sexes at Oberlin College: A Study of Social Ideas in Mid-Nineteenth-Century America,&quot; &quot;Journal of Social History,&quot; (1972–73) 6#2 pp. 160–176 in JSTOR
* Morris, J. Brent. &quot;Oberlin, Hotbed of Abolitionism: College, Community, and the Fight for Freedom and Equality in Antebellum America.&quot; Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2014.
* Waite, Cally L. &quot;The Segregation of Black Students at Oberlin College after Reconstruction,&quot; &quot;History of Education Quarterly&quot; (2001) 41#3, pp. 344–64. in JSTOR

===Primary sources===
* Oberlin College. &quot;General Catalogue of Oberlin College, 1833–1908: Including an Account of the Principal Events in the History of the College, with Illustrations of the College Buildings&quot; (1909) Online

==External links==
* Athletics website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="0" end="15" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="21" end="28" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="29" end="49" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="54" end="75" title="conservatory of music" label="conservatory of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q988384" start="79" end="92" title="Oberlin, Ohio" label="Oberlin, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="143" end="156" title="Mixed-sex education" label="coeducational"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628854" start="244" end="286" title="List of coeducational colleges and universities in the United States" label="coeducational institute of higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q750950" start="305" end="334" title="Oberlin Conservatory of Music" label="Oberlin Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q664881" start="557" end="573" title="Franklin &amp;amp; Marshall College" label="Franklin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115961" start="803" end="835" title="Great Lakes Colleges Association" label="Great Lakes Colleges Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455868" start="844" end="865" title="Five Colleges of Ohio" label="Five Colleges of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091479" start="923" end="940" title="Oberlin Institute" label="Oberlin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="1065" end="1077" title="abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336674" start="1094" end="1107" title="The Liberator (newspaper)" label="The Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1314" end="1336" title="Robert Samuel Fletcher" label="Robert Samuel Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534457" start="1494" end="1511" title="Geoffrey Blodgett" label="Geoffrey Blodgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678054" start="1791" end="1809" title="Miles christianus" label="Christian soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q999699" start="2061" end="2087" title="Burned-over district" label="wave of Christian revivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q532375" start="2124" end="2138" title="Charles Finney" label="Charles Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241728" start="2266" end="2283" title="John Jay Shipherd" label="John Jay Shipherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="2329" end="2348" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3030" end="3042" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="3212" end="3220" title="Divinity" label="Divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q959409" start="3307" end="3324" title="Streetsboro, Ohio" label="Streetsboro, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="3358" end="3369" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="3418" end="3426" title="Alsace" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233467" start="3436" end="3457" title="Jean-Frédéric Oberlin" label="Jean-Frédéric Oberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080800" start="3561" end="3580" title="social Christianity" label="social Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126227" start="3656" end="3671" title="Western Reserve" label="Western Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="3695" end="3699" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3757" end="3764" title="Utopia#Mythical and religious utopias" label="Utopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625559" start="3864" end="3883" title="Christian communist" label="Christian communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485448" start="4180" end="4191" title="Lane Rebels" label="Lane Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485448" start="4307" end="4311" title="Lane Theological Seminary" label="Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053489" start="4389" end="4429" title="Oneida Institute of Science and Industry" label="Oneida Institute of Science and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q115043" start="4434" end="4457" title="Oneida County, New York" label="Oneida County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495519" start="4464" end="4469" title="Utica, New York" label="Utica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11983873" start="4841" end="4864" title="Lewis Tappan" label="Lewis and Arthur Tappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545962" start="4989" end="5011" title="George Washington Gale" label="George Washington Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q532375" start="5039" end="5063" title="Charles Grandison Finney" label="Charles Grandison Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891796" start="5129" end="5141" title="Beriah Green" label="Beriah Green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5196" end="5219" title="Case Western Reserve University#Western Reserve College (1826–1882) and University (1882–1967)" label="Western Reserve College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126227" start="5260" end="5280" title="Ohio Western Reserve" label="Ohio Western Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157757" start="5339" end="5359" title="Theodore Dwight Weld" label="Theodore Dwight Weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622105" start="5464" end="5501" title="Manual labor college" label="Manual Labor in Literary Institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485448" start="6081" end="6094" title="Lane Seminary" label="Lane Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q456454" start="6418" end="6431" title="Lyman Beecher" label="Lyman Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6898" end="6927" title="American Colonization Society#Opposition to colonization" label="American Colonization Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120350" start="7635" end="7659" title="Cincinnati riots of 1829" label="Cincinnati riots of 1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803140" start="7932" end="7941" title="Asa Mahan" label="Asa Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q590026" start="8527" end="8540" title="Noyes Academy" label="Noyes Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750508" start="8549" end="8582" title="Canterbury Female Boarding School" label="Canterbury Female Boarding School"/>
<link wikidata="Q932561" start="8870" end="8876" title="Elyria, Ohio" label="Elyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242646" start="9471" end="9480" title="John Keep" label="John Keep"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9750" end="9761" title="John Morgan (professor)" label="John Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q414706" start="10149" end="10165" title="academic freedom" label="academic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803140" start="10864" end="10873" title="Asa Mahan" label="Asa Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="11028" end="11044" title="moral philosophy" label="moral philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="11062" end="11070" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242646" start="11359" end="11368" title="John Keep" label="John Keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007675" start="11373" end="11386" title="William Dawes (abolitionist)" label="William Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="11803" end="11824" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23900789" start="12018" end="12037" title="George Boyer Vashon" label="George Boyer Vashon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="12090" end="12107" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17264549" start="12585" end="12603" title="William Howard Day" label="William Howard Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q106481407" start="12676" end="12696" title="The Aliened American" label="The Aliened American"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="12732" end="12758" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="12867" end="12878" title="coeducation" label="coeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628854" start="12918" end="12945" title="List of mixed-sex colleges and universities in the United States" label="admitted four women in 1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779892" start="13173" end="13192" title="Mary Jane Patterson" label="Mary Jane Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q532375" start="13435" end="13459" title="Charles Grandison Finney" label="Charles Grandison Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628854" start="13594" end="13686" title="List of earliest coeducational colleges and universities in the United States" label="second-oldest continuously operating coeducational liberal arts college in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="13804" end="13816" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="14224" end="14244" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14297" end="14315" title="Fugitive slave laws#Fugitive Slave Act of 1793" label="Fugitive Slave Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="14378" end="14387" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="14431" end="14443" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074774" start="14515" end="14540" title="Oberlin–Wellington Rescue" label="Oberlin–Wellington Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537048" start="14633" end="14653" title="Lewis Sheridan Leary" label="Lewis Sheridan Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219191" start="14658" end="14679" title="John Anthony Copeland" label="John Anthony Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496187" start="14718" end="14731" title="Shields Green" label="Shields Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="14754" end="14793" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s Raid on Harpers Ferry" label="John Brown&amp;#x27;s Raid on Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q251277" start="15252" end="15265" title="Lorain County, Ohio" label="Lorain County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133744" start="15282" end="15297" title="James Fairchild" label="James Fairchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="15379" end="15391" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q875490" start="15716" end="15735" title="systematic theology" label="systematic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="15849" end="15861" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074757" start="15910" end="15922" title="Oberlin Band (China)" label="Oberlin Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="15955" end="15961" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="16248" end="16263" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074768" start="16269" end="16304" title="Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association" label="Oberlin Shansi Memorial Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719415" start="16573" end="16593" title="Henry Churchill King" label="Henry Churchill King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346213" start="16722" end="16736" title="Robert K. Carr" label="Robert K. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17183" end="17194" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="17343" end="17352" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350672" start="17362" end="17378" title="Robert W. Fuller" label="Robert W. Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927705" start="17458" end="17473" title="Trinity College (Connecticut)" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q52656" start="17956" end="17968" title="Tommie Smith" label="Tommie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="18006" end="18026" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="18030" end="18041" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="18085" end="18089" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q98112747" start="18230" end="18244" title="Emil Danenberg" label="Emil Danenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204556" start="18363" end="18381" title="S. Frederick Starr" label="S. Frederick Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q750950" start="18579" end="18616" title="Oberlin College Conservatory of Music" label="Oberlin College Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962663" start="19107" end="19116" title="Nancy Dye" label="Nancy Dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="19352" end="19361" title="Financial endowment" label="endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778402" start="19644" end="19658" title="Marvin Krislov" label="Marvin Krislov"/>
<link wikidata="Q556098" start="19751" end="19766" title="Pace University" label="Pace University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043608" start="19785" end="19805" title="Carmen Twillie Ambar" label="Carmen Twillie Ambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="20164" end="20189" title="United Automobile Workers" label="United Automobile Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="21017" end="21030" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324420" start="21209" end="21234" title="2014 Israel–Gaza conflict" label="2014 Israel–Gaza conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="21794" end="21798" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q18718876" start="21821" end="21842" title="Charlie hebdo attacks" label="Charlie Hebdo attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="21851" end="21855" title="ISIS" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q20111070" start="22432" end="22456" title="Mohammad Jafar Mahallati" label="Mohammad Jafar Mahallati"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="23076" end="23081" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827306" start="23086" end="23107" title="tortious interference" label="tortious interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048841" start="23113" end="23143" title="Gibson&amp;#x27;s Bakery vs. Oberlin College" label="lawsuit initiated by the store"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080806" start="23321" end="23352" title="Ohio District Courts of Appeals" label="Ohio District Courts of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001112" start="23532" end="23553" title="Supreme Court of Ohio" label="Supreme Court of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="23954" end="23982" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="24033" end="24039" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789030" start="25143" end="25165" title="National Medal of Arts" label="National Medal of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816734" start="25171" end="25196" title="Allen Memorial Art Museum" label="Allen Memorial Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074758" start="25312" end="25337" title="Oberlin College Library" label="Oberlin College Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080725" start="25730" end="25738" title="OhioLINK" label="OhioLINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383223" start="27236" end="27257" title="Ewing Marion Kauffman" label="Ewing Marion Kauffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q851717" start="28861" end="28881" title="The Princeton Review" label="The Princeton Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045756" start="29214" end="29238" title="Carpenters for Christmas" label="Carpenters for Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="29342" end="29346" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="SCLC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29381" end="29397" title="Selma to Montgomery marches#Hammermill Boycott" label="Hammermill Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754623" start="29479" end="29497" title="The Oberlin Review" label="The Oberlin Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="29998" end="30006" title="Hydraulic fracturing" label="fracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="30039" end="30050" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="30179" end="30188" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778402" start="30488" end="30502" title="Marvin Krislov" label="Marvin Krislov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919" start="31591" end="31601" title="food waste" label="food waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079145" start="32837" end="32890" title="Office and Professional Employees International Union" label="Office and Professional Employees International Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074770" start="33306" end="33345" title="Oberlin Student Cooperative Association" label="Oberlin Student Cooperative Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q188577" start="33979" end="33988" title="Consensus decision-making" label="consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="35640" end="35650" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="36008" end="36022" title="chamber music" label="chamber groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="36159" end="36172" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780360" start="36278" end="36292" title="Apollo Theater (Oberlin, Ohio)" label="Apollo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q465087" start="36358" end="36373" title="The Jazz Singer" label="The Jazz Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="36397" end="36403" title="talkie" label="talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="36590" end="36602" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q234058" start="36607" end="36619" title="Rhea Perlman" label="Rhea Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743443" start="36891" end="36897" title="American College and University President&amp;#x27;s Climate Commitment (ACUPCC)" label="ACUPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="36975" end="37025" title="Adam Joseph Lewis Center for Environmental Studies" label="Adam Joseph Lewis Center For Environmental Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="37042" end="37062" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="37153" end="37171" title="photovoltaic array" label="photovoltaic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659496" start="37243" end="37257" title="Living Machine" label="Living Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="37326" end="37335" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="37337" end="37343" title="hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="37349" end="37365" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="37451" end="37472" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433039" start="37974" end="37984" title="proxy vote" label="proxy vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318957" start="38346" end="38360" title="Revolving Loan Fund" label="revolving fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933584" start="38543" end="38575" title="Sustainable Endowments Institute" label="Sustainable Endowments Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q117391531" start="39005" end="39010" title="AASHE" label="AASHE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39018" end="39080" title="Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education#STARS" label="Sustainability Tracking, Assessment, and Rating System (STARS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754623" start="40164" end="40182" title="The Oberlin Review" label="The Oberlin Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="40608" end="40623" title="literary magazine" label="literary review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194480" start="40851" end="40864" title="genre fiction" label="genre fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953741" start="41025" end="41032" title="WOBC-FM" label="WOBC-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="41316" end="41322" title="Yeomen" label="Yeomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="41968" end="41974" title="albino" label="albino"/>
<link wikidata="Q9482" start="41975" end="41983" title="squirrel" label="squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="42137" end="42141" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054848" start="42170" end="42201" title="North Coast Athletic Conference" label="North Coast Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797768" start="42238" end="42252" title="Kenyon College" label="Kenyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493503" start="42254" end="42272" title="Denison University" label="Denison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109093" start="42274" end="42289" title="Wooster College" label="Wooster College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958639" start="42291" end="42305" title="Wabash College" label="Wabash College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462454" start="42406" end="42439" title="Israeli Premier Basketball League" label="Israeli Premier Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="42813" end="42821" title="Ultimate (sport)" label="Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="43231" end="43239" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303281" start="43275" end="43287" title="John Heisman" label="John Heisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="43375" end="43385" title="Ohio State" label="Ohio State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797768" start="44211" end="44225" title="Kenyon College" label="Kenyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="44257" end="44267" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="44676" end="44684" title="Ultimate (sport)" label="Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q810771" start="45074" end="45079" title="Bates College" label="Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="45563" end="45578" title="Rhodes Scholars" label="Rhodes Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138139" start="45583" end="45598" title="Truman Scholars" label="Truman Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="45603" end="45620" title="MacArthur fellows" label="MacArthur fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405483" start="45624" end="45634" title="Rome Prize" label="Rome Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="45650" end="45661" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922471" start="45893" end="45906" title="Mount Oberlin" label="Mount Oberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="45908" end="45929" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005083" start="45959" end="45996" title="New-York Central College, McGrawville" label="New-York Central College, McGrawville"/>
<link wikidata="Q116814491" start="45999" end="46020" title="Oberlin College Press" label="Oberlin College Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22507" wikidata="Q431223" url="?curid=22507" title="Oliver North">
<text>Oliver Laurence North (born October 7, 1943) is an American political commentator, television host, military historian, author, and retired United States Marine Corps lieutenant colonel.

A veteran of the Vietnam War, North was a National Security Council staff member during the Iran–Contra affair, a political scandal of the late 1980s. It involved the illegal sale of weapons to the Khomeini regime of the Islamic Republic of Iran to encourage the release of American hostages then held in Lebanon. North formulated the second part of the plan, which was to divert proceeds from the arms sales to support the Contra rebel groups in Nicaragua, official funding for which had been specifically prohibited under the Boland Amendment. North was granted limited immunity from prosecution in exchange for testifying before Congress about the scheme. He was initially convicted on three felony charges, but the convictions were vacated and reversed and all charges against him dismissed in 1991, on the grounds of immunity.

North unsuccessfully ran for the U.S. Senate seat held by Chuck Robb from Virginia in 1994. In a three-way race, North narrowly lost to Robb by a margin of 2.73%. He then hosted a talk show on Radio America from 1995 to 2003, and hosted &quot;War Stories with Oliver North&quot; on Fox News from 2001 to 2016. In May 2018, North was elected as president of the National Rifle Association. On April 27, 2019, he resigned amidst a dispute with the organization&#x27;s chief executive Wayne LaPierre, and was succeeded by Carolyn D. Meadows.

== Early life ==
North was born in San Antonio, Texas, on October 7, 1943, the son of Ann Theresa (née Clancy) and Oliver Clay North, a U.S. Army major. He grew up in Philmont, New York, and graduated from Ockawamick Central High School in 1961. He attended the State University of New York at Brockport for two years.

While at Brockport, North spent a summer at the United States Marine Corps Platoon Leaders Class at Marine Corps Base Quantico in Virginia, and gained an appointment to the United States Naval Academy in 1963. He received his commission as second lieutenant in 1968, having missed a year due to serious back and leg injuries from an auto accident in which a classmate was killed. One of North&#x27;s classmates at the academy was future secretary of the Navy and U.S. senator Jim Webb, whom he beat in a middleweight championship boxing match at Annapolis. (North had shown films of this match to Marine Medical Corps officials to prove that he had fully recovered from his serious accident and could endure the rigors of midshipman training.) Their graduating class included Dennis C. Blair, Michael Mullen, Jay L. Johnson, Charles Bolden and Michael Hagee.

== U.S. Marine Corps career ==
===Vietnam===
North served as a platoon commander during the Vietnam War, where during his combat service, he was awarded the Silver Star, Bronze Star Medal with Combat V, and two Purple Heart medals. At the time of his being awarded the Silver Star, North was a platoon commander leading his Marines in Operation Virginia Ridge. North led a counter-assault against the People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam, as his platoon took on heavy machine gun fire and rocket propelled grenades. Throughout the battle, North displayed &quot;courage, dynamic leadership and unwavering devotion to duty in the face of grave personal danger&quot;.

===Post-Vietnam===
In 1970, North returned to South Vietnam to testify as a character witness at the trial of Lance Corporal Randall Herrod, a U.S. Marine formerly under his command who, along with four others, had been charged with the murder of sixteen Vietnamese civilians in the village of Son Thang. North claims Herrod had previously saved his life. Herrod and one other Marine were acquitted.

North&#x27;s post-Vietnam career included: instructor at the Marine Basic School from 1969 to 1974; director of the Northern Training Area in Okinawa, Japan (1973–1974); plans and policy analyst with the manpower division at Headquarters Marine Corps from 1975 to 1978; and operations officer (S3) for 3rd Battalion, 8th Regiment, 2nd Marine Division at Camp Lejeune (1978–80). He graduated from the College of Naval Command and Staff at the Navy War College in 1981.

===National Security Council staff===
In 1981, North began his assignment to the National Security Council staff in Washington, D.C., where he served as a lobbyist from 1981 to 1983; and deputy director for political–military affairs from 1983 until his reassignment in 1986. In 1983, North was promoted to lieutenant colonel.

During his tenure at the National Security Council, North managed a number of missions. This included leading the hunt for those responsible for the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing that killed 299 American and French military personnel, an effort that saw North arrange a mid-air interception of an EgyptAir jet carrying those responsible for the Achille Lauro hijacking. While at the National Security Council, he also helped plan the U.S. invasion of Grenada and the 1986 bombing of Libya.

During his Iran-Contra trial, North spent his last two years on active duty assigned to Headquarters Marine Corps in Arlington County, Virginia. He submitted his request to retire from the Marine Corps effective May 1, 1988, following his indictment for conspiring to defraud the United States by channeling the profits from US arms sales to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. After his trial and felony convictions, all convictions were reversed on appeal.

== Military awards ==
North received the following military awards and decorations:


== Iran–Contra affair ==
North came into the public spotlight as a result of his participation in the Iran–Contra affair, a political scandal during the Reagan administration, in which he claimed partial responsibility for the sale of weapons through intermediaries to Iran, with the profits being channeled to the Contras in Nicaragua. It was alleged that he was responsible for the establishment of a covert network which subsequently funneled those funds to the Contras. Congress passed the Boland Amendment (to the House Appropriations Bill of 1982 and following years), which prohibited the appropriation of U.S. funds by intelligence agencies for the support of the Contras.

North solicited $10 million from the Sultan of Brunei to skirt U.S. prohibitions on funding the Contras. However, he gave the wrong number of the Swiss bank account intended to launder the money, and it went instead to a Swiss businessman. A Senate committee investigating the transaction tracked it down so it could be returned to Brunei.

In an August 23, 1986, e-mail to National Security Advisor John Poindexter, North described a meeting with a representative of Panamanian General Manuel Noriega: &quot;You will recall that over the years Manuel Noriega in Panama and I have developed a fairly good relationship,&quot; North writes before explaining Noriega&#x27;s proposal. If U.S. officials can &quot;help clean up his image&quot; and lift the ban on arms sales to the Panamanian Defense Force, Noriega will &quot;&#x27;take care of&#x27; the Sandinista leadership for us.&quot;

North told Poindexter that General Noriega could assist with sabotage against the ruling party of Nicaragua, the Sandinista National Liberation Front. North supposedly suggested that Noriega be paid $1 million in cash from Project Democracy funds raised from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran for the Panamanian leader&#x27;s help in destroying Nicaraguan economic installations.

In November 1986, as the sale of weapons was made public, North was dismissed by President Ronald Reagan. In an interview with &quot;Cigar Aficionado&quot; magazine, North said that on February 11, 1987, the Federal Bureau of Investigation detected an attack on North&#x27;s family from the Peoples Committee for Libyan Students, with an order to kill North. Although government officials later expressed skepticism of this claim, and no charges for this alleged plot were brought, his family was moved to Camp Lejeune in North Carolina and lived with federal agents until North retired from the Marine Corps the following year.

In July 1987, North was summoned to testify before televised hearings of a joint congressional committee that was formed to investigate the Iran–Contra scandal. During the hearings, North admitted that he had misled Congress, for which, along with other actions, he was later charged. He defended his actions by stating that he believed in the goal of aiding the Contras, whom he saw as freedom fighters against the Sandinistas and said that he viewed the Iran–Contra scheme as a &quot;neat idea.&quot; North admitted shredding government documents related to these activities at William Casey&#x27;s suggestion when the Iran–Contra scandal became public. He also testified that Robert McFarlane had asked him to alter official records to delete references to direct assistance to the Contras and that he had helped.

North was indicted in March 1988 on 16 felony counts. His trial opened in February 1989, and on May 4, 1989, he was initially convicted of three: accepting an illegal gratuity, aiding and abetting in the obstruction of a congressional inquiry, and ordering the destruction of documents through his secretary, Fawn Hall. He was sentenced by U.S. District Judge Gerhard Gesell on July 5, 1989, to a three-year suspended prison term, two years probation, $150,000 in fines, and 1,200 hours of community service. North performed some of his community service within Potomac Gardens, a public housing project in southeast Washington, DC. However, with the help of the American Civil Liberties Union, North appealed his conviction to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. On July 20, 1990, the D.C. Circuit vacated North&#x27;s convictions on the ground that witnesses in his trial might have been impermissibly affected by his immunized congressional testimony.

The individual members of the prosecution team had isolated themselves from news reports and discussion of North&#x27;s testimony, and while the defense could show no specific instance in which North&#x27;s congressional testimony was used in his trial, the Court of Appeals ruled that the trial judge had made an insufficient examination of the issue. Consequently, North&#x27;s convictions were reversed. After further hearings on the immunity issue, Judge Gesell dismissed all charges against North on September 16, 1991.

== Politics ==

In the 1994 election, North unsuccessfully ran for the United States Senate as the Republican Party candidate in Virginia. Republican senator John Warner of Virginia endorsed Marshall Coleman, a Republican who ran as an independent, instead of North. North lost, garnering 43 percent of votes, while incumbent Democrat Charles Robb, a son-in-law of President Lyndon B. Johnson, won reelection with 46 percent. Coleman received 11 percent. North&#x27;s candidacy was documented in the 1996 film &quot;A Perfect Candidate&quot;.
In his failed bid to unseat Robb, North raised $20.3 million in a single year through nationwide direct-mail solicitations, telemarketing, fundraising events, and contributions from major donors. About $16 million of that amount was from direct mail alone. This was the biggest accumulation of direct-mail funds for a statewide campaign to that date, and it made North the top direct-mail political fundraiser in the country in 1994.

=== Freedom Alliance ===
In 1990, North founded the Freedom Alliance, a 501(c)(3) foundation &quot;to advance the American heritage of freedom by honoring and encouraging military service, defending the sovereignty of the United States, and promoting a strong national defense.&quot; The foundation&#x27;s primary activities include providing support for wounded combat soldiers and providing scholarships for the children of service members killed in action.

Beginning in 2003, Sean Hannity has raised over $10 million for the Freedom Alliance Scholarship Fund through Freedom Concerts and donations from &quot;The Sean Hannity Show&quot; and its listeners. The charity has been criticized by conservative blogger Debbie Schlussel for distributing too little of its funds for charitable purposes. Hannity, North, and other charity spokespersons say that all of the &quot;net&quot; proceeds from the Freedom Concerts are donated to the fund.

=== National Rifle Association ===
On May 7, 2018, the National Rifle Association (NRA) announced that North would become the organization&#x27;s next president within the following weeks. He succeeded Pete Brownell, the incumbent. North is a board member in the NRA and appeared at NRA national conventions in 2007 and 2008. North began his term as president in September 2018.

In April 2019, in the midst of a wide-ranging dispute involving the NRA&#x27;s chief executive Wayne LaPierre, the NRA&#x27;s advertising agency Ackerman McQueen, and the NRA&#x27;s law firm Brewer Attorneys &amp; Counselors, North announced that he would not serve a second term as president, ostensibly against his wishes. On April 24, 2019, North asked LaPierre to resign. On April 16, 2019, North and NRA first vice president Richard Childress wrote to the chairman of the NRA audit committee and the NRA&#x27;s secretary and general counsel calling for an independent audit of the billing from the NRA&#x27;s law firm, Brewer Attorneys &amp; Counselors. In an April 24, 2019 letter to the executive committee of the NRA board, North said that he was forming a committee to investigate alleged financial improprieties, allegations which he said threatened the NRA&#x27;s non-profit status. In an April 25, 2019 letter to the NRA board, LaPierre said that North was threatening to release damaging information about him. On April 27, 2019, in a letter read on his behalf at the NRA&#x27;s annual convention in Indianapolis, Indiana, North announced he would not serve a second term. North&#x27;s term ended on April 29, 2019, when he was replaced by Carolyn D. Meadows. On May 3, 2019, Senators Ron Wyden of Oregon, Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, and Bob Menendez of New Jersey, members of the Senate Finance Committee, wrote to North, LaPierre, and the NRA&#x27;s advertising agency Ackerman McQueen requesting copies of the letters to the NRA board by North and LaPierre, seeking documents related to the allegations, and directing records preservation.

==Media and books==
===Film, television, radio, and videogames===

North became increasingly known for his media career and appearances. In 1991, he appeared on the first season of &quot;The Jerry Springer Show&quot;. From 1995 to 2003, North was host of his own nationally syndicated talk radio show on Radio America, which was known as the &quot;Oliver North Radio Show&quot; or &quot;Common Sense Radio With Oliver North&quot;. He also served as co-host of &quot;Equal Time&quot; on MSNBC from 1999 to 2000. North was the host of the television show &quot;War Stories with Oliver North&quot; from 2001 to 2016 and is a regular commentator on &quot;Hannity&quot;, both on the Fox News Channel.

North appeared as himself on many television shows, including the sitcom &quot;Wings&quot; in 1991, and three episodes of the TV military drama &quot;JAG&quot; in 1995, 1996, and 2002 as &quot;Ollie&quot;, a close friend of the deceased father of Tracey Needham&#x27;s character Meg Austin. He has also appeared as himself in several film documentaries.

In addition, he regularly speaks at both public and private events. North appears in an episode of &quot;Auction Kings&quot; to have his Marine Corps sword returned after it was lost and presumably stolen in 1980. North was credited as a military consultant in the 2012 video game &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops II&quot; and voiced himself in a cutscene. In Season 4, Episode 15 &quot;Stanny Slickers II: The Legend of Ollie&#x27;s Gold&quot; of the TV series &quot;American Dad!&quot; Stan Smith searches under his house for Oliver North&#x27;s hidden gold. In 2014, he received story credit for an episode of the TV series &quot;The Americans&quot; where the Soviet spy protagonists infiltrate a Contra training base in the United States.

In a 1995 episode of the TV series &quot;Sliders&quot;, North is President of the United States on a parallel Earth.

===Nonfiction books===
*&quot;Under Fire: An American Story&quot;, co-author William Novak, Zondervan, 1991, 
*&quot;One More Mission: Oliver North Returns to Vietnam&quot;, co-author David Roth, Zondervan, January 1, 1993, 
*&quot;War Stories: Operation Iraqi Freedom&quot;, Regnery History, 2003, 
*&quot;True Freedom: The Liberating Power of Prayer&quot;, Multnomah Press, 2003, 
*&quot;A Greater Freedom: Stories of Faith from Operation Iraqi Freedom&quot;, B&amp;H Books, 2004, 
*&quot;War Stories II: Heroism in the Pacific&quot;, Regnery History, 2004, 
*&quot;War Stories III: The Heroes Who Defeated Hitler&quot;, Regnery History, 2005, 
*&quot;American Heroes: In the Fight Against Radical Islam&quot;, Broadman &amp; Holman Publishing, 2008, 
*&quot;American Heroes: In Special Operations&quot;, Fidelis Books, 2010, 
*&quot;American Heroes: On the Homefront&quot;, Threshold Editions, 2013, 
*&quot;Veterans&#x27; Lament: Is This the America Our Heroes Fought For?&quot;, co-author David Goetsch, Fidelis Books, 2020, 
*&quot;American Gulags: Marxist Tyranny in Higher Education and What to do About It.&quot;, co-authors David Goetsch and Archie Jones, Fidelis Books, 2023, 

===Fiction books===
*&quot;Mission Compromised&quot;, co -author Joe Musser, Broadman &amp; Holman Publishers, 2002, 
*&quot;The Jericho Sanction&quot;, co-author Joe Musser, Broadman &amp; Holman Publishers, 2003, 
*&quot;The Assassins&quot;, co-author Joe Musser, Broadman &amp; Holman Publishers, 2005, 
*&quot;Heroes Proved&quot;, Threshold Editions, 2012, 
*&quot;Counterfeit Lies&quot;, co-author Bob Hamer, Threshold Editions, 2014, 
*&quot;The Rifleman&quot;, Fidelis Books, 2019, 
*&quot;The Giant Awakes&quot;, co-author Bob Hamer, Fidelis Books, 2022, 

== Personal life ==
In 1967, North married Betsy Stuart; they have four children. Although raised in the Roman Catholic faith of his mother, North has long attended Protestant or evangelical services with his wife and children. The Norths live in McLean, Virginia.

Betsy North died on November 16, 2024 of corticobasal syndrome.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* list of Oliver North&#x27;s television appearances
* Freedom Alliance
* Oliver North Features at Creators Syndicate
* C-SPAN Sen. Inouye Remarks to Oliver North on Military Ethics and Iran-Contra
* Transcript, Audio, Video of North&#x27;s Opening Statement During the Iran Contra Hearings from AmericanRhetoric.com


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q431223" start="0" end="21" title="Oliver North" label="Oliver Laurence North"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="140" end="166" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="167" end="185" title="Lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="205" end="216" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="230" end="255" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="280" end="298" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="386" end="394" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="429" end="433" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156347" start="462" end="500" title="Lebanon hostage crisis" label="American hostages then held in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="600" end="607" title="United States and state-sponsored terrorism#The Contras" label="support"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="612" end="631" title="Contras" label="Contra rebel groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q891252" start="716" end="732" title="Boland Amendment" label="Boland Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680961" start="752" end="785" title="witness immunity" label="limited immunity from prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q885583" start="1079" end="1089" title="Chuck Robb" label="Chuck Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892080" start="1107" end="1111" title="1994 United States Senate election in Virginia" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280658" start="1214" end="1227" title="Radio America (United States)" label="Radio America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968542" start="1264" end="1293" title="War Stories with Oliver North" label="War Stories with Oliver North"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="1303" end="1311" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="1382" end="1408" title="National Rifle Association" label="National Rifle Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q969977" start="1503" end="1517" title="Wayne LaPierre" label="Wayne LaPierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009233" start="1540" end="1558" title="Carolyn D. Meadows" label="Carolyn D. Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="1596" end="1607" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461467" start="1728" end="1746" title="Philmont, New York" label="Philmont, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674035" start="1767" end="1797" title="Taconic Hills Central School District" label="Ockawamick Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603617" start="1823" end="1864" title="State University of New York at Brockport" label="State University of New York at Brockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1929" end="1955" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148339" start="1956" end="1977" title="Platoon Leaders Class" label="Platoon Leaders Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="1981" end="2007" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Marine Corps Base Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="2011" end="2019" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="2054" end="2081" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="2121" end="2138" title="US Second Lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="2214" end="2227" title="auto accident" label="auto accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q940135" start="2318" end="2339" title="United States Secretary of the Navy" label="secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q532279" start="2357" end="2365" title="Jim Webb" label="Jim Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573533" start="2411" end="2417" title="Amateur boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189023" start="2657" end="2672" title="Dennis C. Blair" label="Dennis C. Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q503161" start="2674" end="2688" title="Michael Mullen" label="Michael Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q714337" start="2690" end="2704" title="Jay L. Johnson" label="Jay L. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25011" start="2706" end="2720" title="Charles Bolden" label="Charles Bolden"/>
<link wikidata="Q709150" start="2725" end="2738" title="Michael Hagee" label="Michael Hagee"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="2804" end="2811" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2833" end="2844" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q650711" start="2863" end="2869" title="combat" label="combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q852071" start="2898" end="2909" title="Silver Star" label="Silver Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="2911" end="2928" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540324" start="2934" end="2942" title="Combat V" label="Combat V"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="2952" end="2964" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984294" start="3076" end="3100" title="Operation Virginia Ridge" label="Operation Virginia Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="3142" end="3171" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3446" end="3459" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138792" start="3694" end="3703" title="Son Thang massacre" label="Son Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715757" start="3862" end="3881" title="The Basic School" label="Marine Basic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027202" start="3917" end="3939" title="Camp Gonsalves" label="Northern Training Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="3943" end="3957" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689905" start="4026" end="4051" title="Headquarters Marine Corps" label="Headquarters Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636688" start="4103" end="4130" title="3rd Battalion, 8th Marines" label="3rd Battalion, 8th Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q210606" start="4132" end="4151" title="2nd Marine Division" label="2nd Marine Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="4155" end="4167" title="Camp Lejeune" label="Camp Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4201" end="4235" title="Naval War College#College of Naval Command and Staff" label="College of Naval Command and Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="4243" end="4259" title="Navy War College" label="Navy War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="4351" end="4376" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="4577" end="4595" title="Lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q518303" start="4747" end="4775" title="1983 Beirut barracks bombing" label="1983 Beirut barracks bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="4894" end="4902" title="EgyptAir" label="EgyptAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q340233" start="4942" end="4955" title="MS Achille Lauro" label="Achille Lauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="5036" end="5055" title="invasion of Grenada" label="invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q922661" start="5069" end="5085" title="Operation El Dorado Canyon" label="bombing of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689905" start="5176" end="5201" title="Headquarters Marine Corps" label="Headquarters Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="5205" end="5231" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916045" start="5342" end="5381" title="Conspiracy against the United States" label="conspiring to defraud the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="5732" end="5750" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5899" end="5903" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="5945" end="5952" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q891252" start="6124" end="6140" title="Boland Amendment" label="Boland Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451936" start="6349" end="6365" title="Sultan of Brunei" label="Sultan of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="6686" end="6711" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q348163" start="6712" end="6727" title="John Poindexter" label="John Poindexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192667" start="6799" end="6813" title="Manuel Noriega" label="Manuel Noriega"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="7163" end="7173" title="Sandinista" label="Sandinista"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="7313" end="7349" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="Sandinista National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422577" start="7423" end="7440" title="National Endowment for Democracy" label="Project Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="7668" end="7681" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918279" start="7710" end="7726" title="Cigar Aficionado" label="Cigar Aficionado"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="7785" end="7816" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479693" start="8083" end="8095" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune" label="Camp Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="8099" end="8113" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q30242234" start="8594" end="8609" title="freedom fighter" label="freedom fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q983721" start="8787" end="8800" title="William Casey" label="William Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q332413" start="8886" end="8902" title="Robert McFarlane (American politician)" label="Robert McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438777" start="9334" end="9343" title="Fawn Hall" label="Fawn Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550667" start="9385" end="9399" title="Gerhard Gesell" label="Gerhard Gesell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235057" start="9587" end="9602" title="Potomac Gardens" label="Potomac Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="9688" end="9718" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="9757" end="9815" title="United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892080" start="10558" end="10571" title="1994 United States Senate election in Virginia" label="1994 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="10606" end="10626" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="10634" end="10650" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="10664" end="10672" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464810" start="10693" end="10704" title="John Warner" label="John Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105886" start="10726" end="10742" title="Marshall Coleman" label="Marshall Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10861" end="10869" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q885583" start="10870" end="10882" title="Charles Robb" label="Charles Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="10910" end="10927" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658759" start="11051" end="11070" title="A Perfect Candidate" label="A Perfect Candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="11585" end="11594" title="501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q557730" start="11993" end="12005" title="Sean Hannity" label="Sean Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682076" start="12126" end="12147" title="The Sean Hannity Show" label="The Sean Hannity Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247991" start="12229" end="12245" title="Debbie Schlussel" label="Debbie Schlussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="12512" end="12538" title="National Rifle Association" label="National Rifle Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q969977" start="12932" end="12946" title="Wayne LaPierre" label="Wayne LaPierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151806" start="12982" end="12998" title="Ackerman McQueen" label="Ackerman McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324733" start="13267" end="13284" title="Richard Childress" label="Richard Childress"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="13712" end="13729" title="Nonprofit organization" label="non-profit status"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="13950" end="13962" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009233" start="14090" end="14108" title="Carolyn D. Meadows" label="Carolyn D. Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q529344" start="14135" end="14144" title="Ron Wyden" label="Ron Wyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q652066" start="14156" end="14174" title="Sheldon Whitehouse" label="Sheldon Whitehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q888132" start="14196" end="14208" title="Bob Menendez" label="Bob Menendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985424" start="14239" end="14263" title="United States Senate Committee on Finance" label="Senate Finance Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151806" start="14329" end="14345" title="Ackerman McQueen" label="Ackerman McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q890908" start="14689" end="14712" title="The Jerry Springer Show" label="The Jerry Springer Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="14765" end="14786" title="radio syndication" label="nationally syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="14787" end="14797" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280658" start="14806" end="14819" title="Radio America (United States)" label="Radio America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384143" start="14968" end="14978" title="Equal Time (TV program)" label="Equal Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="14988" end="14993" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968542" start="15061" end="15090" title="War Stories with Oliver North" label="War Stories with Oliver North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310195" start="15153" end="15160" title="Hannity" label="Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="15180" end="15196" title="Fox News Channel" label="Fox News Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q331787" start="15278" end="15283" title="Wings (NBC TV series)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q754197" start="15349" end="15352" title="JAG (TV series)" label="JAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q509979" start="15446" end="15460" title="Tracey Needham" label="Tracey Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107630" start="15478" end="15488" title="Meg Austin (JAG)" label="Meg Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819597" start="15659" end="15672" title="Auction Kings" label="Auction Kings"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15841" end="15867" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops II" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops II"/>
<link wikidata="Q245056" start="15898" end="15906" title="cutscene" label="cutscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727578" start="15932" end="15995" title="American Dad! (season 4)" label="&amp;quot;Stanny Slickers II: The Legend of Ollie&amp;#x27;s Gold&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q210311" start="16019" end="16032" title="American Dad!" label="American Dad!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746527" start="16153" end="16160" title="Martial Eagle (The Americans)" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q498438" start="16184" end="16197" title="The Americans" label="The Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q589187" start="16336" end="16343" title="Sliders (TV series)" label="Sliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="16360" end="16390" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16443" end="16472" title="Under Fire (North book)" label="Under Fire: An American Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q963138" start="18414" end="18430" title="McLean, Virginia" label="McLean, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55346059" start="18474" end="18495" title="corticobasal syndrome" label="corticobasal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183619" start="18664" end="18682" title="Creators Syndicate" label="Creators Syndicate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22512" wikidata="Q25331" url="?curid=22512" title="Odense">
<text>Odense ( , , ) is the third largest city in Denmark (after Copenhagen and Aarhus) and the largest city on the island of Funen. As of 1 January 2024, the city proper had a population of 183,763 while Odense Municipality had a population of 209,078, making it the fourth largest municipality in Denmark (behind Copenhagen, Aarhus and Aalborg municipalities). Eurostat and OECD have used a definition for the Metropolitan area of Odense (referred to as a &quot;Functional urban area&quot;), which includes all municipalities in the Province (Danish: &quot;landsdel&quot;) of Funen (Danish: &quot;Fyn&quot;), with a total population of 504,066 as of 1 July 2022.

By road, Odense is located north of Svendborg, to the south of Aarhus and to the southwest of the capital Copenhagen. The city was the seat of Odense County until 1970, and Funen County from 1970 until 1 January 2007, when Funen County became part of the Region of Southern Denmark. Odense has close associations with Hans Christian Andersen who is remembered above all for his fairy tales. He was born in the city in 1805 and spent his childhood years there.

There has been human settlement in the Odense area for over 4,000 years, although the name was not mentioned in writing until 988, and by 1070, it had already grown into a thriving city. Canute IV of Denmark, generally considered to be the last Viking king, was murdered by unruly peasants in Odense&#x27;s St Alban&#x27;s Priory on 10 July 1086. Although the city was burned in 1249 following a royal rivalry, it quickly recovered and flourished as a centre of commerce in the Middle Ages. After a period of decline, large-scale plans for development were made during the 18th century, which led to the rebuilding of Odense Palace and the building of a canal to the Port of Odense, facilitating trade. In 1865, one of the largest railway terminals in Denmark was built, further increasing the population and commerce, and by 1900, Odense had reached a population of 35,000. Odense&#x27;s Odinstårnet was one of the tallest towers in Europe when built in 1935 but was destroyed by the Nazis during World War II. The University of Southern Denmark was established in 1966.

In the present day, Odense remains the commercial hub of Funen, and has a notable shopping district with a diversity of stores. Several major industries are located in the city including the Albani Brewery and GASA, Denmark&#x27;s major dealer in vegetables, fruits and flowers. The city is home to Odense Palace, erected by King Frederik IV who died there in 1730, the Odense Theatre, the Odense Symphony Orchestra, and the Hans Christian Andersen Museum, situated in the house that was the birthplace of Hans Christian Andersen. In sports, Odense has a number of football clubs including OB, BM, B1909, and B1913, the Odense Bulldogs professional ice hockey team, and the city also hosts the H.C. Andersen Marathon. Odense is served by Hans Christian Andersen Airport and Odense station, which lies on the line between Copenhagen and the Jutland peninsula.

== Etymology ==

The name Odense is derived from &quot;Odins vé&quot;, meaning &quot;Odin&#x27;s sanctuary&quot;, as the area was known as a sanctuary for worshippers of the Nordic god, Odin.

== History ==
: &quot;For the Catholic ecclesiastical history, see Roman Catholic bishopric of Odense&quot;

===Early history===

Odense is one of Denmark&#x27;s oldest cities. Archaeological excavations in the vicinity show proof of settlement for over 4,000 years since at least the Stone Age. The earliest community was centred on the higher ground between the Odense River to the south and Naesbyhoved Lake (now dry) to the north. Nonnebakken, one of Denmark&#x27;s former Viking ring fortresses, lay to the south of the river. Today, Odense&#x27;s Møntergården Museum has many artefacts related to the early Viking history in the Odense area. The Vikings built numerous fortifications along the river banks to defend it against invaders coming in from the coast.

The city celebrated its thousandth anniversary in 1988, commemorating the first mention of the town&#x27;s name in a letter dated 18 March 988 from the German emperor Otto III which granted rights to Odense and neighbouring settlements. The first church in Odense appears to have been St Mary&#x27;s, probably built in the late 12th century. The territory, previously part of the vast Archbishopric of Hamburg, was created a Catholic diocese in 988. The first recorded bishops of Odense were Odinkar Hvide and Reginbert, who was consecrated by Archbishop Æthelnoth of Canterbury, in 1022.

Recent excavations have shown that from the early 11th century, the town developed in the area around Albani Torv, Fisketorvet, Overgade and Vestergade. By 1070, Odense had already grown into a city of stature in Denmark. Canute IV of Denmark, generally considered to be the last Viking king, was murdered by unruly peasants, discontent with the high taxes he imposed on the town, in Odense&#x27;s St Alban&#x27;s Priory on 10 July 1086. He was canonized in 1100. The priory no longer exists, although a church has been situated on the site since about 900. At the beginning of the 12th century, Benedictine monks from England founded St Canute&#x27;s Abbey. It was here the English monk Ælnoth wrote Denmark&#x27;s first literary work, &quot;Vita et Passio S. Canuti&quot; (The Life and Passion of St Canute). Canute&#x27;s shrine in Odense Cathedral (which was attached to the priory) attracted pilgrims throughout the Middle Ages.

===Middle Ages===

In the Middle Ages, a number of churches and monasteries were built in the town. St Canute&#x27;s Church (&quot;Skt. Knuds Kirke&quot;), now the cathedral, dates from the end of the 13th century and was closely connected to the Benedictine Order. The town&#x27;s other old churches are St Mary&#x27;s (&quot;Vor Frue Kirke&quot;) and St John&#x27;s (&quot;Skt. Hans Kirke&quot;) with its adjacent monastery. Greyfriars Monastery (&quot;Gråbrødre Kloster&quot;) was founded by the Franciscans in 1279.

In 1247 Odense was burned by Abel of Denmark during conflicts with his brother King Erik IV. The cathedral had to be completely rebuilt. Nevertheless, the town continued to flourish as a commercial centre, and was charted in 1335. The city thrived economically during the Middle Ages, attracting many merchants and craftsman who traded their goods.

In 1482 Bishop Karl Rønnov brought the German printer Johann Snell to Odense to print a short prayer book, &quot;Breviarium Ottoniense&quot;, considered to be the first work to be printed in Scandinavia. In parallel Snell printed &quot;De obsidione et bello Rhodiano&quot;, an account of the Turkish siege of the island of Rhodes.

After the Danish Reformation, involving the suppression of the Catholic bishopric in 1536, the city enjoyed a sustained period of prosperity from the 1530s to the mid-17th century, becoming northern Funen&#x27;s commercial centre. One of the main sources of income was the sale of cattle, providing substantial funds for the construction of fine half-timbered houses for the local merchants. The local nobility also participated in the city&#x27;s development by building residences where they spent the winter months. But the city&#x27;s prosperity came to an abrupt end in the late 1650s heavy taxes were imposed after the end of the Swedish Wars. A period of stagnation ensued until the end of the 18th century.

From the 16th century the town was the meeting-place of several parliaments, and until 1805 Odense was the seat of the provincial assembly of Funen. By 1700 Odense&#x27;s population was about 4,000.

===Development===

Dramatic changes began in Odense in the 18th century to modernise the city and a great plan was drawn up for development. In 1720, Frederick IV ordered the rebuilding of Odense Palace, partly on the foundations of the 13th century St. Hans’s Monastery, and the construction of St Hans’s Church by the Knights Hospitallers. An 8 kilometre (5.0 mi) long, 7.5 metre (25 ft) deep canal from Odense Harbour to Odense Fjord was built between 1796 and 1806 to facilitate the growth of Odense as a port city, radically increasing its level of trade and population. Founded in 1796, Odense Teater is the first provincial theatre in Denmark and the country&#x27;s second oldest. Odense Central Library was established in 1924 and removed to Odense station in 1995. The Odense Music Library contains Denmark&#x27;s largest collection of phonograms.

From the 1840s, the city enjoyed a period of rapid expansion beyond its traditional boundaries, becoming Denmark&#x27;s second largest city. The city gates were demolished in 1851 and soon afterwards development extended to the area south of the river. Glove production, which had begun in the 18th century, developed into one of the most important industries while the harbour facilities were further expanded. In 1853 Denmark&#x27;s first modern water and gas works were opened in Odense. Commerce was further boosted by the building of a railway across Funen in 1865, and Odense became one of Denmark&#x27;s largest rail junctions. All this provided an ideal basis for industrialisation, attracting a wide range of industries including iron and metals, textiles, and food and beverages. Separate areas of the city were devoted to increased industrial and residential expansion, and the population of the city began to grow markedly; by 1900 it had 35,000 inhabitants.

===Modern history===
Odense&#x27;s most famous landmark was Odinstårnet (&quot;The Odin Tower&quot;) constructed in 1935, as the second-tallest tower in Europe, only surpassed by the Eiffel Tower with its 177 meters. &quot;Odinstårnet&quot; was blown up by a Danish Nazi group in 1944 and has never been rebuilt. However, a miniature model now stands in Odinsparken in the area where the original was located. During the German occupation in the Second World War, Odense&#x27;s general strike in August 1943 contributed to terminating collaboration with the Germans.

Until the beginning of the Danish industrial revolution, Odense was also the second-largest city in modern Denmark, but has in recent times been overtaken by Aarhus. From the 1960s Odense increasingly became a cultural hub, with the establishment of a university in 1966 and the launching of trade shows, including the large Odense Congress Centre. In 1988 a major national television network, TV2, was established in Odense.

In celebration of the thousandth anniversary in 1988, a forest, Tusindårsskoven (meaning &quot;The Thousand Year Forest&quot;) was planted. In 2005 the city celebrated the 200th anniversary of the birth of Hans Christian Andersen.

The Odense Steel Shipyard (&quot;Staalskibsvæeft&quot;), which since 1996 had been Denmark&#x27;s largest shipbuilding facility, closed in 2012 as a result of international competition. Opened in 1919 by A.P. Møller, it latterly produced container ships for Mærsk, the parent company. The Lindø site was sold to the Port of Odense (&quot;Odense Havn&quot;) who are developing the Lindø Industrial Park.

==Geography==

Odense is situated in the northeastern centre of the island of Funen. By road, Odense is located north of Svendborg, to the south of Aarhus, to the southwest of Copenhagen, east of Esbjerg and southeast of Kolding. Suburbs of Odense include Stige to the north, Seden, Bullerup and Agedrup to the northeast, Blommenslyst to the west, Bellinge to the southwest, and Neder Holluf and Højby to the south.

The Odense River flows through Odense, to the south of the main shopping quarter. To the north of the city is the Odense Fjord, and to the northeast, along the 165 road to Kerteminde is Kerteminde Fjord. The fjord is accessed through the narrow passage of Gabets, between Hals and Skoven, and is connected by canal to the Port of Odense. The small fishing village of Bregnør lies to the southeast of the passage. A controlling depth of is reported in the northern part of channel between the entrance to the fjord and Lindo Terminal Quay. The bight of Fyns Hoved to the northeast of the harbour curves south to form the approach to Odense Fjord. The eastern side of the bight between Fyns Hoved and Skoven, to the south, is irregular, with a beach and hills behind it, and to the south of the bight is the small, shallow Korshavn Bay, with the Korshavn Light in the vicinity. Skoven is a bare, rugged peninsula, with Dalby Bay (Dalby Bugt) to the east.

In the southwestern part of the Odense Fjord are the islands of Vigelsø and the 21 hectare Tornø, although the latter is connected to the mainland by a 300-metre (980 ft)-long causeway. Vigelsø is the largest island in the fjord at 132 hectares and is an important breeding ground for migratory birds. It is part of the Special Area of Conservation &quot;No. SPC 94, Odense Fjord&quot; under the EU Habitat and Birds Directives and has been subject to close monitoring, with the target to reach at least &quot;good&quot; ecological status by 2015. The island is low-lying, the highest point of Østerhoved only reaching six metres above the sea. There is a 25 hectare forest on the northern part of the island while the southern part consists of coastal meadows.

===Climate===
Odense has a temperate oceanic climate, classified as Köppen zone &quot;Cfb&quot;. Mild summers feature average maximum temperatures exceeding 20 °C (68 °F), while winters are characterised by minimum temperatures dropping just below freezing. The hottest months on average are July and August with highs of 21 °C (70 °F) and daily mean temperatures of 17 °C (63 °F) and 16 °C (61 °F) respectively. These are also the wettest months, with August receiving and July of rain on average. Extratropical cyclones frequently affect the region, contributing to abundant precipitation. The coldest months are January and February, with a daily mean temperature of 0 °C (32 °F), and lows of −2 °C (28 °F) and −3 °C (26 °F) respectively. It is common for Odense Fjord to contain ice between January and March, and the entrance is kept clear by icebreakers. The tidal range in the fjord varies up to , and winds from the west and northeast may raise the water level by up to and winds from the east and southwest may lower it by up to . Climate data for the city are recorded at Hans Christian Andersen Airport (ICAO: EKOD).

== Demographics ==
Odense has long been a populated town, and in 1670 it had a population of 3,808 people. By 1787 the population had grown to 5,363 to and 5,782 in 1801. The population grew markedly during the 19th century, reaching 8,709 inhabitants in 1834, 10,238 in 1845, 12,932 in 1855, 16,970 in 1870, 20,804 in 1880 and 30,268 in 1890.

With improvements in communications by rail and via the port, the population of Odense grew dramatically in the early 20th century. The 1901 census recorded 40,138 people, growing to 47,224 in 1911, 61,969 in 1921 and 87,090 in 1935. During the Second World War, the population passed the 100,000 mark, reaching 103,107 in 1945. It continued to grow in the post war years, with 120,570 recorded in 1955 and 133,384 in 1965; the city reached a population of 139,490 people in 1970, a time when it was developing as a university city after Odense University was established in 1966.

Residents began to move out of the centre into the suburban areas which were included in Odense Municipality after boundaries were redefined in 1970. As a result, the population declined slightly in the 1970s and 1980s, falling to 136,646 in 1981. It began climbing again in the late 1980s, and steadily grew to 144,518 in 1996 and 145,554 in 2004. In 2010 Odense had a population of 166,305 people. As of 2017 it had a population of 176,683.


==Municipal administration==

Odense Municipality is the administrative unit which covers not only the city of Odense but surrounding suburbs and villages. Odense City Council consists of 29 members, including a mayor. The former mayor of Odense, Anker Boye, is a member of the Social Democratic Party. His first term was from 1993 to 2005 when he was defeated by Jan Boye, a Conservative. He was re-elected in the 2009 election, forming a coalition with the Red–Green Alliance, the Socialist People&#x27;s Party and the Social Democrats. The city council&#x27;s motto is &quot;At lege er at leve&quot; (Playing is living) summarising a new approach addressing learning, innovation, development and growth with targets for 2017. Boye and his administration have been criticised for mismanaging the celebrations for the 200th anniversary of Hans Christian Andersen in 2005, above all for allegedly signing a contract with Tina Turner for a show which resulted in a deficit of 13 million kroner.

In the 2013 municipal elections, Boye was successful in obtaining sufficient support from the Liberals and the left to ensure his continuation as mayor from the beginning of 2014.

Boye announced in December 2016 that he would resign as mayor on 1 January 2017. The new mayor of Odense would be Peter Rahbæk Juel, also a member of the Social Democrats. Rahbæk Juel succeeded Boye as announced and continues to serve as mayor after the municipal elections in November 2017.

== Economy ==
Odense is Funen&#x27;s most important industrial and commercial centre, and the city&#x27;s central location in Denmark makes it one of the national convention and congress centres. Enterprises include the Albani Brewery, ABB (Asea Brown Boveri), Kansas Workwear (clothing), Plus Pack (canning and containers) as well as manufacturers in the electrical sector such as Riegens / SG Lighting. In recent years there has been a general trend from manufacturing into the service sector. By 2002, 51% of the workforce was employed by the service sector while only 13% were working in industry. Lindø Wharf, once Denmark&#x27;s largest shipbuilding facility, has now been converted into Lindø Industrial Park specialising in the production and storage of components for the offshore industries, creating a variety of new tenants. GASA, a large horticultural centre, supplies fruit, vegetables, flowers and plants to most of the country as well as for export. Established in 1988, Denmark&#x27;s major commercial television channel TV 2 is based in Odense.

The Rosengårdcentret shopping centre is located in the south-eastern part of Odense. The centre dates from 1971 and is the largest in Denmark with floor space and more than 150 shops as well as restaurants, a cinema and a fitness centre. A wide variety of shops can be found in the city centre, especially on Kongensgade and Vestergade and adjacent pedestrian streets.
Tourism is an important source of income for the city. In 2008 Odense Municipality was listed seventh in Denmark for turnover on tourism, reaching 1.6 million Danish kroner for the year. In 2011, Odense Zoo was Funen&#x27;s most popular tourist attraction and the eleventh most popular in Denmark with 405,913 visitors. The zoo was founded in 1930 and covers an area of and has roughly 2,000 animals, covering 147 species. In 2001, Odense Zoo inaugurated a DKK 60 million &quot;Oceanium&quot; featuring South American animal life.

Nightlife in the city culminates in Brandts Passage, which contains numerous restaurants, bars and cafes. Hotels of note include the Radisson SAS HC Andersen Hotel, the First Hotel Grand with its brasserie bar, the 68-room Old English-style Clarion Collection Hotel Plaza, City Hotel, which is in close proximity to the Hans Christian Andersen museum, and the 140-room Danhostel Odense City.

Odense has become an internationally recognized hub for robotics, particularly following the success of companies such as Universal Robots and Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR). The city hosts numerous startups, leading academic institutions in robotics at the University of Southern Denmark, the national drone test center at Hans Christian Andersen Airport, and the national Danish cluster for the robot industry, Odense Robotics, with more than 300 robotics, drone and automation companies, employing nearly 20,000 people. Odense is especially known for its advancements in collaborative robots, or &quot;co-bots.&quot; 

== Landmarks ==
Nonnebakken, a hill in the Odense area, is the site of one of Denmark&#x27;s six former Viking ring castles, built during the reign of Sweyn Forkbeard, who had forced his father Harold Bluetooth to leave the country and seek refuge by the Jomsvikings in Wollin (modern Poland) in around 975. The fort provided its occupier the command of the Odense River passing next to the hill. The archaeological remains of the fort were heavily damaged when a building for the Odd Fellow lodge was constructed on the site during the late nineteenth century.

===Churches===
Odense is the see of the bishop of Funen. Saint Canute&#x27;s Cathedral () was formerly connected with the great Benedictine monastery of the same name, and is one of the largest and finest buildings of its kind in Denmark. Originally dating from 1081 to 1093, the church was rebuilt in the 13th century in brick in a pure Gothic style. Under the altar lies Canute (Danish: &quot;Knud&quot;), the patron saint of Denmark and his brother on public display. A large fragment of Byzantine cloth is displayed next to the two skeletons. The cathedral also boasts one of Denmark&#x27;s most remarkable altarpieces, a magnificent triptych by Claus Berg. Kings Jens and Christian II are buried in the city.

St Alban&#x27;s Church, built in the Neogothic style and consecrated in 1908, is the Roman Catholic church of Odense. Its steeple is high. St Mary&#x27;s Church (&quot;Vor Frue Kirke&quot; or Our Lady&#x27;s Church), built in the 13th century and restored in 1851–1852 and again in 1864, contains a carved 16th-century altarpiece by Claus Berg of Lübeck. St John&#x27;s Church (&quot;Sankt Hans Kirke&quot;), first mentioned in 1295, was built by the Knights Hospitaller, also known as the Order of Saint John. Not much of the original building remains as it was rebuilt in 1636 and subsequently restored. Built of red brick with horizontal decorations on the chancel wall, it has large Gothic windows. The date of 1496 on one of the bells in the step-ribbed tower may well be the year the church was completed. The tower is adjacent to Odense Palace which was originally built as a monastery.

Ansgars Church was the first church to be built in Odense since the Middle Ages. Completed in 1902, it was designed by Niels Jacobsen in the late Romanesque style in red brick on granite foundations. The cross-shaped interior is complemented by a spired bell-tower, high. The Peace Church (&quot;Fredenskirke&quot;) consecrated in 1920 was so named in gratitude for the end of the First World War. The church was the work of Peder Vilhelm Jensen-Klint who went on to design Copenhagen&#x27;s Grundtvig&#x27;s Church.

===City Hall===

Odense&#x27;s City Hall (&quot;Odense Rådhus&quot;), with its medieval Italian look, was designed by Johan Daniel Herholdt and Carl Lendorf in the Historicist style. Completed in 1883, it combines red masonry with sandstone decorations, stepped gables and a saw-tooth course. It stands on the site of a smaller building from 1480. In 1937 Bent Helveg-Møller won the competition for the building&#x27;s enlargement. The tower over the main entrance was torn down in 1942 but was not rebuilt. As work was delayed during the war, the extension was not completed until 1955. In conjunction with Hans Christian Andersen&#x27;s 200th anniversary in 2005, comprehensive renovation work was completed on the building&#x27;s interiors, including the entrance halls, meeting rooms, banqueting hall and council chamber.

===Palaces and theatres===

Odense Palace was erected by Frederick IV, who died there in 1730. Now an administrative building, it stands on the site of &quot;Sankt Hans Kloster&quot;, a 15th-century monastery which was transferred to the Crown in 1536. The main white Baroque wing with 13 bays was designed by J.C. Krieger for Frederick IV and completed in 1723. Set in a park, the King&#x27;s Garden was constructed to a French design by Johan Cornelius Krieger.

Odense Teater, first established in 1796, is Denmark&#x27;s second oldest theatrical enterprise and one of the country&#x27;s three main theatres. The original building was on Sortebrødre Torv was used until 1914 when a new building designed by Jacobsen was opened on Jernbanegade. It has three stages: &quot;Store Scene&quot;, &quot;Værkstedet&quot;, and &quot;Foyerscenen&quot;. The theatre also has stages in the former sugar factory &quot;Sukkerkogeriet&quot;, where it runs the first drama school outside Copenhagen established in 1941. It is notable in theatrical history for staging the première of Henrik Ibsen&#x27;s first contemporary realist drama &quot;The Pillars of Society&quot; on 14 November 1877. Teater Momentum or Teater uden Ryglæn, publicly funded by the municipal government and the Ministry of Cultural Affairs, is also of note. Established in 2005, it signs on a new director each year who is charged with creating the &quot;volume&quot; of the year with a set of plays and performers. It also puts on other cultural entertainment including concerts, debates, lectures and poetry.

Odense Symphony Orchestra (Odense Symfoniorkester), one of Denmark&#x27;s five regional orchestras, was formally established in 1946. The orchestra is based in Odense Concert Hall, which was inaugurated in 1982. Most of the orchestra’s concerts are given in the Carl Nielsen Hall, a seating capacity of 1,212 and a large 46-stops organ built by Marcussen &amp; Son. First established in 1948, Funen Opera (&quot;Den Fynske Opera&quot;) was reopened in 1996 after a period of closure. It specializes in presenting contemporary operas in Danish.

===Hans Christian Andersen connections===

Remembered above all for his fairy tales, Hans Christian Andersen was born in Odense in 1805. It is thought his birthplace is the small yellow house on the corner of Hans Jensens Stræde and Bangs Boder in the old town. In 1908 the house was opened as the Hans Christian Andersen Museum. It documents his life from his childhood years as the son of a struggling shoemaker, to his schooling, career as an author, and later life, with artefacts providing an insight into his acquaintances and adventures. Andersen&#x27;s childhood home is on Munkemøllestræde not far from the cathedral. He lived in the little half-timbered house from the age of two until he was 14. Opened as a museum in 1930, the house contains an exhibition of the cobbling tools used by his father and other items based on Andersen&#x27;s own descriptions.

Throughout the city there are numerous statues and sculptures representing characters from the stories of Hans Christian Andersen. They include the Steadfast Tin Soldier, the Mermaid, the Shepherdess and the Chimney Sweep, the Toad, the Darning Needle, the Emperor&#x27;s New Clothes, the Sea Horse, the Paper Boat, the Flying Trunk and the Wild Swans. There is also a distinctive statue of Andersen in &quot;Eventyrparken&quot; (The Fairy Tale Park) beside the cathedral. Sculpted by Louis Hasselriis in 1888, it shows the storyteller with a book in his hand, ready to entertain onlookers with his fairy tales.

===Museums===

The museums in Odense are mainly governed by the Odense City Museums, a department of the municipal government. Funen&#x27;s Art Museum (Fyns Kunstmuseum), formerly The Museum of Funen Diocese, is one of Denmark&#x27;s oldest art museums, dating to 1885. It contains the principal works by Jens Juel, Dankvart Dreyer, P.S. Krøyer and H. A. Brendekilde. The open-air The Funen Village museum (&quot;Den Fynske Landsby&quot;) tries to emulate what country life was like in Denmark at the time of Andersen&#x27;s life and contains houses of historical Odense.

The Carl Nielsen Museum is dedicated to the life of Carl Nielsen and his wife, the sculptor Anne Marie Carl-Nielsen. It documents his life from his childhood in the town of Nr. Lyndelse, to his career and success on the European music scene, with his violins, his bugle and his grand piano on display, as well as a number of his musical scores, including six symphonies, three concertos, two operas, and chamber music and numerous songs.
The Møntergården cultural history museum of Odense is one of the most notable remaining Renaissance buildings of the city, built in 1646 by the nobleman Falk Gøye. It has many artefacts related to the early Viking history in Odense, and is named after the narrow street Møntestræde adjacent to the building, where a coin workshop once operated in around 1420. Located in a courtyard of half-timbered houses, the museum also has exhibits on Funen&#x27;s ancient history, as well as Odense in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.

The Danish Railway Museum is the national railway museum of Denmark, the largest such museum in Scandinavia. It was established in 1975 in a former engine shed adjacent to the city&#x27;s main railway station and has an area of over , with some 50 locomotives and railway carriages on 20 rail tracks from all periods of Danish rail history. The oldest steam engine dates back to 1869.

The Brandts Museum of Photographic Art (Museet for Fotokunst) in Odense is the only national Danish art museum dedicated specifically to photographic art. It was founded on 13 September 1985 as part of the Brandts International Centre for Art and Culture and opened its own exhibition space in 1987. The Media Museum of Odense documents the history of the freedom of speech in Denmark since 1849, and the development of the printing press and the history of Danish broadsheet &quot;Berlingske&quot;.

== Education ==
===Odense University===
Odense University, established by law in 1964, was the first of three new provincial universities created to relieve pressure on the universities of Copenhagen and Aarhus. Teaching began in 1966. By the end of the 20th century, there were 11,000 students and some 5,000 employees. Before it became part of the University of Southern Denmark in 1998, it had four faculties covering arts, medicine, and natural and social sciences. The university building which opened in 1971 was designed by KHR Arkitekter.

===University of Southern Denmark===

The University of Southern Denmark (&quot;Syddansk Universitet&quot;) was established in 1998 as a merger of Odense University, the Southern Denmark Business School (&quot;Handelshøjskole Syd&quot;), the Southern Engineering School (&quot;Ingeniørhøjskole Syd&quot;) and the South Jutland University Centre (&quot;Sydjysk Universitetscenter&quot;). The main campus is in Odense but there are also departments in Copenhagen, Esbjerg, Kolding, Slagelse and Sønderborg. With some 26,000 students (2012), the establishment is Denmark&#x27;s third largest university. The Faculty of Engineering (&quot;Det Tekniske Fakultet&quot;) combines several institutions: &quot;Odense Maskinteknikum&quot; (a mechanical engineering college which was established in 1905 and in 1962 became the Southern Engineering School), the Mads Clausen Institute and the Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller Institute.

The Odense campus of the University of Southern Denmark is known to host all faculties and study programs at the same place, contrary to, for instance, University of Copenhagen where the institutes and disciplines have been spread out in the city. This, too, is reflected in the strategy of the university which stresses cross-disciplinary research. In 2024, The University of Southern Denmark campus and Nyt OUH – the new buildings for Odense University Hospital – will be physically connected to promote cooperations between the two institutions. The combined university and hospital will cover 500,000 square meters, making it one of the largest buildings in Europe. 

===Other educational institutions===
Odense also includes departments of the UCL University College headquartered in Vejle. The university is the result of a merger between several further education institutions on Funen and in Jelling, Vejle and Svendborg. UCL is currently undertaking comprehensive renovation of the buildings on Niels Bohrs Allé from the 1960s where it will concentrate its Odense interests. It intends to open University College Lillebælt Campus Odense in August 2014.

Aimed at improving employment opportunities in business, the Lillebaelt Academy of Professional Higher Education (&quot;Erhvervsakademiet Lillebælt&quot;) was established in 2009 as a result of a merger between Tietgen Business College, SDE college, Kold College and Vejle Business College. In 2014, it had 3,200 students and a staff of 300. Its programmes are offered at various locations in Odense and Vejle. Under the auspices of the municipality, the Odense School of Music (&quot;Odense Musikskole&quot;) offers educational courses with an emphasis on music to children and young people up to the age of 25.

Kold College is a privately run institution offering vocational courses in food, agriculture and gardening. Founded in 2004, after a merger between Datum Tekniske Skole and Gartnerskolen Søhus, it changed its name to Kold College in 2008. It also offers secondary education courses in the natural sciences. The college is named after Christen Kold who founded vocational schools on Funen in the mid-19th century.

Funen Art Academy is an independent, nationally recognized educational institution located in the Brandts complex in central Odense which offers 5-year course in the visual arts.

Odense is home to eight gymnasiums (Grammar schools), 21 state grade schools as well as a number of private schools.

== Sports ==

Odense&#x27;s most important football clubs are Odense Boldklub (OB), BK Marienlyst (BM), B1909, and B1913. OB has a history going back to 1887 when it was founded as &quot;Odense Kricketklub&quot; (Odense Cricket Club). It changed its name to Odense Boldklub in 1893 after football was included in its activities. The club has won three national championships, and five cup titles. The club play their home matches at Odense Stadium, also known as Odense Stadion. BK Marienlyst, founded in 1922, are in the Danish 2nd Division, and play their home matches at Marienlystcentret, which has a capacity of 1,200. The club also has a notable volleyball team. RC Odense represents the city at rugby in combination with Lindø RSC.

The Odense Bulldogs are a professional ice hockey team based in Odense. They play in the top Danish League Metal Ligaen, as the only team from Funen. In tennis, Tennis Club Odense is located near the Odense River. The country&#x27;s largest tennis centre is due to open in Marienlyst in 2014.

The H.C. Andersen Marathon is held annually in Odense. On Ascension Sunday, children can participate in Eventyrløbet (the Fairy Tale Run) with circuits from 2.5 to 10 km.
There are many smaller sports clubs in Odense covering athletics, badminton, basketball, boxing, climbing, cycling, rowing, fencing, football, golf, gymnastics, handball, jujitsu, karate, riding, roller-skating, shooting, swimming, table tennis, tennis, volleyball, yoga and wrestling as well as several specialising in facilities for people with disabilities.

===Esports===
In early December 2017, the ESL Pro League Season 6 finals were held in the 4,000-seat Arena Fyn. The event would return to Odense for its Season 8 finals, won by the hometown heroes Astralis, in December 2018. The season 10 offline finals of ESL Pro League were also held in the city.

== Transport ==
===Boat===
The Port of Odense consists of three main basins and a number of facilities along the canal, with quays measuring roughly in length in total. Vessels up to a length of and a draft of are facilitated in the port. The wharf for tankers is situated outside the harbour on the southern side of the canal, with facilities for tankers, general cargo ships, bulk, and LPG ships, and has a depth of .

===Great Belt Bridge===
Accessibility to Odense was greatly increased when the ferry service between the two main Danish islands, Zealand and Funen, was replaced by the Great Belt Bridge – opened in 1997 for rail traffic, 1998 for road traffic. When the bridge opened, it was the second longest suspension bridge in the world. Aarhus can be reached by train in 1 hour and 33 minutes while, thanks to the Great Belt Bridge, trains to Copenhagen can take as little as an hour and a quarter.

===Rail, bus and tram===

Odense&#x27;s main railway station Odense Station lies on the railway line between Copenhagen and Jutland, Denmark&#x27;s peninsular mainland. International trains connect the town with Hamburg in Germany. Local and regional trains link Odense to the rest of Denmark. A separate passenger railway line, Svendborgbanen, operates between Odense and Svendborg. Formerly, railways connected Odense to most of Funen&#x27;s coastal cities, but these links were closed down in the 1950s and 1960s. Today, these regional routes are served by buses operated by the public company FynBus, which also operates the town&#x27;s municipal bus service, connecting the town&#x27;s suburbs to the city centre. On 28 May 2022, Odense’s new tram line entered service. A 14.5 km double-track line runs from Tarup in the northwest to the station, Syddansk Universitet, a hospital, and Hjallese in the south, with 26 stops. Possible extensions are under consideration.

===Road===
By road, Odense connects to Zealand and Jutland with the Funish Motorway (&quot;Fynske Motorvej&quot;), a section of the E20, and to Svendborg on the southern part of Funen by way of the Svendborg Motorway (&quot;Svendborgmotorvejen&quot;), which comprises the Danish national road 9. Other, smaller routes connect Odense to the rest of Funen, with direct links to all coastal towns.

In 2015 plannings were established on Denmark&#x27;s first Diverging diamond interchange (DDI), called &quot;Dynamisk Ruderanlæg&quot;, upgrading the diamond interchange number 52 on Fynske Motorvej (E20), crossing the roadways of Assesvej by following the American design of DDIs at On 17 September 2017, the redesigned interchange opened for traffic. Computer aided simulation and land usage resulted the DDI as the adequate solution.

===Air===
Odense is served by Odense Airport, which operates flights to tourist resorts, mainly in the summer months.

=== Cycling Initiatives in Odense ===
In 2016, the city of Odense, Denmark implemented a new form of technology to allow for more efficient bike travel. Often, when it is raining heavily, cyclists have had to sit in the rain for long periods of time at traffic lights, and this disincentives them to cycle to work that day. To fix this problem, Odense has placed rain sensors in traffic lights along their super bike highways. These sensors interact with motion detectors which &quot;allow the system to register when bikes are within 70 meters of the intersection.&quot; They then automatically prolong the green light. The intersection includes a small sign that explains the system to the cyclists, and when a light goes on, they can see the system is functioning. This technology allows cyclists to experience up to 20 seconds longer of green light, and makes their overall journey more efficient, safer, and dryer.

The Cycling Embassy of Denmark is the organization spearheading this research and initiatives. While there is not much criticism due to the cycling culture that is already fairly prevalent in Odense, those who commute in cars would be naturally upset by the longer red lights. However, the embassy believes that there should not be too much pushback because of the equity issue involved with being exposed to the rain versus being sheltered in a car. It will also only be utilized up to 3 times a month.

This initiative does not only optimize the corridor flow and speed for cyclists, but reinforces the &quot;green wave&quot;. The green wave is known as the ability to cycle through several intersections without having to stop. This is the overall thought the Cycling Embassy had in installing rain sensors, as they hope to implement the technology in other intersections of the city, creating an efficient city-wide system of sustainable transit. Eventually, riding a bike will be easier than riding a car.

==Healthcare==

The Odense University Hospital (OUH), established in 1912, is of major regional importance, not only for healthcare, but for conducting research in collaboration with the Institute of Clinical Research of the University of Southern Denmark. OUH is the largest hospital unit in Denmark and the largest employer in Odense, and as of 2006 it had 1200 beds and a staff of 7700 people, of which 1300 people were doctors. Today there are about 10,000 employees covering all fields of medicine. The hospital tower block is high, has 15 floors and is Odense&#x27;s tallest building. It is the principal hospital for the northern part of Funen but also takes patients from all over Denmark, as it has highly specialized units within hand replantation surgery and special neuro-radiological intervention.

The Hans Christian Andersen Children’s Hospital, part of the OUH, is the only paediatric department on the island of Funen, and also conducts research into nutrition and gastrointestinal diseases, asthma and allergies, hormonal diseases and others. As of 2013, the children&#x27;s hospital had consisted of seven wards and had 377 employees, with about 10,000 admissions and 25,000 annual outpatient visits annually. A new DKK 6.3 billion hospital is under construction in closer proximity to the University of Southern Denmark, scheduled to be completed in 2018. The hospital will have a floor area of .

Odense is home to several other private hospitals, including Privathospitalet H. C. Andersen Klinikken, Privathospitalet Hunderup, and Privathospitalet Mariahjemmet.

==Media==

Odense is the centre for media activity on Funen, and the hub of the regional network. Its principal newspaper is &quot;Fyens Stiftstidende&quot;, a daily broadsheet owned by Den Fynske Bladfond and published by Fyens Stiftstidende A/S, which was established on 3 January 1772. Until 1841 the newspaper was known as &quot;Kongelig Priviligerede Odense Adresse-Contoirs Efterretninger&quot;, and on 13 April 1993 the newspaper changed its 221-year-old tradition as a midday newspaper, to a morning paper. In 2013, it had an average circulation of 47,738, down from some 60,500 in 2005. The editor in chief, Per Westergård, chairs the board of the Centre for Journalism at the University of Southern Denmark, one of the two university journalism departments in Denmark. Denmark&#x27;s largest university press, the University Press of Southern Denmark, is also based in Odense. It was founded in 1966 as &quot;Odense University Press&quot; (&quot;Odense Universitetsforlag&quot;), and its authors are mainly academics from the University of Southern Denmark.

The television station TV 2, fully owned by the state since 2003, is based in Odense. The station began broadcasting on 1 October 1988 as a privately owned company, thereby ending the television monopoly previously exercised by the Danmarks Radio (DR). Since 2007, TV 2 has had about 1,000 employees. Now operating six channels, TV 2 now broadcasts over 40,000 hours of television programmes per year.

== Notable residents ==
* Note: &quot;Place of birth&quot; is shown for notables born in the wider Odense Municipality
=== Nobility ===
* Canute IV of Denmark ( 1042 – 1086), also known as &quot;Canute the Saint&quot; and &quot;Canute the Holy&quot;
* Charles I, Count of Flanders (1084–1127), also known as &quot;Charles the Good&quot;, son of Canute IV of Denmark 
* Ludvig Rosenkrantz (1628–1685), noble, military officer and land owner; settled in Norway
* Birgitte, Duchess of Gloucester (born 1946), wife of Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester, a first cousin of Queen Elizabeth II.

=== Public thought and politics ===

* Jørgen Sadolin (–1559), Danish reformer
* Frants Berg (1504–1591), clergyman, rector in Odense 1581, Bishop of Oslo in 1548–1580
* Jacob B. Winslow (1669–1760), Danish-French anatomist
* Ida Falbe-Hansen (1849–1922), educator, philologist and women&#x27;s activist
* Louise Winteler (1834–1926), headmistress, founder of the Louise Winteler girls school
* Anna Lohse (1866–1942), teacher and women&#x27;s rights activist
* Lise Østergaard (1924–1996), psychologist and politician
* Niels Helveg Petersen (1939–2017), politician
* Bendt Bendtsen (born 1954), politician and MEP in 2009–2019
* Lars Christian Lilleholt (born 1965), politician, former Minister of Energy, Utilities and Climate
* Jeanette Varberg (born 1978), archaeologist, curator at the National Museum of Denmark

=== Arts ===
* Johan Frederik Schultz (1756–1817), book printer and publisher
* Wilhelm Bendz (1804–1832), painter of genre works and portraits
* Hans Christian Andersen (1805–1875), novelist, poet, fairy tale and short story writer
* Carl Frederik Aagaard (1833–1895), landscape painter and decorative artist
* Julius Paulsen (1860–1940), painter
* Carl Nielsen (1865 in Sortelung – 1931), composer, musician, conductor and violinist
* Holger Jacobsen (1876–1960), architect
* Bodil Kjer (1917–2003), actress
* Dagmar Orlamundt (1863–1939), actress
* Ove Sprogøe (1919–2004), actor
* Morten Grunwald (1934–2018), actor, stage director and theatre manager
* Kim Larsen (1945–2018), rock and pop musician
* Jens Galschiøt (born 1954), sculptor; moved to Odense in 1973
* Ulrich Thomsen (born 1963 in Næsby), actor
* Claes Bang (born 1967), actor and musician
* Trine Dyrholm (born 1972), actress, singer and songwriter
* Roland Møller (born 1972), actor
* Johan Kobborg (born 1972), ballet dancer, choreographer, director and visual artist
* MØ (born 1988 in Ubberud), singer-songwriter

=== Business ===
* Erich Erichsen (1752–1837), merchant and ship-owner
* Johan Frederik Schultz (1756–1817), book printer and publisher
* Carl Frederik Tietgen (1829–1901), industrialist, financier and banker
* Niels Jacobsen (1865–1935), architect and politician, Chairman of The Lego Group, worked and died in Odense
* Kurt Østervig (1912–1986), furniture designer

=== Sport ===
* Edmund Hansen (1900–1995), tandem cyclist, Olympic silver medalist
* Abraham Kurland (1912–1999), wrestler, Olympic silver medalist
* Jytte Hansen (1932–2015), breaststroke swimmer
* Ib Solvang Hansen (1934–1978), professional wrestler
* Richard Møller Nielsen (1937 in Ubberud – 2014), football player and manager
* John Danielsen (born 1939), footballer
* Ole Bjørnmose (1944 in Strib - 2006), footballer
* Lars Høgh (born 1959), footballer
* Inger Pors Olsen (born 1966), rower
* Þorvaldur Örlygsson (born 1966), Icelandic footballer
* Anja Andersen (born 1969), handball player and coach, Olympic winner
* Niels Frederiksen (born 1970), football manager
* Thomas Helveg (born 1971), footballer
* Nicki Pedersen (born 1977), motorcycle speedway rider
* Allan Simonsen (1978–2013), racing driver
* Stephan Mølvig (born 1979), rower, Olympic winner
* Lars Jacobsen (born 1979), footballer
* Hans Andersen (born 1980), motorcycle speedway rider
* Helle Frederiksen (born 1981), triathlete
* Frederik Klokker (born 1983), cricketer
* Martin Damsbo (born 1985), compound archery competitor
* Rikke Møller Pedersen (born 1989), breaststroke swimmer, Olympic bronze medalist
* Caroline Wozniacki (born 1990), tennis player
* Viktor Axelsen (born 1994), badminton player, Olympic winner

== Twin towns – sister cities ==
Odense Municipality is twinned with:
* Columbus, United States
* Funabashi, Japan
* Groningen, Netherlands
* Iksan, South Korea
* İzmir, Turkey
* Kaunas, Lithuania
* Kyiv, Ukraine
* Klaksvík, Faroe Islands
* Kópavogur, Iceland
* Norrköping, Sweden
* Östersund, Sweden
* Schwerin, Germany
* Shaoxing, China
* St Albans, England, United Kingdom
* Tampere, Finland
* Trondheim, Norway
* Upernavik (Avannaata), Greenland
== See also ==
* Tourism in Denmark

== References ==
Bibliography
*
*
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* The City of Odense 
* FynBus – Municipal and regional bus operator</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25331" start="0" end="6" title="Odense" label="Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="59" end="69" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="74" end="80" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="120" end="125" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21146" start="199" end="218" title="Odense Municipality" label="Odense Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="309" end="319" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="321" end="327" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="332" end="339" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="357" end="365" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="370" end="374" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="406" end="423" title="Metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175539" start="458" end="479" title="Functional urban area" label="Functional urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="529" end="537" title="Province" label="Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12307283" start="547" end="567" title="Provinces of Denmark" label="&amp;quot;landsdel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28031" start="696" end="705" title="Svendborg" label="Svendborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="723" end="729" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="766" end="776" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623896" start="803" end="816" title="Odense County" label="Odense County"/>
<link wikidata="Q847014" start="833" end="845" title="Funen County" label="Funen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q26061" start="915" end="941" title="Region of Southern Denmark" label="Region of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="978" end="1001" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="1038" end="1048" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q212284" start="1308" end="1328" title="Canute IV of Denmark" label="Canute IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1366" end="1372" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587387" start="1428" end="1450" title="St. Canute&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Odense" label="St Alban&amp;#x27;s Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1599" end="1610" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432878" start="1739" end="1752" title="Odense Palace" label="Odense Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329867" start="1788" end="1802" title="Port of Odense" label="Port of Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421460" start="2010" end="2021" title="Odinstårnet" label="Odinstårnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2106" end="2111" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2119" end="2131" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166335" start="2137" end="2167" title="University of Southern Denmark" label="University of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="2251" end="2256" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246988" start="2385" end="2399" title="Albani Brewery" label="Albani Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484636" start="2404" end="2408" title="GASA" label="GASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q161059" start="2524" end="2535" title="Frederick IV of Denmark" label="Frederik IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568447" start="2564" end="2578" title="Odense Theatre" label="Odense Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419935" start="2584" end="2609" title="Odense Symphony Orchestra" label="Odense Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q490485" start="2619" end="2649" title="Hans Christian Andersen Museum" label="Hans Christian Andersen Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q211912" start="2784" end="2786" title="Odense BK" label="OB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436577" start="2788" end="2790" title="Boldklubben Marienlyst" label="BM"/>
<link wikidata="Q654223" start="2792" end="2797" title="Boldklubben 1909" label="B1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195591" start="2803" end="2808" title="Boldklubben 1913" label="B1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014368" start="2814" end="2829" title="Odense Bulldogs" label="Odense Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="2843" end="2853" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562556" start="2888" end="2910" title="H.C. Andersen Marathon" label="H.C. Andersen Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896204" start="2932" end="2963" title="Hans Christian Andersen Airport" label="Hans Christian Andersen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203165" start="2968" end="2982" title="Odense station" label="Odense station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="3034" end="3041" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036775" start="3115" end="3117" title="Vé (shrine)" label="vé"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3228" end="3238" title="Norse mythology" label="Nordic god"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="3240" end="3244" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618598" start="3314" end="3348" title="Roman Catholic bishopric of Odense" label="Roman Catholic bishopric of Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="3532" end="3541" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q667282" start="3611" end="3623" title="Odense River" label="Odense River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329562" start="3641" end="3657" title="Naesbyhoved Lake" label="Naesbyhoved Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566735" start="3682" end="3693" title="Nonnebakken" label="Nonnebakken"/>
<link wikidata="Q586552" start="3724" end="3744" title="Viking ring fortress" label="Viking ring fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="4183" end="4191" title="Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4301" end="4315" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Odense" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q254336" start="4401" end="4425" title="Archbishopric of Hamburg" label="Archbishopric of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618598" start="4441" end="4457" title="Roman Catholic bishopric of Odense" label="Catholic diocese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4526" end="4535" title="Reginbert of Odense" label="Reginbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110969" start="4571" end="4580" title="Æthelnoth (archbishop of Canterbury)" label="Æthelnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113985" start="4584" end="4594" title="Archbishopric of Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q212284" start="4828" end="4848" title="Canute IV of Denmark" label="Canute IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587387" start="5004" end="5026" title="St. Canute&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Odense" label="St Alban&amp;#x27;s Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363339" start="5294" end="5300" title="Ælnoth of Canterbury" label="Ælnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q492584" start="5641" end="5664" title="St. Canute&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Canute&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="5788" end="5805" title="Benedictine Order" label="Benedictine Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="6040" end="6051" title="Franciscan Order" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27932" start="6091" end="6106" title="Abel, King of Denmark" label="Abel of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q350226" start="6141" end="6153" title="Eric IV of Denmark" label="King Erik IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q91092" start="6466" end="6478" title="Johann Snell" label="Johann Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="6735" end="6741" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381174" start="6754" end="6772" title="Danish Reformation" label="Danish Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="7090" end="7103" title="half-timbered" label="half-timbered"/>
<link wikidata="Q632313" start="7380" end="7392" title="Dano-Swedish War (1657–58)" label="Swedish Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7910" end="7930" title="St. Hans’s Monastery" label="St. Hans’s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="7980" end="8000" title="Knights Hospitallers" label="Knights Hospitallers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329867" start="8066" end="8080" title="Odense Harbour" label="Odense Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131536" start="8084" end="8096" title="Odense Fjord" label="Odense Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568447" start="8253" end="8266" title="Odense Teater" label="Odense Teater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329859" start="8348" end="8370" title="Odense Central Library" label="Odense Central Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203165" start="8410" end="8424" title="Odense station" label="Odense station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8438" end="8458" title="Odense Music Library" label="Odense Music Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421460" start="9550" end="9561" title="Odinstårnet" label="Odinstårnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="9673" end="9685" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9844" end="9855" title="Odinsparken" label="Odinsparken"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9936" end="9952" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793946" start="10452" end="10455" title="TV 2 (Denmark)" label="TV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343428" start="10549" end="10564" title="Tusindårsskoven" label="Tusindårsskoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="10691" end="10714" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778277" start="10721" end="10742" title="Odense Steel Shipyard" label="Odense Steel Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18224" start="10921" end="10932" title="Mærsk" label="A.P. Møller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28031" start="11242" end="11251" title="Svendborg" label="Svendborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234" start="11317" end="11324" title="Esbjerg" label="Esbjerg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27119" start="11342" end="11349" title="Kolding" label="Kolding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478902" start="11377" end="11382" title="Stige" label="Stige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576325" start="11397" end="11402" title="Seden" label="Seden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340281" start="11404" end="11412" title="Bullerup" label="Bullerup"/>
<link wikidata="Q12300694" start="11417" end="11424" title="Agedrup" label="Agedrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354104" start="11443" end="11455" title="Blommenslyst" label="Blommenslyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788987" start="11469" end="11477" title="Bellinge, Denmark" label="Bellinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12328490" start="11500" end="11512" title="Neder Holluf" label="Neder Holluf"/>
<link wikidata="Q29969" start="11710" end="11720" title="Kerteminde" label="Kerteminde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12321735" start="11724" end="11740" title="Kerteminde Fjord" label="Kerteminde Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11819" end="11825" title="Skoven" label="Skoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511905" start="11905" end="11912" title="Bregnør Fiskerleje" label="Bregnør"/>
<link wikidata="Q12313227" start="12090" end="12100" title="Fyns Hoved" label="Fyns Hoved"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432664" start="12359" end="12371" title="Korshavn Bay" label="Korshavn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12382" end="12396" title="Korshavn Light" label="Korshavn Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523958" start="12556" end="12563" title="Vigelsø" label="Vigelsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q576274" start="12583" end="12588" title="Tornø" label="Tornø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191622" start="12812" end="12840" title="Special Area of Conservation" label="Special Area of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="12888" end="12890" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q759874" start="12891" end="12898" title="Habitats Directive" label="Habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637838" start="12903" end="12918" title="Birds Directive" label="Birds Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777019" start="13237" end="13251" title="meadow" label="coastal meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="13282" end="13307" title="Oceanic climate" label="temperate oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="13323" end="13350" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen zone &amp;quot;Cfb&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="13754" end="13775" title="Extratropical cyclone" label="Extratropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896204" start="14337" end="14368" title="Hans Christian Andersen Airport" label="Hans Christian Andersen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q207529" start="14370" end="14374" title="International Civil Aviation Organization airport code" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21146" start="15400" end="15419" title="Odense Municipality" label="Odense Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="15890" end="15896" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766025" start="16003" end="16013" title="Anker Boye" label="Anker Boye"/>
<link wikidata="Q212101" start="16034" end="16057" title="Social Democrats (Denmark)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439289" start="16120" end="16128" title="Jan Boye" label="Jan Boye"/>
<link wikidata="Q902619" start="16132" end="16144" title="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party (Denmark)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q25785" start="16215" end="16233" title="Red–Green Alliance (Denmark)" label="Red–Green Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q615603" start="16239" end="16268" title="Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Party (Denmark)" label="Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="16677" end="16688" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="16742" end="16748" title="Danish krone" label="kroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q916161" start="16845" end="16853" title="Danish Social Liberal Party" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246988" start="17445" end="17459" title="Albani Brewery" label="Albani Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="17461" end="17484" title="ABB" label="ABB (Asea Brown Boveri)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793946" start="18263" end="18267" title="TV 2 (Denmark)" label="TV 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656977" start="18293" end="18309" title="Rosengårdcentret" label="Rosengårdcentret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077669" start="18854" end="18864" title="Odense Zoo" label="Odense Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="19072" end="19079" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="19115" end="19118" title="Danish krone" label="DKK"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515141" start="19323" end="19353" title="Radisson SAS HC Andersen Hotel" label="Radisson SAS HC Andersen Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894055" start="19705" end="19721" title="Universal Robots" label="Universal Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166335" start="19841" end="19871" title="University of Southern Denmark" label="University of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896204" start="19907" end="19938" title="Hans Christian Andersen Airport" label="Hans Christian Andersen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566735" start="20221" end="20232" title="Nonnebakken" label="Nonnebakken"/>
<link wikidata="Q586552" start="20309" end="20328" title="Viking ring castles" label="Viking ring castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="20356" end="20371" title="Sweyn I of Denmark" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201041" start="20399" end="20415" title="Harold I of Denmark" label="Harold Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41345" start="20460" end="20471" title="Jomsvikings" label="Jomsvikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q148505" start="20475" end="20481" title="Wollin" label="Wollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425508" start="20686" end="20696" title="Odd Fellow" label="Odd Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="20697" end="20702" title="Masonic Lodge" label="lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="20797" end="20800" title="Episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="20808" end="20814" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20818" end="20823" title="Bishopric of Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q492584" start="20825" end="20854" title="Saint Canute&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Canute&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="20896" end="20907" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="21106" end="21112" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212284" start="21141" end="21147" title="Canute the Saint of Denmark" label="Canute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="21259" end="21268" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79218" start="21406" end="21414" title="triptych" label="triptych"/>
<link wikidata="Q472749" start="21418" end="21428" title="Claus Berg" label="Claus Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157776" start="21436" end="21440" title="John, King of Denmark" label="Jens"/>
<link wikidata="Q154460" start="21445" end="21457" title="Christian II of Denmark" label="Christian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992243" start="21483" end="21505" title="St. Alban&amp;#x27;s Church, Odense" label="St Alban&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="21520" end="21529" title="Neogothic" label="Neogothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="21830" end="21836" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377187" start="21838" end="21859" title="Saint Hans Church" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="21934" end="21953" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q12301928" start="22378" end="22392" title="Ansgars Church" label="Ansgars Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12328813" start="22497" end="22511" title="Niels Jacobsen" label="Niels Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="22524" end="22534" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22654" end="22666" title="Peace Church, Odense" label="Peace Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22759" end="22774" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q705956" start="22803" end="22829" title="Peder Vilhelm Jensen-Klint" label="Peder Vilhelm Jensen-Klint"/>
<link wikidata="Q650849" start="22870" end="22893" title="Grundtvig&amp;#x27;s Church" label="Grundtvig&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885103" start="22927" end="22936" title="Odense City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362713" start="23014" end="23035" title="Johan Daniel Herholdt" label="Johan Daniel Herholdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12305286" start="23040" end="23052" title="Carl Lendorf" label="Carl Lendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q277466" start="23060" end="23071" title="Historicism (art)" label="Historicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939660" start="23150" end="23164" title="Crow-stepped gable" label="stepped gables"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23252" end="23270" title="Bent Helveg-Møller" label="Bent Helveg-Møller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432878" start="23751" end="23764" title="Odense Palace" label="Odense Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q546170" start="24033" end="24045" title="J.C. Krieger" label="J.C. Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10547585" start="24105" end="24123" title="King&amp;#x27;s Garden (Odense)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q546170" start="24162" end="24185" title="Johan Cornelius Krieger" label="Johan Cornelius Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568447" start="24188" end="24201" title="Odense Teater" label="Odense Teater"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="24794" end="24806" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774700" start="24853" end="24875" title="The Pillars of Society" label="The Pillars of Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691865" start="24903" end="24918" title="Teater Momentum" label="Teater Momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419935" start="25295" end="25320" title="Odense Symphony Orchestra" label="Odense Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q694082" start="25640" end="25659" title="Marcussen &amp;amp; Son" label="Marcussen &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q12308051" start="25688" end="25699" title="Funen Opera" label="Funen Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="25912" end="25922" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q490485" start="26138" end="26168" title="Hans Christian Andersen Museum" label="Hans Christian Andersen Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q942029" start="27194" end="27210" title="Louis Hasselriis" label="Louis Hasselriis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077667" start="27386" end="27405" title="Odense City Museums" label="Odense City Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509094" start="27449" end="27472" title="Funen&amp;#x27;s Art Museum" label="Funen&amp;#x27;s Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q581361" start="27627" end="27636" title="Jens Juel (painter)" label="Jens Juel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365368" start="27638" end="27653" title="Dankvart Dreyer" label="Dankvart Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q365068" start="27655" end="27666" title="P.S. Krøyer" label="P.S. Krøyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362163" start="27671" end="27688" title="H. A. Brendekilde" label="H. A. Brendekilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q727113" start="27703" end="27720" title="The Funen Village" label="The Funen Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q12305341" start="27899" end="27918" title="Carl Nielsen Museum" label="Carl Nielsen Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="27947" end="27959" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Carl Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851207" start="27987" end="28010" title="Anne Marie Carl-Nielsen" label="Anne Marie Carl-Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12304739" start="28337" end="28349" title="Møntergården" label="Møntergården"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="28421" end="28432" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28486" end="28495" title="Falk Gøye" label="Falk Gøye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138285" start="28866" end="28887" title="Danish Railway Museum" label="Danish Railway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863365" start="28904" end="28918" title="railway museum" label="railway museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362210" start="29252" end="29286" title="Brandts Museum of Photographic Art" label="Brandts Museum of Photographic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066582" start="29385" end="29401" title="fine art photography" label="photographic art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29454" end="29502" title="Brandts" label="Brandts International Centre for Art and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q59055" start="29730" end="29740" title="Berlingske" label="Berlingske"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436286" start="29789" end="29806" title="Odense University" label="Odense University"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="29938" end="29948" title="Copenhagen University" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="29953" end="29959" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166335" start="30099" end="30129" title="University of Southern Denmark" label="University of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994399" start="30280" end="30294" title="KHR Arkitekter" label="KHR Arkitekter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="31365" end="31389" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166335" start="31572" end="31606" title="University of Southern Denmark" label="The University of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496415" start="31650" end="31676" title="Odense University Hospital" label="Odense University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029700" start="31854" end="31871" title="List of largest buildings" label="largest buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q115686474" start="31962" end="31984" title="UCL University College" label="UCL University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q27116" start="32002" end="32007" title="Vejle" label="Vejle"/>
<link wikidata="Q835708" start="32113" end="32120" title="Jelling" label="Jelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q28031" start="32132" end="32141" title="Svendborg" label="Svendborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q127102" start="33324" end="33337" title="Christen Mikkelsen Kold" label="Christen Kold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12308342" start="33404" end="33421" title="Funen Art Academy" label="Funen Art Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969697" start="33608" end="33617" title="Gymnasium (Denmark)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="33647" end="33659" title="grade school" label="grade school"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="33684" end="33698" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q211912" start="33764" end="33779" title="Odense Boldklub" label="Odense Boldklub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436577" start="33786" end="33799" title="BK Marienlyst" label="BK Marienlyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q654223" start="33806" end="33811" title="Boldklubben 1909" label="B1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195591" start="33817" end="33822" title="Boldklubben 1913" label="B1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850346" start="34135" end="34149" title="Odense Stadium" label="Odense Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q383932" start="34224" end="34243" title="Danish 2nd Division" label="Danish 2nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12326105" start="34276" end="34293" title="Marienlystcentret" label="Marienlystcentret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276186" start="34371" end="34380" title="RC Odense" label="RC Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="34404" end="34409" title="Rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121085" start="34430" end="34439" title="Lindø RSC" label="Lindø RSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014368" start="34446" end="34461" title="Odense Bulldogs" label="Odense Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="34481" end="34491" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q294332" start="34549" end="34561" title="Metal Ligaen" label="Metal Ligaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700301" start="34603" end="34621" title="Tennis Club Odense" label="Tennis Club Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562556" start="34740" end="34762" title="H.C. Andersen Marathon" label="H.C. Andersen Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34794" end="34810" title="Feast of the Ascension#Sunday observance" label="Ascension Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326127" start="35311" end="35314" title="ESL (company)" label="ESL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788889" start="35370" end="35379" title="Arena Fyn" label="Arena Fyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662523" start="35466" end="35474" title="Astralis" label="Astralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329867" start="35601" end="35615" title="Port of Odense" label="Port of Odense"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="35958" end="35961" title="liquefied petroleum gas" label="LPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="36070" end="36075" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="36121" end="36128" title="Zealand (Denmark)" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q213962" start="36160" end="36177" title="Great Belt Bridge" label="Great Belt Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="36286" end="36303" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="36424" end="36434" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203165" start="36542" end="36556" title="Odense station" label="Odense Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q60332540" start="36569" end="36612" title="Copenhagen–Fredericia/Taulov Line" label="railway line between Copenhagen and Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="36693" end="36700" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="36704" end="36711" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930439" start="36810" end="36824" title="Svendborgbanen" label="Svendborgbanen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37078" end="37084" title="FynBus" label="FynBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12329875" start="37216" end="37238" title="Odense Letbane" label="Odense’s new tram line"/>
<link wikidata="Q987346" start="37587" end="37590" title="European route E20" label="E20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110277" start="37727" end="37749" title="Danish national road 9" label="Danish national road 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586568" start="37910" end="37939" title="Diverging diamond interchange" label="Diverging diamond interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q628131" start="38001" end="38020" title="diamond interchange" label="diamond interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896204" start="38319" end="38333" title="Odense Airport" label="Odense Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137517" start="38771" end="38782" title="rain sensor" label="rain sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659787" start="38863" end="38878" title="motion detector" label="motion detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198288" start="39333" end="39359" title="Cycling Embassy of Denmark" label="Cycling Embassy of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551100" start="39694" end="39700" title="Social equity" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q966337" start="39940" end="39950" title="green wave" label="green wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496415" start="40361" end="40387" title="Odense University Hospital" label="Odense University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326391" start="42057" end="42076" title="Fyens Stiftstidende" label="Fyens Stiftstidende"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42112" end="42131" title="Den Fynske Bladfond" label="Den Fynske Bladfond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326391" start="42149" end="42172" title="Fyens Stiftstidende A/S" label="Fyens Stiftstidende A/S"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42543" end="42557" title="Per Westergård" label="Per Westergård"/>
<link wikidata="Q191216" start="42583" end="42604" title="Centre for Journalism (University of Southern Denmark)" label="Centre for Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q479716" start="42728" end="42744" title="university press" label="university press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894897" start="42750" end="42786" title="University Press of Southern Denmark" label="University Press of Southern Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793946" start="43018" end="43022" title="TV 2 (Denmark)" label="TV 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164334" start="43243" end="43245" title="DR (broadcaster)" label="DR"/>
<link wikidata="Q21146" start="43497" end="43516" title="Odense Municipality" label="Odense Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q212284" start="43536" end="43556" title="Canute IV of Denmark" label="Canute IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q378217" start="43650" end="43678" title="Charles I, Count of Flanders" label="Charles I, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q212284" start="43743" end="43763" title="Canute IV of Denmark" label="Canute IV of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11986923" start="43767" end="43785" title="Ludvig Rosenkrantz" label="Ludvig Rosenkrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q241584" start="43859" end="43890" title="Birgitte, Duchess of Gloucester" label="Birgitte, Duchess of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q170294" start="43912" end="43946" title="Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester" label="Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="43966" end="43984" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363314" start="44026" end="44040" title="Jørgen Sadolin" label="Jørgen Sadolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381174" start="44057" end="44065" title="Reformation in Denmark–Norway and Holstein" label="reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492624" start="44068" end="44079" title="Frants Berg" label="Frants Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82747" start="44127" end="44141" title="Diocese of Oslo" label="Bishop of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677684" start="44157" end="44173" title="Jacob B. Winslow" label="Jacob B. Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947484" start="44213" end="44229" title="Ida Falbe-Hansen" label="Ida Falbe-Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12324976" start="44293" end="44308" title="Louise Winteler" label="Louise Winteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q62079541" start="44382" end="44392" title="Anna Lohse" label="Anna Lohse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991173" start="44449" end="44464" title="Lise Østergaard" label="Lise Østergaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q425708" start="44508" end="44529" title="Niels Helveg Petersen" label="Niels Helveg Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q816805" start="44556" end="44570" title="Bendt Bendtsen" label="Bendt Bendtsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="44599" end="44602" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491442" start="44618" end="44642" title="Lars Christian Lilleholt" label="Lars Christian Lilleholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907987" start="44719" end="44735" title="Jeanette Varberg" label="Jeanette Varberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q648166" start="44779" end="44805" title="National Museum of Denmark" label="National Museum of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665852" start="44822" end="44844" title="Johan Frederik Schultz" label="Johan Frederik Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q981441" start="44887" end="44900" title="Wilhelm Bendz" label="Wilhelm Bendz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047337" start="44925" end="44936" title="genre works" label="genre works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="44953" end="44976" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q643123" start="45042" end="45063" title="Carl Frederik Aagaard" label="Carl Frederik Aagaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160022" start="45119" end="45133" title="Julius Paulsen" label="Julius Paulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="45157" end="45169" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Carl Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880250" start="45244" end="45259" title="Holger Jacobsen" label="Holger Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q435317" start="45285" end="45295" title="Bodil Kjer" label="Bodil Kjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62079810" start="45319" end="45335" title="Dagmar Orlamundt" label="Dagmar Orlamundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q788060" start="45359" end="45370" title="Ove Sprogøe" label="Ove Sprogøe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345002" start="45392" end="45407" title="Morten Grunwald" label="Morten Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q943173" start="45465" end="45475" title="Kim Larsen" label="Kim Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q469665" start="45513" end="45527" title="Jens Galschiøt" label="Jens Galschiøt"/>
<link wikidata="Q382210" start="45577" end="45591" title="Ulrich Thomsen" label="Ulrich Thomsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565254" start="45622" end="45632" title="Claes Bang" label="Claes Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q469983" start="45667" end="45680" title="Trine Dyrholm" label="Trine Dyrholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065110" start="45727" end="45740" title="Roland Møller" label="Roland Møller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744887" start="45762" end="45775" title="Johan Kobborg" label="Johan Kobborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10670047" start="45848" end="45850" title="MØ" label="MØ"/>
<link wikidata="Q12310266" start="45913" end="45927" title="Erich Erichsen" label="Erich Erichsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665852" start="45967" end="45989" title="Johan Frederik Schultz" label="Johan Frederik Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037888" start="46032" end="46053" title="Carl Frederik Tietgen" label="Carl Frederik Tietgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="46067" end="46080" title="industrialist" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12328813" start="46105" end="46119" title="Niels Jacobsen" label="Niels Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063455" start="46171" end="46185" title="The Lego Group" label="The Lego Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447168" start="46215" end="46228" title="Kurt Østervig" label="Kurt Østervig"/>
<link wikidata="Q59554" start="46278" end="46291" title="Edmund Hansen (cyclist)" label="Edmund Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q330192" start="46347" end="46362" title="Abraham Kurland" label="Abraham Kurland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12320663" start="46412" end="46424" title="Jytte Hansen" label="Jytte Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983545" start="46461" end="46478" title="Ib Solvang Hansen" label="Ib Solvang Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274343" start="46516" end="46538" title="Richard Møller Nielsen" label="Richard Møller Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382210" start="46595" end="46609" title="John Danielsen" label="John Danielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q709706" start="46636" end="46649" title="Ole Bjørnmose" label="Ole Bjørnmose"/>
<link wikidata="Q972238" start="46687" end="46696" title="Lars Høgh" label="Lars Høgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482059" start="46723" end="46739" title="Inger Pors Olsen" label="Inger Pors Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079556" start="46761" end="46780" title="Þorvaldur Örlygsson" label="Þorvaldur Örlygsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265646" start="46817" end="46830" title="Anja Andersen" label="Anja Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513421" start="46888" end="46905" title="Niels Frederiksen" label="Niels Frederiksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q910192" start="46938" end="46951" title="Thomas Helveg" label="Thomas Helveg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330" start="46978" end="46992" title="Nicki Pedersen" label="Nicki Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q350308" start="47034" end="47048" title="Allan Simonsen (racing driver)" label="Allan Simonsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608156" start="47078" end="47092" title="Stephan Mølvig" label="Stephan Mølvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q213134" start="47130" end="47143" title="Lars Jacobsen" label="Lars Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992300" start="47170" end="47183" title="Hans Andersen (speedway rider)" label="Hans Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q371524" start="47225" end="47242" title="Helle Frederiksen" label="Helle Frederiksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499293" start="47269" end="47285" title="Frederik Klokker" label="Frederik Klokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152500" start="47311" end="47324" title="Martin Damsbo" label="Martin Damsbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q653015" start="47338" end="47354" title="compound archery" label="compound archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q466402" start="47368" end="47389" title="Rikke Møller Pedersen" label="Rikke Møller Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30767" start="47451" end="47469" title="Caroline Wozniacki" label="Caroline Wozniacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q586422" start="47499" end="47513" title="Viktor Axelsen" label="Viktor Axelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21146" start="47594" end="47613" title="Odense Municipality" label="Odense Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="47617" end="47624" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="47633" end="47641" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q271417" start="47659" end="47668" title="Funabashi" label="Funabashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="47678" end="47687" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42137" start="47703" end="47708" title="Iksan" label="Iksan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="47724" end="47729" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="47740" end="47746" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="47760" end="47764" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094328" start="47776" end="47784" title="Klaksvík Municipality" label="Klaksvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q163852" start="47802" end="47811" title="Kópavogur" label="Kópavogur"/>
<link wikidata="Q504676" start="47823" end="47833" title="Norrköping Municipality" label="Norrköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q306789" start="47844" end="47853" title="Östersund Municipality" label="Östersund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709" start="47864" end="47872" title="Schwerin" label="Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42666" start="47884" end="47892" title="Shaoxing" label="Shaoxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094060" start="47902" end="47911" title="St Albans City and District" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="47939" end="47946" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="47958" end="47967" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q303160" start="47978" end="47999" title="Upernavik" label="Upernavik (Avannaata)"/>
<link wikidata="Q587266" start="48028" end="48046" title="Tourism in Denmark" label="Tourism in Denmark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22513" wikidata="Q188199" url="?curid=22513" title="Ogg">
<text>Ogg is a free, open container format maintained by the Xiph.Org Foundation. The authors of the Ogg format state that it is unrestricted by software patents and is designed to provide for efficient streaming and manipulation of high-quality digital multimedia. Its name is derived from &quot;ogging&quot;, jargon from the computer game &quot;Netrek&quot;.

The Ogg container format can multiplex a number of independent streams for audio, video, text (such as subtitles), and metadata.

In the Ogg multimedia framework, Theora provides a lossy video layer. The audio layer is most commonly provided by the music-oriented Vorbis format or its successor Opus. Lossless audio compression formats include FLAC, and OggPCM.

Before 2007, the .ogg filename extension was used for all files whose content used the Ogg container format. Since 2007, the Xiph.Org Foundation recommends that .ogg only be used for Ogg Vorbis audio files. The Xiph.Org Foundation decided to create a new set of file extensions and media types to describe different types of content such as .oga for audio only files, .ogv for video with or without sound (including Theora), and .ogx for multiplexed Ogg.

As of November 7, 2017, the current version of the Xiph.Org Foundation&#x27;s reference implementation is libogg 1.3.3. Another version, libogg2, has been in development, but is awaiting a rewrite as of 2018. Both software libraries are free software, released under the New BSD License. Ogg reference implementation was separated from Vorbis on September 2, 2000.

Ogg&#x27;s various codecs have been incorporated into a number of different free and proprietary media players, both commercial and non-commercial, as well as portable media players and GPS receivers from different manufacturers.

==Naming==
The Ogg Vorbis project started in 1993. It was originally named &quot;Squish&quot; but that name was already trademarked, so the project underwent a name change. The new name, &quot;OggSquish&quot;, was used until 2001 when it was changed again to &quot;Ogg&quot;. Ogg has since come to refer to the container format, which is now part of the larger Xiph.org multimedia project. Today, &quot;Squish&quot; (now known as &quot;Vorbis&quot;) refers to a particular audio coding format typically used with the Ogg container format.

Ogg is derived from &quot;ogging&quot;, jargon from the computer game &quot;Netrek&quot;, which came to mean doing something forcefully, possibly without consideration of the drain on future resources. At its inception, the Ogg project was thought by the authors to be somewhat ambitious given the limited power of the PC hardware of the time. Although the name Ogg is unrelated to the character Nanny Ogg in Terry Pratchett&#x27;s Discworld novels, &quot;Vorbis&quot; is named after another Terry Pratchett character from the book Small Gods.

==File format==
The &quot;Ogg&quot; bitstream format, designed principally by the Xiph.Org Foundation, has been developed as the framework of a larger initiative aimed at producing a set of components for the coding and decoding of multimedia files, which are available free of charge and freely re-implementable in software and hardware.

The format consists of chunks of data each called an &quot;Ogg page&quot;. Each page begins with the characters &quot;OggS&quot; to identify the file as Ogg format.

A &quot;serial number&quot; and &quot;page number&quot; in the page header identifies each page as part of a series of pages making up a bitstream. Multiple bitstreams may be multiplexed in the file where pages from each bitstream are ordered by the seek time of the contained data. Bitstreams may also be appended to existing files, a process known as &quot;chaining&quot;, to cause the bitstreams to be decoded in sequence.

A BSD-licensed library, called &quot;libvorbis&quot;, is available to encode and decode data from &quot;Vorbis&quot; streams. Independent Ogg implementations are used in several projects such as RealPlayer and a set of DirectShow filters.

Mogg, the &quot;Multi-Track-Single-Logical-Stream Ogg-Vorbis&quot;, is the multi-channel or multi-track Ogg file format.

===Page structure===
The following is the field layout of an Ogg page header:

;Capture pattern – 32 bits
:The capture pattern or sync code is a magic number used to ensure synchronization when parsing Ogg files. Every page starts with the four ASCII character sequence, &quot;OggS&quot;. This assists in resynchronizing a parser in cases where data has been lost or is corrupted, and is a sanity check before commencing parsing of the page structure.

;Version – 8 bits
:This field indicates the version of the Ogg bitstream format, to allow for future expansion. It is currently mandated to be 0.

;Header type – 8 bits
:This is an 8 bit field of flags, which indicates the type of page that follows.

;Granule position – 64 bits
:A granule position is the time marker in Ogg files. It is an abstract value, whose meaning is determined by the codec. It may, for example, be a count of the number of samples, the number of frames or a more complex scheme.

;Bitstream serial number – 32 bits
:This field is a serial number that identifies a page as belonging to a particular logical bitstream. Each logical bitstream in a file has a unique value, and this field allows implementations to deliver the pages to the appropriate decoder. In a typical Vorbis and Theora file, one stream is the audio (Vorbis), and the other is the video (Theora)

;Page sequence number – 32 bits
:This field is a monotonically increasing field for each logical bitstream. The first page is 0, the second 1, etc. This allows implementations to detect when data has been lost.

;Checksum – 32 bits
:This field provides a CRC32 checksum of the data in the entire page (including the page header, calculated with the checksum field set to 0). This allows verification that the data has not been corrupted since it was authored. Pages that fail the checksum should be discarded. The checksum is generated using a polynomial value of 0x04C11DB7.

;Page segments – 8 bits
:This field indicates the number of segments that exist in this page. It also indicates how many bytes are in the segment table that follows this field. There can be a maximum of 255 segments in any one page.

;Segment table
:The segment table is an array of 8-bit values, each indicating the length of the corresponding segment within the page body. The number of segments is determined from the preceding page segments field. Each segment is between 0 and 255 bytes in length.

The segments provide a way to group segments into packets, which are meaningful units of data for the decoder. When the segment&#x27;s length is indicated to be 255, this indicates that the following segment is to be concatenated to this one and is part of the same packet. When the segment&#x27;s length is 0–254, this indicates that this segment is the final segment in this packet. Where a packet&#x27;s length is a multiple of 255, the final segment is length 0.

Where the final packet continues on the next page, the final segment value is 255, and the continuation flag is set on the following page to indicate that the start of the new page is a continuation of last page.

===Metadata===

VorbisComment is a base-level Metadata format initially authored for use with Ogg Vorbis. It has since been adopted in the specifications of Ogg encapsulations for other Xiph.Org codecs including Theora, Speex, FLAC and Opus. &quot;VorbisComment&quot; is the simplest and most widely supported mechanism for storing metadata with Xiph.Org codecs.

Notably, one or more METADATA_BLOCK_PICTURE=... in a &quot;VorbisComment&quot; for thumbnails and cover art have Base64-encoded values of the corresponding FLAC METADATA_BLOCK_PICTURE. In other words, FLAC stores thumbnails and cover art in binary blocks—outside of the FLAC tags in a little-endian METADATA_BLOCK_VORBIS_COMMENT.

Other existing and proposed mechanisms are:

* FLAC metadata blocks 
* Ogg Skeleton
* Continuous Media Markup Language (deprecated)

==History==

The Ogg project began with a simple audio compression package as part of a larger project in 1993. The software was originally named &quot;Squish&quot; but due to an existing trade mark it was renamed to &quot;OggSquish&quot;. This name was later used for the whole Ogg project. In 1997, the Xiphophorus OggSquish was described as &quot;an attempt both to create a flexible compressed audio format for modern audio applications as well as to provide the first audio format that is common on any and every modern computer platform&quot;. The OggSquish was in 2000 referred to as &quot;a group of several related multimedia and signal processing projects&quot;. In 2000, two projects were in active development for planned release: Ogg Vorbis format and libvorbis—the reference implementation of Vorbis. Research also included work on future video and lossless audio coding. In 2001, OggSquish was renamed to &quot;Ogg&quot; and it was described as &quot;the umbrella for a group of several related multimedia and signal processing projects&quot;. Ogg has come to stand for the file format, as part of the larger Xiph.org multimedia project. Squish became just the name of one of the Ogg codecs. In 2009, Ogg is described as &quot;a multimedia container format, and the native file and stream format for the Xiph.org multimedia codecs&quot;.

The Ogg reference implementation was separated from Vorbis on September 2, 2000.

In May 2003, two Internet RFCs were published relating to the format. The Ogg bitstream was defined in (which is classified as &#x27;informative&#x27;) and its Internet content type (codice_1) in (which is, , a proposed standard protocol). In September 2008, RFC 3534 was obsoleted by , which added content types codice_2, codice_3 and filename extensions .ogx, .ogv, .oga, .spx.

===OGM===
In 2002, the lack of formal video support in Ogg resulted in the development of the &quot;OGM&quot; file format, a hack on Ogg that allowed embedding of video from the Microsoft DirectShow framework into an Ogg-based wrapper. OGM was initially supported only by closed source Windows-only tools, but the codebase was subsequently opened. Later, video (and subtitle) support were formally specified for Ogg but in a manner incompatible with OGM. Independently, the Matroska container format reached maturity and provided an alternative for people interested in combining Vorbis audio and arbitrary video codecs. As a result, OGM is no longer supported or developed and is formally discouraged by Xiph.org. Today, video in Ogg is found with the .ogv file extension, which is formally specified and officially supported. Software and codecs that support .ogm files are available without charge.

===2006===
Although Ogg had not reached anywhere near the ubiquity of the MPEG standards (e.g., MP3/MP4), , it was commonly used to encode free content (such as free music, multimedia on Wikimedia Foundation projects and Creative Commons files) and had started to be supported by a significant minority of digital audio players. Also supporting the Ogg format were many popular video game engines, including &quot;Doom 3&quot;, &quot;Unreal Tournament 2004&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Jets&#x27;n&#x27;Guns&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Myst IV: Revelation&quot;, &quot;StepMania&quot;, &quot;Serious Sam: The Second Encounter&quot;, &quot;Lineage 2&quot;, &quot;Vendetta Online&quot;, &quot;Battlefield 2&quot;, and the &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; engines, as well as the audio files of the Java-based game, &quot;Minecraft&quot;. The more popular Vorbis codec had built-in support on many software players, and extensions were available for nearly all the rest.

===2007===
On May 16, 2007, the Free Software Foundation started a campaign to increase the use of Vorbis &quot;as an ethically, legally and technically superior audio alternative to the proprietary MP3 format&quot;. People were also encouraged to support the campaign by adding a web button to their website or blog. For those who did not want to download and use the FSF&#x27;s suggested Ogg player (VLC), the Xiph.Org Foundation had an official codec for QuickTime-based applications in Windows and Mac OS X, such as iTunes players and iMovie applications; and Windows users could install a Windows Media Player Ogg codec.

===2009===
By June 30, 2009, the Ogg container, through the use of the Theora and Vorbis, was the only container format included in Firefox 3.5 web browser&#x27;s implementation of the HTML5 codice_4 and codice_5 elements. This was in accordance with the original recommendation outlined in, but later removed from, the HTML5 draft specification (see Ogg controversy).

===2010===
On March 3, 2010, a technical analysis by an FFmpeg developer was critical about the general purpose abilities of Ogg as a multimedia container format. The author of Ogg later responded to these claims in an article of his own.

==Ogg codecs==
Ogg is only a container format. The actual audio or video encoded by a codec is stored inside an Ogg container. Ogg containers may contain streams encoded with multiple codecs; for example, a video file with sound contains data encoded by both an audio codec and a video codec.

Being a container format, Ogg can embed audio and video in various formats (such as Dirac, MNG, CELT, MPEG-4, MP3 and others) but Ogg was intended to be, and usually is, used with the following Xiph.org free codecs:

* Audio
** Lossy
*** Speex: handles voice data at low bitrates (~2.1–32 kbit/s/channel)
*** Vorbis: handles general audio data at mid to high-level variable bitrates (≈16–500 kbit/s per channel)
*** Opus: handles voice, music and generic audio at low and high variable bitrates (≈6–510 kbit/s per channel)
** Lossless
*** FLAC handles archival and high-fidelity audio data.
*** OggPCM allows storing standard uncompressed PCM audio in an Ogg container
* Video
** Lossy
*** Theora: based upon On2&#x27;s VP3, it is targeted at competing with MPEG-4 video (for example, encoded with DivX or Xvid), RealVideo, or Windows Media Video.
*** Daala: a video coding format under development.
*** Tarkin: an experimental and now obsolete video codec developed in 2000, 2001 and 2002 utilizing discrete wavelet transforms in the three dimensions of width, height, and time. It has been put on hold after Theora became the main focus for video encoding (in August 2002).
*** Dirac: a free and open video format developed by the BBC. Uses wavelet encoding.
** Lossless
*** Dirac: a part of the specification of dirac covers lossless compression.
*** Daala: a video coding format under development.
* Text
** Continuous Media Markup Language: a text/application codec for timed metadata, captioning, and formatting.
** Annodex: A free and open source set of standards developed by CSIRO to annotate and index networked media.
** OggKate: An overlay codec, originally designed for karaoke and text, that can be multiplexed in Ogg.

===Media types===
Ogg audio media is registered as IANA media type audio/ogg with file extensions .oga, .ogg, and .spx. It is a proper subset of the Ogg video media type video/ogg with file extension .ogv. Other Ogg applications use media type application/ogg with file extension .ogx; this is a superset of video/ogg. The Opus media type audio/opus with file extension .opus was registered later in RFC and .

==See also==

* Audio data compression
* Comparison of audio coding formats
* Comparison of container formats
* Use of Ogg formats in HTML5
* Wikimedia Commons&#x27; Theora video conversion help page
* Installing audio and video software
==References==
==External links==
* The Xiph.Org Foundation official webpage — Ogg
* Using Creative Commons Metadata in Ogg containers
* Ogg etymology from the Jargon File
* Xiph.Org&#x27;s official Ogg QuickTime Components for iTunes and iMovie (Windows and Mac OS X)
* Windows Media Player codecs for Vorbis, Speex, Theora and FLAC
* ffmpeg2theora Ogg Theora encoder, commandline application for Linux and Win32</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188199" start="0" end="3" title="Ogg" label="Ogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056408" start="9" end="13" title="free file format" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056408" start="15" end="19" title="open format" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q167772" start="20" end="36" title="container format (digital)" label="container format"/>
<link wikidata="Q576550" start="55" end="74" title="Xiph.Org Foundation" label="Xiph.Org Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913351" start="139" end="154" title="software patent" label="software patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="197" end="206" title="streaming media" label="streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131765" start="240" end="258" title="digital multimedia" label="digital multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="305" end="311" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162098" start="341" end="347" title="Netrek" label="Netrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q901831" start="385" end="394" title="time-division multiplexing" label="multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q618814" start="419" end="426" title="stream (computing)" label="streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="431" end="436" title="sound" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="438" end="443" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q204028" start="459" end="468" title="subtitles" label="subtitles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="475" end="483" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q372626" start="519" end="525" title="Theora" label="Theora"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="537" end="542" title="lossy" label="lossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q758871" start="560" end="571" title="audio coding format" label="audio layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885120" start="620" end="626" title="Vorbis" label="Vorbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918952" start="627" end="633" title="bitstream format" label="format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466199" start="651" end="655" title="Opus (audio format)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="657" end="665" title="Lossless compression" label="Lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="700" end="704" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q188199" start="710" end="716" title="OggPCM" label="OggPCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="741" end="759" title="filename extension" label="filename extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="1389" end="1407" title="library (computing)" label="software libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="1412" end="1425" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="1446" end="1461" title="New BSD License" label="New BSD License"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="1560" end="1565" title="codec" label="codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="1626" end="1637" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q210337" start="1638" end="1651" title="media player (application software)" label="media players"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="1700" end="1721" title="portable media player" label="portable media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="1727" end="1730" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885120" start="1787" end="1797" title="Vorbis" label="Ogg Vorbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167772" start="2083" end="2099" title="Container format (digital)" label="container format"/>
<link wikidata="Q758871" start="2245" end="2264" title="audio coding format" label="audio coding format"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="2352" end="2358" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162098" start="2388" end="2394" title="Netrek" label="Netrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="2631" end="2633" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q963492" start="2708" end="2717" title="Nanny Ogg" label="Nanny Ogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="2721" end="2736" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="2744" end="2753" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307144" start="2844" end="2854" title="Small Gods" label="Small Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918952" start="2893" end="2909" title="bitstream format" label="bitstream format"/>
<link wikidata="Q188199" start="3256" end="3264" title="Ogg page" label="Ogg page"/>
<link wikidata="Q415568" start="3500" end="3509" title="bitstream" label="bitstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="3538" end="3549" title="multiplexing" label="multiplexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q191307" start="3792" end="3804" title="BSD licenses" label="BSD-licensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q644320" start="3985" end="3995" title="RealPlayer" label="RealPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q962763" start="4009" end="4019" title="DirectShow" label="DirectShow"/>
<link wikidata="Q284099" start="4297" end="4309" title="magic number (programming)" label="magic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="5708" end="5716" title="Checksum" label="Checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994998" start="5750" end="5755" title="CRC32" label="CRC32"/>
<link wikidata="Q642317" start="7274" end="7287" title="Vorbis comment" label="VorbisComment"/>
<link wikidata="Q372626" start="7470" end="7476" title="Theora" label="Theora"/>
<link wikidata="Q930667" start="7478" end="7483" title="Speex" label="Speex"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="7485" end="7489" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466199" start="7494" end="7498" title="Opus (audio format)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q726780" start="7735" end="7741" title="Base64" label="Base64"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7778" end="7782" title="FLAC#Metadata" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q339338" start="7907" end="7920" title="little-endian" label="little-endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="8000" end="8004" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120664" start="8039" end="8071" title="Continuous Media Markup Language" label="Continuous Media Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079994" start="8309" end="8318" title="Ogg Squish" label="OggSquish"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="9175" end="9186" title="file format" label="file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="9548" end="9552" title="Request for Comments" label="RFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192902" start="9682" end="9703" title="MIME content type" label="Internet content type"/>
<link wikidata="Q962763" start="10091" end="10101" title="DirectShow" label="DirectShow"/>
<link wikidata="Q223535" start="10377" end="10385" title="Matroska" label="Matroska"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273" start="10880" end="10884" title="MPEG" label="MPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="10902" end="10905" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q336316" start="10906" end="10909" title="MP4" label="MP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14075" start="10945" end="10957" title="free content" label="free content"/>
<link wikidata="Q180" start="10993" end="11013" title="Wikimedia Foundation" label="Wikimedia Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43449" start="11027" end="11043" title="Creative Commons" label="Creative Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="11112" end="11132" title="digital audio player" label="digital audio player"/>
<link wikidata="Q203310" start="11220" end="11226" title="Doom 3" label="Doom 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q913536" start="11240" end="11262" title="Unreal Tournament 2004" label="Unreal Tournament 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q842121" start="11290" end="11311" title="Jets&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Guns" label="Jets&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Guns"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11339" end="11358" title="Myst IV: Revelation" label="Myst IV: Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750824" start="11372" end="11381" title="StepMania" label="StepMania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11395" end="11428" title="Serious Sam: The Second Encounter" label="Serious Sam: The Second Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q477199" start="11442" end="11451" title="Lineage 2" label="Lineage 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919608" start="11465" end="11480" title="Vendetta Online" label="Vendetta Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q206653" start="11494" end="11507" title="Battlefield 2" label="Battlefield 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132730" start="11529" end="11545" title="Grand Theft Auto" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="11595" end="11599" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q49740" start="11618" end="11627" title="Minecraft" label="Minecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="11800" end="11824" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="12069" end="12076" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="12080" end="12084" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q171477" start="12170" end="12173" title="VLC media player" label="VLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q576550" start="12180" end="12199" title="Xiph" label="Xiph.Org Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243769" start="12226" end="12235" title="QuickTime" label="QuickTime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="12258" end="12265" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="12270" end="12278" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="12288" end="12294" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9558" start="12307" end="12313" title="iMovie" label="iMovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192527" start="12362" end="12382" title="Windows Media Player" label="Windows Media Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638134" start="12527" end="12538" title="Mozilla Firefox 3.5" label="Firefox 3.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="12580" end="12585" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901758" start="12746" end="12761" title="Ogg controversy" label="Ogg controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847465" start="12821" end="12827" title="FFmpeg" label="FFmpeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q604279" start="13383" end="13388" title="Dirac (codec)" label="Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q904680" start="13390" end="13393" title="Multiple-image Network Graphics" label="MNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128269" start="13395" end="13399" title="CELT" label="CELT"/>
<link wikidata="Q219763" start="13401" end="13407" title="MPEG-4" label="MPEG-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="13409" end="13412" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q576550" start="13493" end="13501" title="Xiph.org" label="Xiph.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="13527" end="13532" title="Lossy data compression" label="Lossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q930667" start="13537" end="13542" title="Speex" label="Speex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885120" start="13608" end="13614" title="Vorbis" label="Vorbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154443" start="13664" end="13680" title="variable bitrate" label="variable bitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466199" start="13715" end="13719" title="Opus (codec)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="13825" end="13833" title="Lossless data compression" label="Lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q219848" start="13838" end="13842" title="FLAC" label="FLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="13938" end="13941" title="Pulse-code modulation" label="PCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="13979" end="13984" title="lossy data compression" label="Lossy"/>
<link wikidata="Q372626" start="13989" end="13995" title="Theora" label="Theora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816282" start="14008" end="14011" title="On2" label="On2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276641" start="14019" end="14022" title="VP3" label="VP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q219763" start="14057" end="14063" title="MPEG-4" label="MPEG-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q202519" start="14097" end="14101" title="DivX" label="DivX"/>
<link wikidata="Q622433" start="14105" end="14109" title="Xvid" label="Xvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q737207" start="14112" end="14121" title="RealVideo" label="RealVideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q280761" start="14126" end="14145" title="Windows Media Video" label="Windows Media Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207367" start="14151" end="14156" title="Daala" label="Daala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414958" start="14299" end="14325" title="discrete wavelet transform" label="discrete wavelet transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="14340" end="14349" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q604279" start="14479" end="14484" title="Dirac (codec)" label="Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14532" end="14535" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="14563" end="14571" title="lossless data compression" label="Lossless"/>
<link wikidata="Q604279" start="14576" end="14581" title="Dirac (codec)" label="Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207367" start="14653" end="14658" title="Daala" label="Daala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120664" start="14711" end="14743" title="Continuous Media Markup Language" label="Continuous Media Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769584" start="14821" end="14828" title="Annodex" label="Annodex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="14883" end="14888" title="CSIRO" label="CSIRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="15084" end="15088" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="IANA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667978" start="15089" end="15099" title="media type" label="media type"/>
<link wikidata="Q930667" start="15147" end="15151" title="Speex" label=".spx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466199" start="15356" end="15360" title="Opus (audio format)" label="Opus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="15433" end="15436" title="Request for Comments" label="RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="15460" end="15482" title="Audio data compression" label="Audio data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438347" start="15485" end="15519" title="Comparison of audio coding formats" label="Comparison of audio coding formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438322" start="15522" end="15553" title="Comparison of container formats" label="Comparison of container formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901758" start="15556" end="15583" title="Use of Ogg formats in HTML5" label="Use of Ogg formats in HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15586" end="15643" title=":Commons:Help:Converting video" label="Wikimedia Commons&amp;#x27; Theora video conversion help page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535068" start="15842" end="15853" title="Jargon File" label="Jargon File"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="16090" end="16095" title="Win32" label="Win32"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22514" wikidata="Q715597" url="?curid=22514" title="Obelix">
<text>Obelix (; ) is a cartoon character in the French comic book series &quot;Asterix&quot;. He works as a menhir sculptor and deliveryman as well as one of the primary defenders of the Gaulish village, and is Asterix&#x27;s best friend. Obelix is noted for his obesity, the menhirs he carries around on his back and his superhuman strength. He fell into a cauldron of the Gauls&#x27; magic potion when he was a baby, causing him to be the only Gaul in Asterix&#x27;s village who is in a permanent state of superhuman strength. Because of this already enormous strength, Obelix is not allowed to drink the magic potion ever again, a ban he regards as being tremendously unfair. Other characteristics are his simplemindedness, his love and care for his dog Dogmatix, his anger when someone refers to him as being &quot;fat&quot;, his enthusiasm for hunting and eating wild boars, and beating up Romans. His catchphrase is: &quot;Ils sont fous ces romains&quot;, which translates into &quot;These Romans are crazy!&quot;, although he considers nearly every other nationality, even other Gauls, to be just as strange.

The character was portrayed by actor Gérard Depardieu in every &quot;Asterix&quot; live-action film until 2023&#x27;s &quot;Asterix &amp; Obelix: The Middle Kingdom&quot;.

==Character==
Obelix is Asterix&#x27;s closest friend (they even have the same birthday—although this is inconsistent with the comic &quot;Obelix and Co.&quot;, where only Obelix&#x27;s birthday is celebrated). He generally works as a menhir delivery man. His passions in life are hanging around with Asterix, fighting, hunting and eating wild boar, making and carrying his menhirs, and beating up Roman legionaries (and occasionally collecting their helmets as trophies). Obelix has a little dog named Dogmatix (Fr. &quot;Idéfix&quot;), whom he adores. His parents live now in Condate (as seen in &quot;Asterix and the Actress&quot;) and his distant cousin Metallurgix, a famous golden sickle maker, lives in Lutetia (as seen in &quot;Asterix and the Golden Sickle&quot;).

Obelix&#x27;s favourite food is roast wild boar which he usually hunts with Asterix, but he has a voracious appetite, and will try eating nearly anything with few exceptions; in &quot;Asterix and Obelix All at Sea&quot; and &quot;Asterix in Britain&quot; he seems not to like boiled boar. In fact, he eats nuts and oysters in the shell, and is completely oblivious to drugs, spicy food and poison, possibly due to the permanent effects of the magic potion. However, when he consumes alcohol, he gets very drunk very quickly, as seen for example in &quot;Asterix in Britain&quot; where he enjoys sampling different barrels of wine trying to find a barrel containing magic potion, or in &quot;Asterix and the Laurel Wreath&quot;, where both he and chief Vitalstatistix get drunk during a banquet, much to the shame of the latter&#x27;s wife Impedimenta. Although he has his own house, Obelix is occasionally shown staying overnight at Asterix&#x27;s.

Obelix owns the quarry where he chisels the menhirs himself. It is never directly stated what the menhirs are mostly used for aside from being Obelix’s personal blunt weapons. It is hinted that they are also just oversized knick-knacks; however they are probably a running-gag regarding the origins of the mystery surrounding Menhirs in ancient Europe, with the joke being that Obelix delivered them. Obelix usually trades the stones away for whatever he needs, resulting in the village having a literal field of menhirs.

Obelix is kind-hearted, but socially inept—possibly because his strength means that others have had to adapt to him instead of vice versa. He is still not completely aware of his own strength and almost invariably breaks any door he &quot;gently&quot; knocks on, making him a human battering ram. He is frequently used as a &quot;human battering ram&quot; for opening locked doors or breaking through walls. Similarly, he is unaware that others do not share his superhuman strength, and shows great surprise when others are crushed by what he calls &quot;a little menhir&quot;, or when Asterix attempts to explain to him that a small dog like Dogmatix cannot lift a menhir. He also has little interest in subjects of formal education or intellectual pursuits, since sheer strength usually solves his problems; he generally leaves any decisions to Asterix. However, Obelix is not completely stupid. In &quot;Asterix and the Normans&quot; he deduces from various clues that Cacofonix the bard has gone to Lutetia to pursue a career in popular music: this unusual display of intelligence on Obelix&#x27;s part surprises Getafix. He also surprises Asterix in &quot;Asterix and the Black Gold&quot; by reeling off a dictionary definition of wild boar in conversation (including the Latin taxonomical classification). He can also be quite dangerous when angered.

While cheerfully violent and enjoying a good fight, Obelix is far from brutal or sadistic: he tends to view fighting as a game and is generally friendly and polite (to the point of inappropriate courtesy) towards his opponents. He extends this benevolence even towards the Romans, whom he rarely seems to view as oppressors but more as less-willing participants in his rough-housing (The Romans themselves seem to view him as a terrifying ogre, whose infamy has spread across the entire Roman army). His other favored pastimes are dancing (which he apparently is very good at), and occasionally drinking goat&#x27;s milk to excess (as he rarely imbibes in alcohol).

Like Asterix, Obelix is a bachelor, but he is easily smitten by a pretty face. He harbours a hopeless crush on Panacea, the daughter of Soporifix (one of the other villagers), and occasionally other young women, most notably Mrs. Geriatrix (which enrages her husband). However, one may think that he will eventually find a mate and have children since in &quot;Asterix and the Class Act&quot;, he is shown to be the founder of a long dynasty of French warriors that lasted well into the 20th century.

Obelix&#x27;s trademark phrase is &quot;These Romans are crazy&quot; (&quot;Ils sont fous ces romains&quot;: in the Italian translation, it is &quot;Sono pazzi questi Romani&quot;, which can be shortened to S.P.Q.R., Rome&#x27;s motto), although he has applied a variant of it to nearly every group he&#x27;s met in his travels: &quot;These Britons are crazy&quot;, &quot;These Corsicans are crazy&quot;, etc. This remark is followed by him tapping his forehead. It is a parody of the quote &quot;These Gauls are crazy&quot;, which Julius Caesar famously said while describing the Gauls&#x27; fighting style during his conquest of the region.

==Strength==

Unlike the other villagers, Obelix has no need to drink the druid Getafix&#x27;s magic potion that gives superhuman strength, because he fell into the cauldron as a baby and its effect on him became permanent. Obelix is tall and massive. He is about tall and he weighs more than . The story of that incident is told in &quot;How Obelix Fell into the Magic Potion When he was a Little Boy.&quot; Since this effect was not intended or expected, Getafix refuses to allow him even one more drop except under the most dire circumstances (either out of fear for his life, or fear for the lives of others should the inattentive and uncoordinated strongman become any stronger), which annoys Obelix greatly. (In &quot;Asterix and Obelix All at Sea&quot;, it is revealed that too much of the potion can turn the drinker to stone; exactly how much is not known, but a whole cauldron will certainly do the trick. This appears to only work on grown people as Obelix did not turn to stone as a baby, or may simply occur after drinking an excessive amount while still under the effects of a previous dose). However, in &quot;Asterix and Cleopatra,&quot; Getafix gives him a few drops to open a door in the Great Pyramid&#x27;s Labyrinth but he comments that he does not see much difference between &quot;before and after the potion&quot; though this is presumably because Obelix is used to accomplishing any physical task with ease.

Although it has been clearly stated by both Getafix (in &quot;Asterix the Gaul&quot;) and Asterix (in &quot;Asterix and the Laurel Wreath&quot;) that the magic potion does NOT grant invulnerability (Getafix has a potion for that but it is only mentioned in Asterix the Gaul), meaning that they &quot;could&quot; be injured by the Romans in their fights but their raw strength generally prevents the Romans getting the chance to do so, the same does not seem to be true of Obelix. He does not even notice when attackers attempt to knock him unconscious with blows to the head, when Roman spearheads are stuck in his bottom in &quot;Asterix in Corsica&quot; or when anyone else attempts to harm him in any way. This may imply that Obelix, either by stupidity or ignorance, simply does not notice or react to the pain that should be inflicted, or that the potion has enhanced his overall strength, since it has been shown to increase the drinker&#x27;s endurance allowing them to run faster, to such a point where his muscles allow him to effortlessly absorb the attacks in question. Most of the occasions where Obelix demonstrates invulnerability include him being attacked physically rather than with sharp objects, as in Asterix and the Magic Carpet, when an arrow accidentally hits his bottom and he yells in agony, and thus showing that Obelix is not above physical pain.

Obelix does sometimes display twisted views, especially when it comes to the relationship between the Gauls and the Romans. As far as he is concerned the more Romans he can beat up the better and nobody should deny him this, not even the &quot;selfish&quot; Roman victims themselves:

*In &quot;Asterix in Britain&quot;, he dismisses the claim that the Romans have invaded Britain; he believes that the Britons dragged the Romans over there in order to have all the fun for themselves. During a rugby match, Obelix is bored until he sees how violent the game can get, and is overjoyed, recommending that they play rugby in Gaul.
*In &quot;Asterix in Corsica&quot;, it is revealed that the villagers attack the Romans at least once a year in order to celebrate the Gaulish victory at Gergovia. When the Romans leave their camps in order to avoid the attacks, Obelix sees this behaviour as crazy and detrimental to their &quot;friendly&quot; relationship.
*In &quot;Asterix and Obelix All at Sea&quot;, he has a dream (or nightmare as he puts it) in which the Romans pull out of Gaul. He&#x27;s horrified at the idea of such a dream coming true. He also declares that the idea of peace with the Romans is offensive to the memory of Vercingetorix. Far more likely is the fact that peace will mean that he will not be able to bash the Romans anymore, a prospect he dreads. He then comments on the good &quot;sense&quot; of the Romans in attacking the village (although they were actually merely planning a parade to welcome an admiral).
*The Roman civil war between Caesar and Pompey features in both &quot;Asterix the Legionary&quot; and &quot;Asterix and the Actress&quot;. When he witnesses a battle between Roman troops, Obelix murmurs &quot;What a waste!&quot;. But this is not so much on the wasted lives as the fact that it means that he has fewer Romans to bash himself.

==Portrayal==
Albert Augier voiced Obelix in a 1960 radio play. For the animated films, he has been voiced by Jacques Morel in the first three, Pierre Tornade in all films during the &#x27;80s and &#x27;90s, as well as the videogames &quot;Asterix &amp; Obelix XXL&quot; and &quot;Asterix &amp; Obelix XXL 2: Mission: Las Vegum&quot;, Jacques Frantz in the 2006 film &quot;Asterix and the Vikings&quot; and the videogame &quot;Asterix at the Olympic Games&quot;, and currently since the 2014 film &quot;&quot;. In the English dubs of the animated films, he has been voiced by Hal Brav, Michael Kilgarriff, Billy Kearns, Bernard Bresslaw, Rosey Grier, Howard Lew Lewis, Brad Garrett, C. Ernst Harth, and Nick Frost.

In the live action films, Gérard Depardieu played Obelix until Gilles Lellouche took over the role for &quot;Asterix &amp; Obelix: The Middle Kingdom&quot;. The English dubs for these films have featured Obelix&#x27;s voice being provided by Terry Jones, Dominic Fumusa, and Paul Bandey.

==Name==
Obelix&#x27;s name is a pun on the Greek word &quot;obélisque&quot; (obelisk, an ancient Greek stone pillar), suggested by his rotund physique and his habit of casually carrying heavy stone monuments (Menhir) around with him. The word &quot;obelisk&quot; is also (in both French and English) a variant of the word obelus (&quot;obèle&quot;), a typographical mark (&quot;†&quot;) often found in a companion role to that of the asterisk, after which his friend Asterix is named.

==See also==
*List of &quot;Asterix&quot; characters

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q715597" start="0" end="6" title="Obelix" label="Obelix"/>
<link wikidata="Q42490" start="73" end="80" title="Asterix" label="Asterix"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="102" end="108" title="menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620503" start="205" end="212" title="Asterix (character)" label="Asterix"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="270" end="276" title="menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752911" start="751" end="759" title="Dogmatix" label="Dogmatix"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="862" end="871" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106508" start="1148" end="1164" title="Gérard Depardieu" label="Gérard Depardieu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1235" end="1275" title="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix: The Middle Kingdom" label="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix: The Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1354" end="1371" title="Asterix and the Class Act#The Birth of Asterix" label="the same birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468556" start="1423" end="1437" title="Obelix and Co." label="Obelix and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="1688" end="1699" title="Roman legionary" label="legionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752911" start="1787" end="1795" title="Dogmatix" label="Dogmatix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1842" end="1849" title="Recurring characters in Asterix#Gauls" label="parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="1862" end="1869" title="Rennes" label="Condate"/>
<link wikidata="Q748291" start="1888" end="1911" title="Asterix and the Actress" label="Asterix and the Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q270273" start="1994" end="2001" title="Lutetia" label="Lutetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218477" start="2020" end="2049" title="Asterix and the Golden Sickle" label="Asterix and the Golden Sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="2102" end="2106" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q947559" start="2243" end="2272" title="Asterix and Obelix All at Sea" label="Asterix and Obelix All at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q677479" start="2289" end="2307" title="Asterix in Britain" label="Asterix in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="2542" end="2549" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q677479" start="2613" end="2631" title="Asterix in Britain" label="Asterix in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="2684" end="2688" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q593947" start="2750" end="2779" title="Asterix and the Laurel Wreath" label="Asterix and the Laurel Wreath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2811" end="2825" title="Recurring characters in Asterix#Vitalstatistix" label="Vitalstatistix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413287" start="3560" end="3574" title="socially inept" label="socially inept"/>
<link wikidata="Q748394" start="4439" end="4462" title="Asterix and the Normans" label="Asterix and the Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215264" start="4693" end="4719" title="Asterix and the Black Gold" label="Asterix and the Black Gold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5668" end="5675" title="Recurring characters in Asterix#Gauls" label="Panacea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5782" end="5796" title="Recurring characters in Asterix#Mrs. Geriatrix" label="Mrs. Geriatrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5812" end="5823" title="Recurring characters in Asterix#Geriatrix" label="her husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q748240" start="5918" end="5943" title="Asterix and the Class Act" label="Asterix and the Class Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="6175" end="6182" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131306" start="6266" end="6274" title="S.P.Q.R." label="S.P.Q.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6276" end="6280" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="6591" end="6604" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="6777" end="6782" title="druid" label="druid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6783" end="6790" title="Recurring characters in Asterix#Getafix" label="Getafix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682411" start="7042" end="7104" title="How Obelix Fell into the Magic Potion When he was a Little Boy" label="How Obelix Fell into the Magic Potion When he was a Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q947559" start="7427" end="7456" title="Asterix and Obelix All at Sea" label="Asterix and Obelix All at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q742624" start="7828" end="7849" title="Asterix and Cleopatra" label="Asterix and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="7909" end="7922" title="Great Pyramid of Giza" label="Great Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q618719" start="8199" end="8215" title="Asterix the Gaul" label="Asterix the Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q593947" start="8245" end="8274" title="Asterix and the Laurel Wreath" label="Asterix and the Laurel Wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q747995" start="8768" end="8786" title="Asterix in Corsica" label="Asterix in Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q599154" start="9358" end="9386" title="Asterix and the Magic Carpet" label="Asterix and the Magic Carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q677479" start="9807" end="9825" title="Asterix in Britain" label="Asterix in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q742306" start="9885" end="9892" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s invasions of Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="10007" end="10012" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q747995" start="10151" end="10169" title="Asterix in Corsica" label="Asterix in Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q55950714" start="10295" end="10303" title="Gergovia" label="Gergovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q947559" start="10476" end="10505" title="Asterix and Obelix All at Sea" label="Asterix and Obelix All at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q178953" start="10742" end="10755" title="Vercingetorix" label="Vercingetorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="11050" end="11065" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Roman civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="11074" end="11080" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="11085" end="11091" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q747981" start="11115" end="11136" title="Asterix the Legionary" label="Asterix the Legionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q748291" start="11153" end="11176" title="Asterix and the Actress" label="Asterix and the Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q547182" start="11498" end="11511" title="Jacques Morel (actor)" label="Jacques Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387127" start="11532" end="11546" title="Pierre Tornade" label="Pierre Tornade"/>
<link wikidata="Q747882" start="11628" end="11652" title="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix XXL" label="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix XXL"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11669" end="11715" title="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix XXL 2: Mission: Las Vegum" label="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix XXL 2: Mission: Las Vegum"/>
<link wikidata="Q552876" start="11723" end="11737" title="Jacques Frantz" label="Jacques Frantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q748412" start="11761" end="11784" title="Asterix and the Vikings" label="Asterix and the Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710226" start="11815" end="11843" title="Asterix at the Olympic Games (video game)" label="Asterix at the Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308296" start="11974" end="11992" title="Michael Kilgarriff" label="Michael Kilgarriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903658" start="11994" end="12006" title="Billy Kearns" label="Billy Kearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q327747" start="12008" end="12024" title="Bernard Bresslaw" label="Bernard Bresslaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368791" start="12026" end="12037" title="Rosey Grier" label="Rosey Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920208" start="12039" end="12055" title="Howard Lew Lewis" label="Howard Lew Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q331720" start="12057" end="12069" title="Brad Garrett" label="Brad Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006429" start="12071" end="12085" title="C. Ernst Harth" label="C. Ernst Harth"/>
<link wikidata="Q363400" start="12091" end="12101" title="Nick Frost" label="Nick Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q123631109" start="12111" end="12128" title="Asterix films (live action)" label="live action films"/>
<link wikidata="Q106508" start="12130" end="12146" title="Gérard Depardieu" label="Gérard Depardieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q552639" start="12167" end="12183" title="Gilles Lellouche" label="Gilles Lellouche"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12213" end="12253" title="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix: The Middle Kingdom" label="Asterix &amp;amp; Obelix: The Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="12346" end="12357" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q80925" start="12359" end="12373" title="Dominic Fumusa" label="Dominic Fumusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="12471" end="12478" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="12603" end="12609" title="menhirs" label="Menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q282364" start="12716" end="12722" title="Dagger (mark)" label="obelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190212" start="12828" end="12836" title="asterisk" label="asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412089" start="12894" end="12932" title="List of Asterix characters" label="List of &amp;quot;Asterix&amp;quot; characters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22518" wikidata="Q80970" url="?curid=22518" title="Orthodox Judaism">
<text>Orthodox Judaism is a collective term for the traditionalist branches of contemporary Judaism. Theologically, it is chiefly defined by regarding the Torah, both Written and Oral, as literally revealed by God on Mount Sinai and faithfully transmitted ever since.

Orthodox Judaism therefore advocates a strict observance of Jewish Law, or &quot;halakha&quot;, which is to be interpreted and determined only according to traditional methods and in adherence to the continuum of received precedent through the ages. It regards the entire &quot;halakhic&quot; system as ultimately grounded in immutable revelation, essentially beyond external and historical influence. More than any theoretical issue, obeying the dietary, purity, ethical and other laws of &quot;halakha&quot; is the hallmark of Orthodoxy. Practicing members are easily distinguishable by their lifestyle, refraining from doing numerous routine actions on the Sabbath and holidays, consuming only &quot;kosher&quot; food, praying thrice a day, studying the Torah often, donning head covering and tassels for men and modest clothing for women, and so forth. Other key doctrines include belief in a future bodily resurrection of the dead, divine reward and punishment for the righteous and the sinners, the Election of Israel as a people bound by a covenant with God, and an eventual Messianic Age ruled by a salvific Messiah-King who will restore the Temple in Jerusalem and gather the people to Zion.

Orthodox Judaism is not a centralized denomination. Relations between its different subgroups are often strained, and the exact limits of Orthodoxy are subject to intense debate. Very roughly, it may be divided between Haredi Judaism (Strictly-Orthodox), which is more conservative and reclusive, and Modern Orthodox Judaism, which is relatively open to outer society and partakes in secular life and culture. Each of those is itself formed of independent streams. These are almost uniformly exclusionist, regarding Orthodoxy as the only legitimate form of Judaism.

While adhering to traditional beliefs, the movement is a modern phenomenon. It arose as a result of the breakdown of the autonomous Jewish community since the late 18th century, and was much shaped by a conscious struggle against the pressures of secularization, acculturation and rival alternatives. The strictly observant Orthodox are a definite minority among all Jews, but there are also numerous semi- and non-practicing persons who are officially affiliated or personally identify with the movement. In total, Orthodox Judaism is the largest Jewish religious group, estimated to have over 2 million practicing adherents, and at least an equal number of nominal members or self-identifying supporters.

== Definitions ==

The earliest known mention of the term &quot;Orthodox Jews&quot; was made in the &quot;Berlinische Monatsschrift&quot; in 1795. The word &quot;Orthodox&quot; was borrowed from the general German Enlightenment discourse, and used to denote those Jews who opposed Enlightenment. During the early and mid-19th century, with the advent of the progressive movements among German Jews, and especially early Reform Judaism, the title &quot;Orthodox&quot; became the epithet of traditionalists who espoused conservative positions on the issues raised by modernization. They themselves often disliked the name that was earlier adopted by eastern Christianity, preferring titles such as &quot;Torah-true&quot; (&quot;gesetztreu&quot;). They often declared they used it only as a convenience. German Orthodox leader Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch referred to &quot;the conviction commonly designated as Orthodox Judaism&quot;; in 1882, when Rabbi Azriel Hildesheimer became convinced that the public understood that his philosophy and Liberal Judaism were radically different, he removed the word &quot;Orthodox&quot; from the name of his Hildesheimer Rabbinical Seminary. By the 1920s, the term had become common and accepted even in Eastern Europe.

Orthodoxy perceives itself as the only authentic continuation of Judaism as it was until the crisis of modernity. Its progressive opponents often shared this view, regarding it as a remnant of the past and lending credit to their own rival ideology. Thus, the term &quot;Orthodox&quot; is often used generically to refer to traditional (even if only in the sense that it is unrelated to modernist movement) synagogues, rites, and observances.

Academic research noted that the formation of Orthodox ideology and organizations was itself influenced by modernity. This was brought about by the need to defend the very concept of tradition in a world where that was no longer self-evident. When secularization and the dismantlement of communal structures uprooted the old order of Jewish life, traditionalist elements united to form groups that had a specific self-understanding. This, and all that it entailed, constituted a notable change, for the Orthodox had to adapt to modern society no less than anyone else; they developed novel, sometimes radical, means of action and modes of thought. &quot;Orthodoxization&quot; was a contingent process, drawing from local circumstances and dependent on the threat sensed by its proponents: a sharply-delineated Orthodox identity appeared in Central Europe, in Germany and Hungary, by the 1860s; a less stark one emerged in Eastern Europe during the Interwar period. Among the Jews of the Muslim lands, similar processes on a large scale began only around the 1970s, after they immigrated to Israel. Orthodoxy is often described as extremely conservative, ossifying a once-dynamic tradition due to the fear of legitimizing change. While this was sometimes true, its defining feature was not forbidding change and &quot;freezing&quot; Jewish heritage, but rather the need to adapt to the segment of Judaism in a modern world inhospitable to traditional practice. Orthodoxy often involved much accommodation and leniency. In the mid-1980s, research on Orthodox Judaism became a scholarly discipline, examining how the need to confront modernity shaped and changed its beliefs, ideologies, social structure, and &quot;halakhic&quot; rulings, separating it from traditional Jewish society.

== History ==
=== Modernity crisis ===
Until the latter half of the 18th century, Jewish communities in Central and Western Europe were autonomous entities, with distinct privileges and obligations. They were led by the affluent wardens&#x27; class (&quot;parnasim&quot;), judicially subject to rabbinical courts, which governed most civil matters. The rabbinical class monopolized education and morals, much like the Christian clergy. Jewish Law was considered normative and enforced upon transgressors (common sinning was rebuked, but tolerated) invoking all communal sanctions: imprisonment, taxation, flogging, pillorying, and, especially, excommunication. Cultural, economic, and social exchange with non-Jewish society was limited and regulated.

This state of affairs came to an end with the rise of the modern, centralized state, which appropriated all authority. The nobility, clergy, urban guilds, and all other corporate estates were gradually stripped of privileges, inadvertently creating a more equal and secularized society. The Jews were one of the groups affected: excommunication was banned, and rabbinic courts lost almost all their jurisdiction. The state, especially following the French Revolution, was more and more inclined to tolerate Jews as a religious sect, but not as an autonomous entity, and sought to reform and integrate them as &quot;useful subjects&quot;. Jewish emancipation and equal rights were discussed. The Christian (and especially Protestant) separation of &quot;religious&quot; and &quot;secular&quot; was applied to Jewish affairs, to which these concepts were alien. The rabbis were bemused when the state expected them to assume pastoral care, beyond their principal judicial role. Of secondary importance, much less than the civil and legal transformations, were the ideas of Enlightenment that chafed at the authority of tradition and faith.

By the end of the 18th century, the weakened rabbinic establishment was facing a new kind of transgressor: they could not be classified as tolerable sinners overcome by their urges (&quot;khote le-te&#x27;avon&quot;), or as schismatics like the Sabbateans or Frankists, against whom sanctions were levied. Their attitudes did not fit the criteria set when faith was a normative and self-evident part of worldly life, but rested on the realities of the new, secularized age. The wardens&#x27; class, which wielded most power within the communities, was rapidly acculturating and often sought to oblige the state&#x27;s agenda.

Rabbi Elazar Fleckeles, who returned to Prague from the countryside in 1783, recalled that he first faced there &quot;new vices&quot; of principled irreverence towards tradition, rather than &quot;old vices&quot; such as gossip or fornication. In Hamburg, Rabbi Raphael Cohen attempted to reinforce traditional norms. Cohen ordered the men in his community to grow a beard, forbade holding hands with one&#x27;s wife in public, and decried women who wore wigs, instead of visible headgear, to cover their hair; Cohen taxed and otherwise persecuted members of the priestly caste who left the city to marry divorcees, men who appealed to state courts, those who ate food cooked by Gentiles, and other transgressors. Hamburg&#x27;s Jews repeatedly appealed to the civil authorities, which eventually justified Cohen. However, the unprecedented meddling in his jurisdiction profoundly shocked him and dealt a blow to the prestige of the rabbinate.

An ideological challenge to rabbinic authority, in contrast to prosaic secularization, appeared in the form of the &quot;Haskalah&quot; (Jewish Enlightenment) movement which came to the fore in 1782. Hartwig Wessely, Moses Mendelssohn, and other &quot;maskilim&quot; called for a reform of Jewish education, abolition of coercion in matters of conscience, and other modernizing measures. They bypassed rabbinic approval and set themselves, at least implicitly, as a rival intellectual elite. A bitter struggle ensued. Reacting to Mendelssohn&#x27;s assertion that freedom of conscience must replace communal censure, Rabbi Cohen of Hamburg commented: 

However, &quot;maskilic&quot;&#x27;-rabbinic rivalry ended in most of Central Europe, as governments imposed modernization upon their Jewish subjects. Schools replaced traditional &quot;cheders&quot;, and Standard German began to supplant Yiddish. Differences between the establishment and the Enlightened became irrelevant, and the former often embraced the views of the latter (now antiquated, as more aggressive modes of acculturation replaced the Haskalahs program). In 1810, when philanthropist Israel Jacobson opened what was later identified as the first Reform synagogue in Seesen, with modernized rituals, he encountered little protest.

=== Hamburg Temple dispute ===

The founding of the Hamburg Temple in 1818 mobilized the conservative elements. The organizers of the synagogue wished to appeal to acculturated Jews with a modernized ritual. They openly defied not just the local rabbinic court that ordered them to desist, but published learned tracts that castigated the entire rabbinical elite as hypocritical and obscurant. The moral threat they posed to rabbinic authority, as well as &quot;halakhic&quot; issues such as having a gentile play an organ on the Sabbath, were combined with theological issues. The Temple&#x27;s revised prayer book omitted or rephrased petitions for the coming of the Messiah and renewal of sacrifices (&quot;post factum&quot;, it was considered to be the first Reform liturgy). More than anything else, this doctrinal breach alarmed the traditionalists. Dozens of rabbis from across Europe united in support of the Hamburg rabbinic court, banning the major practices enacted there and offering &quot;halakhic&quot; grounds for forbidding any changes. Most historians concur that the 1818–1821 Hamburg Temple dispute, with its concerted backlash against Reform and the emergence of a self-aware conservative ideology, marks the beginning of Orthodox Judaism.

The leader and organizer of the Orthodox camp during the dispute, and the most influential figure in early Orthodoxy, was Rabbi Moses Sofer of Pressburg, Hungary. Historian Jacob Katz regarded him as the first to grasp the realities of the modern age. Sofer understood that what remained of his political clout would soon disappear, and that he had largely lost the ability to enforce observance; as Katz wrote, &quot;obedience to &quot;halakha&quot; became dependent on recognizing its validity, and this very validity was challenged by those who did not obey&quot;. He was deeply troubled by reports from his native Frankfurt and the arrival from the west of dismissed rabbis, ejected by progressive wardens, or pious families, fearing for the education of their children. These émigrés often became ardent followers.

Sofer&#x27;s response to the crisis of traditional Jewish society was unremitting conservatism, canonizing every detail of prevalent norms in the observant community lest any compromise legitimize the progressives&#x27; claim that the law was fluid or redundant. He was unwilling to trade &quot;halakhic&quot; opinions for those he considered to be pretending to honor the rules of rabbinic discourse, while intending to undermine them. Sofer regarded traditional customs as equivalent to vows; he warned in 1793 that even the &quot;custom of ignoramuses&quot; (one known to be rooted solely in a mistake of the common masses) was to be meticulously observed and revered. Sofer was frank and vehement about his stance, stating during the Hamburg dispute that prayers in the vernacular were not problematic &quot;per se&quot;, but he forbade them because they constituted an innovation. He succinctly expressed his attitude in wordplay he borrowed from the Talmud: &quot;The new (&quot;Chadash&quot;, originally meaning new grain) is forbidden by the Torah anywhere.&quot; Regarding the new, ideologically-driven sinners, Sofer commented in 1818 that they should have been anathemized and banished from the People of Israel like earlier heretical sects.

Unlike most, if not all, rabbis in Central Europe, who had little choice but to compromise, Sofer enjoyed unique circumstances. He, too, had to tread carefully during the 1810s, tolerating a modernized synagogue in Pressburg and other innovations, and his &quot;yeshiva&quot; was nearly closed by warden Wolf Breisach. But in 1822, three poor (and therefore traditional) community members, whose deceased apostate brother bequeathed them a large fortune, rose to the wardens&#x27; board. Breisach died soon after, and the Pressburg community became dominated by the conservatives. Sofer also possessed a strong base in the form of his &quot;yeshiva&quot;, the world&#x27;s largest at the time, with hundreds of students. And crucially, the large and privileged Hungarian nobility blocked most imperial reforms in the backward country, including those relevant to the Jews. Hungarian Jewry retained its pre-modern character well into the 19th century, allowing Sofer&#x27;s disciples to establish a score of new &quot;yeshivas&quot;, at a time when these institutions were rapidly closing in the west, and a strong rabbinate to appoint them. A generation later, a self-aware Orthodoxy was well entrenched in the country. Hungarian Jewry gave rise both to Orthodoxy in general, in the sense of a comprehensive response to modernity, and specifically to the traditionalist, militant ultra-Orthodoxy.

The 1818–1821 controversy also elicited a different response, which first arose in its very epicenter. Severe protests did not affect Temple congregants, eventually leading the wardens of Hamburg&#x27;s Jewish community to a comprehensive compromise for the sake of unity. They replaced the elderly, traditional Chief Dayan Baruch Oser with Isaac Bernays. The latter was a university graduate, clean-shaven, and modern, who could appeal to the acculturated and the young. Bernays signified a new era, and historians marked him as the first modern rabbi, fitting the demands of emancipation: his contract forbade him to tax, punish, or coerce, and he lacked political or judiciary power. He was forbidden from interfering in the Temple&#x27;s conduct. Conservative in the principal issues of faith, in aesthetic, cultural, and civil matters, Bernays was a reformer and the Temple leaders. He introduced secular studies for children, wore a cassock like a Protestant clergyman, and delivered vernacular sermons. He forbade the spontaneous, informal character of synagogue conduct typical of Ashkenazi tradition, and ordered prayers to be somber and dignified. Bernays&#x27; style re-unified the Hamburg community by accommodating their aesthetic demands (but not theological ones, raised by only a learned few).
The combination of religious conservatism and modernity in everything else was emulated elsewhere, earning the label &quot;Neo-Orthodoxy&quot;. Bernays and his like-minded followers, such as Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger, fully accepted the platform of the moderate &quot;Haskalah&quot;, taking away its progressive edge. While old-style traditional life continued in Germany until the 1840s, secularization and acculturation turned Neo-Orthodoxy into the strict right-wing of German Jewry. It was fully articulated by Bernays&#x27; mid-century disciples Samson Raphael Hirsch and Azriel Hildesheimer. Hirsch, a Hamburg native who was ten during the Temple dispute, combined Orthodox dogmatism and militancy against rival interpretations of Judaism, granting leniency on many cultural issues and embraced German culture. The novel mixture termed Neo-Orthodoxy spread.

While insisting on strict observance, the movement both tolerated and advocated modernization: Traditionally rare formal religious education for girls was introduced; modesty and gender separation were relaxed to match German society; men went clean-shaven and dressed like Gentiles; and exclusive Torah study virtually disappeared. Basic religious studies incorporating German provided children with practical &quot;halakhic&quot; knowledge for thriving in modern society. Ritual was reformed to match prevalent aesthetic conceptions, much like non-Orthodox synagogues though without the ideological undertone, and the liturgy was often abbreviated. Neo-Orthodoxy mostly did not attempt to reconcile its conduct and &quot;halakhic&quot; or moral norms. Instead it adopted compartmentalization, de facto limiting Judaism to the private and religious spheres, while otherwise yielding to outer society. While conservative Rabbis in Hungary still thought in terms of the now-lost communal autonomy, the Neo-Orthodox turned Judaism from an all-encompassing practice into a private religious conviction.

=== Science of Judaism ===

In the late 1830s, modernist pressures in Germany shifted from the secularization debate, moving into the &quot;purely religious&quot; sphere of theology and liturgy. A new generation of university-trained rabbis (many German states required communal rabbis to possess such education) sought to reconcile Judaism with the historical-critical study of scripture and the dominant philosophies of the day, especially Kant and Hegel. Influenced by the critical &quot;Science of Judaism&quot; (&quot;Wissenschaft des Judentums&quot;) pioneered by Leopold Zunz, and often in emulation of the Liberal Protestant milieu, they reexamined and undermined beliefs held as sacred in traditional circles, especially the notion of an unbroken chain from Sinai to the Sages. The more radical among the &quot;Wissenschaft&quot; rabbis, unwilling to limit critical analysis or its practical application, coalesced around Rabbi Abraham Geiger to establish Reform Judaism. Between 1844 and 1846, Geiger organized three rabbinical synods in Braunschweig, Frankfurt and Breslau, to determine how to refashion Judaism for present times.

The Reform conferences were met with uproar by the Orthodox. Warden Hirsch Lehren of Amsterdam and Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger of Altona both organized anti-Reform manifestos, denouncing the new initiatives, signed by scores of rabbis from Europe and the Middle East. The tone of the signatories varied considerably along geographic lines: letters from traditional societies in Eastern Europe and the Ottoman Empire implored local leaders to petition the authorities and have them ban the movement. Signers from Central and Western Europe used terms commensurate with the liberal age. All were implored by the petitioners to be brief and accessible; complex &quot;halakhic&quot; arguments, intended to convince the rabbinic elite in past generations, were replaced by an appeal to the secularized masses.

The struggle with &quot;Wissenschaft&quot; criticism shaped the Orthodox. For centuries, Ashkenazi rabbinic authorities espoused Nahmanides&#x27; position that the Talmudic exegesis, which derived laws from the Torah&#x27;s text by employing hermeneutics, was binding &quot;d&#x27;Oraita&quot;. Geiger and others presented exegesis as an arbitrary, illogical process, and consequently defenders of tradition embraced Maimonides&#x27; claim that the Sages merely buttressed already received laws with biblical citations, rather than actually deriving them.

Jay Harris commented, &quot;An insulated orthodox, &quot;or, rather, traditional&quot; rabbinate, feeling no pressing need to defend the validity of the Oral Law, could confidently appropriate the vision of most medieval rabbinic scholars; a defensive German Orthodoxy, by contrast, could not. ... Thus began a shift in understanding that led Orthodox rabbis and historians in the modern period to insist that the &quot;entire&quot; Oral Law was revealed by God to Moses at Sinai.&quot; 19th-Century Orthodox commentaries, like those authored by Malbim, attempted to amplify the notion that the Oral and Written Law were intertwined and inseparable.

&quot;Wissenschaft&quot; posed a greater challenge to the modernized neo-Orthodox than to the traditionalist. Hirsch and Hildesheimer divided on the matter, anticipating modernist Orthodox attitudes to the historical-critical method. Hirsch argued that analyzing minutiae of tradition as products of their historical context was akin to denying its divine origin and timeless relevance. Hildesheimer consented to research under limits, subjugating it to the predetermined sanctity of the subject matter and accepting its results only when they accorded with the latter. More importantly, while he was content to engage academically, he opposed its practical application in religious questions, requiring traditional methods to be used. Hildesheimer&#x27;s approach was emulated by his disciple Rabbi David Zvi Hoffmann, a scholar and apologetic. His polemic against the Graf-Wellhausen hypothesis formed the classical Orthodox response to Higher Criticism. Hoffman declared that for him, the unity of the Pentateuch was a given, regardless of research. Hirsch often lambasted Hoffman for contextualizing rabbinic literature.

All of them stressed the importance of dogmatic adherence to &quot;Torah min ha-Shamayim&quot;, which led them to conflict with Rabbi Zecharias Frankel, Chancellor of the Jewish Theological Seminary of Breslau. Unlike the Reform camp, Frankel insisted on strict observance and displayed great reverence towards tradition. But though appreciated by conservatives, his practice of &quot;Wissenschaft&quot; left him suspect to Hirsch and Hildesheimer. They demanded again and again that he state his beliefs concerning the nature of revelation. In 1859, Frankel published a critical study of the Mishnah, and added that all commandments classified as &quot;Law given to Moses at Sinai&quot; were merely customs (he broadened Asher ben Jehiel&#x27;s opinion). Hirsch and Hildesheimer seized the opportunity and launched a public campaign against him, accusing him of heresy. Concerned that public opinion regarded both neo-Orthodoxy and Frankel&#x27;s &quot;Positive-Historical School&quot; centered at Breslau as similarly observant and traditionalist, the two stressed that the difference was dogmatic and not &quot;halakhic&quot;. They managed to tarnish Frankel&#x27;s reputation in the traditional camp and delegitimized him for many. The Positive-Historical School is regarded by Conservative Judaism as an intellectual forerunner. While Hildesheimer distinguished Frankel&#x27;s observant disciples from Reform proponents, he wrote in his diary: &quot;how meager is the principal difference between the Breslau School, who don silk gloves at their work, and Geiger who wields a sledgehammer&quot;.

=== Communal schism ===

During the 1840s in Germany, as traditionalists became a clear minority, some Orthodox rabbis, such as Salomo Eger of Posen, urged the adoption of Moses Sofer&#x27;s position and to anathemize the principally nonobservant. Eating, worshipping or marrying with them were to be banned. Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger, whose journal &quot;Treue Zionswächter&quot; was the first regular Orthodox newspaper, signifying the coalescence of a distinct Orthodox milieu, rejected their call. Ettlinger, and German neo-Orthodoxy in his wake, chose to regard the modern secularized Jew as a transgressor rather than a schismatic. He adopted Maimonides&#x27; interpretation of the Talmudic concept &quot;tinok shenishba&quot; (captured infant), a Jew by birth who was not raised as such and therefore could be absolved for not practicing, and greatly expanded it to serve the Orthodox need to tolerate the nonobservant majority: Many of their own congregants were far removed from strict practice. For example, he allowed congregants to drink wine poured by Sabbath desecrators, and to ignore other &quot;halakhic&quot; sanctions. Yet German neo-Orthodoxy could not legitimize nonobservance, and adopted a hierarchical approach, softer than traditional sanctions, but no less intent on differentiating sinners and righteous. Reform rabbis or lay leaders, considered ideological opponents, were castigated, while the common mass was to be carefully handled.

Some German neo-Orthodox believed that while doomed to minority status in their native country, their ideology could successfully confront modernity and unify Judaism in more traditional communities to the east. In 1847, Hirsch was elected Chief Rabbi of Moravia, where old rabbinic culture and &quot;yeshiva&quot;s were still extant. His expectations were dashed as traditionalist rabbis scorned him for his European manners and lack of Talmudic acumen. They became enraged by his attempts to reform synagogues and to establish a rabbinical seminary including secular studies. The progressives viewed him as too conservative. After four years of constant strife, he lost faith in the possibility of reuniting the Jewish public. In 1851, a group in Frankfurt am Main that opposed the Reform character of the Jewish community turned to Hirsch. He led them for the remainder of his life, finding Frankfurt a hospitable site for his unique ideology, which amalgamated acculturation, dogmatic theology, thorough observance, and strict secession from the non-Orthodox.
That year, Hildesheimer visited Hungary. Confounded by urbanization and acculturation – and the rise of Neology, a nonobservant laity served by rabbis who mostly favoured the Positive-Historical approach – the elderly local rabbis at first welcomed Hildesheimer. He opened a modern school in Eisenstadt that included secular studies in the curriculum. Traditionalists such as Moshe Schick and Yehudah Aszód sent their sons to study there. Samuel Benjamin Sofer, the heir of late Hatam Sofer, considered appointing Hildesheimer as his assistant-rabbi in Pressburg and instituting secular studies in the city&#x27;s great &quot;yeshiva&quot;. The rabbi of Eisenstadt believed that only a full-fledged modern rabbinical seminary could fulfill his neo-Orthodox agenda. In the 1850s and 1860s, however, a radical reactionary Orthodox party coalesced in the northeastern regions of Hungary. Led by Rabbi Hillel Lichtenstein, his son-in-law Akiva Yosef Schlesinger and decisor Chaim Sofer, the &quot;zealots&quot; were shocked by the demise of the traditional world into which they had been born. Like Moses Sofer a generation before them, these Orthodox émigrés moved east, to a pre-modern environment that they were determined to safeguard. Lichtenstein ruled out any compromise with modernity, insisting on maintaining Yiddish and traditional dress. They considered the Neologs as already beyond the pale of Jewishness, and were more concerned with neo-Orthodoxy, which they regarded as a thinly-veiled gateway for a similar fate. Chaim Sofer summarized their view of Hildesheimer: &quot;The wicked Hildesheimer is the horse and chariot of the Evil Inclination... All the heretics in the last century did not seek to undermine the Law and the Faith as he does.&quot;

In their struggle against acculturation, the Hungarian &quot;Haredim&quot; struggled to provide strong &quot;halakhic&quot; arguments. Michael Silber wrote: &quot;These issues, even most of the religious reforms, fell into gray areas not easily treated within Halakha. It was often too flexible or ambiguous, at times silent, or worse yet, embarrassingly lenient.&quot; Schlesinger was forced to venture outside of normative law, into mystical writings and other fringe sources, to buttress his ideology. Most Hungarian Orthodox rabbis, while sympathetic to the &quot;zealots&quot;&#x27; cause, dismissed their legal arguments. In 1865, the &quot;Haredim&quot; convened in Nagymihály and issued a ban on various synagogue reforms, intended not against the Neologs but against developments in the Orthodox camp, especially after Samuel Sofer violated his father&#x27;s expressed ban and instituted vernacular sermons in Pressburg. Schick, the country&#x27;s most prominent decisor, and other leading rabbis refused to sign, though they did not publicly oppose the decree. On the other end of the spectrum, Hildesheimer&#x27;s planned seminary was too radical for the same mainstream rabbis, and he became marginalized and isolated by 1864.

The internal Orthodox division was complicated by growing tension with the Neologs. In 1869, the Hungarian government convened a General Jewish Congress that was aimed at creating a national representative body. Fearing Neolog domination, the Orthodox seceded from the Congress and appealed to Parliament in the name of religious freedom. This demonstrated the internalization of the new circumstances: Twenty years before, in 1851, Orthodox leader Meir Eisenstaedter petitioned the authorities to restore the old coercive powers of the communities. In 1871 the government recognized a separate Orthodox national committee. Communities that refused to join either side, labeled &quot;Status Quo&quot;, were subject to Orthodox condemnation even when impeccably conservative. However, the Orthodox tolerated nonobservant Jews as long as they affiliated with the national committee: Adam Ferziger claimed that membership and loyalty, rather than beliefs and ritual behavior, emerged as the definitive manifestation of Jewish identity. The Hungarian schism was the most radical internal separation among the Jews of Europe. Hildesheimer returned to Germany soon after, disillusioned though not as pessimistic as Hirsch. He was appointed rabbi of the Orthodox sub-community in Berlin (which had separate religious institutions but was not formally independent of the Liberal majority), where he finally established his seminary.

In 1877, a law enabling Jews to secede from their communities without baptism was passed in Germany. It was a stark example that Judaism was now confessional, not corporate. Hirsch withdrew his congregation from the Frankfurt community, and decreed that all Orthodox should do the same. However, unlike the heterogeneous congregations of Hungary, which often consisted of recent immigrants, Frankfurt and most German communities were close-knit. The majority of Hirsch&#x27;s congregants enlisted Rabbi Seligman Baer Bamberger, who was older and more conservative. Bamberger was concerned with the principal of unity among the People Israel and dismissive of Hirsch, whom he regarded as unlearned and overly assimilated. He decreed that since the mother community was willing to finance Orthodox services and allow them religious freedom, secession was unwarranted. Eventually, less than 80 families from Hirsch&#x27;s 300-strong congregation followed their rabbi. The vast majority of the 15%–20% of German Jews affiliated with Orthodox institutions cared little for the polemics. They did not secede over reasons of finance and familial relations. Only a handful of Secessionist, &quot;Austrittorthodox&quot;, communities were established in the Reich; almost everyone remained Communal Orthodox, &quot;Gemeindeortodox&quot;, within Liberal mother congregations. The Communal Orthodox argued that their approach was true to Jewish unity and decisive in maintaining public standards of observance and traditional education in Liberal communities. The Secessionists viewed them as hypocritical middle-of-the-roaders.

The conflicts in Hungary and Germany, and the emergence of distinctly Orthodox communities and ideologies, were the exception rather than the rule in Central and Western Europe. France, Britain, Bohemia, Austria and other countries saw both a virtual disappearance of traditional Jewish life, and no serious interest in bridging Judaism and modernity. The official rabbinate remained technically traditional, in the default sense of not introducing ideological change. The organ – a symbol of Reform in Germany since 1818, so much that Hildesheimer seminarians had to sign a declaration that they would never serve in a synagogue that introduced one – was accepted with little qualm by the French Consistoire in 1856, as part of a series of synagogue regulations passed by Chief Rabbi Salomon Ulmann. Even Rabbi Solomon Klein of Colmar, the leader of Alsatian conservatives who partook in the castigation of Zecharias Frankel, allowed the instrument in his community. In England, Rabbi Nathan Marcus Adler&#x27;s United Synagogue shared a similar approach: It was vehemently conservative in principle and combated ideological reformers, yet served a nonobservant public – as Todd Endelman noted, &quot;While respectful of tradition, most English-born Jews were not orthodox in terms of personal practice. Nonetheless they were content to remain within an orthodox congregational framework&quot; – and introduced considerable synagogue reforms.

=== Eastern Europe ===
The slow pace of modernization in Russia, Congress Poland and Romanian principalities delayed the crisis of traditional society for decades. , Harsh discrimination and active persecution of Jews continued there until 1917. Old-style education in the &quot;heder&quot; and &quot;yeshiva&quot; remained the norm, retaining Hebrew as the language of the elite and Yiddish as the vernacular. The defining fault-line of Eastern European Jews was between the Hasidim and the &quot;Misnagdic&quot; reaction against them. Reform attempts by the Czar&#x27;s government all had little influence. School modernization under Max Lilienthal, the growth of rabbinical seminaries and the mandating to appoint clerks known as &quot;official rabbis&quot; all had little impact. Communal autonomy and the rabbinic courts&#x27; jurisdiction were abolished in 1844, but economic and social seclusion remained, ensuring the &quot;de facto&quot; authority of Jewish institutions and traditions. In 1880, only 21,308 Jewish pupils attended government schools, out of some 5 million Jews; In 1897, 97% of the 5.2 million Jews in the Pale of Settlement and Congress Poland spoke Yiddish their mother tongue, and only 26% were literate in Russian. Though the Eastern European &quot;Haskalah&quot; challenged the traditional establishment, it flourished from the 1820s until the 1890s. Unlike its western counterpart, it thrived despite ongoing acculturation. The leading rabbis maintained the concept of communal unity: in 1882, when an Orthodox party in Galicia appealed for the right of secession, the Netziv and other Russian rabbis forbade it for contradicting the idea of Israel&#x27;s unity.

In the 1860s and 1870s, moderate &quot;maskilic&quot; rabbis like Yitzchak Yaacov Reines and Yechiel Michel Pines called for inclusion of secular studies in the &quot;heder&quot;s and &quot;yeshiva&quot;s, anticipating a communal disintegration as in the west. Instead they proposed a careful modernization, based on a consensus on the adaptation of &quot;halakha&quot;. Their initiative was thwarted by a combination of radical, secularist &quot;maskilim&quot; and leading conservative rabbis. This was highlighted during the battle that erupted after Moshe Leib Lilienblum&#x27;s 1868 call for a reconsideration of Talmudic strictures. Reines, Pines and their associates gradually formed the nucleus of Religious Zionism, while their conservative opponents adopted the epithet &quot;Haredim&quot; (generic term for the observant and the pious).

Jewish nationalism, particularly Zionism, with its nonobservant if not staunchly secular partisans, was the key question facing Eastern European traditionalists, although it was tangled with modernization. Salmon claimed that the future Zionists were: supportive of a national agenda; motivated by criticism of Jewish society; supportive of modernity; tolerant of nonobservance; and approving of traditional faith and practice. Their proto-&quot;Haredi&quot; opponents sharply rejected all he former positions and espoused staunch conservatism, which idealized existing norms. Any illusion that differences could be blanded and a united observant pro-Zionist front would be formed, were dashed between 1897 and 1899, as both the Eastern European nationalist intellectuals and Theodor Herzl himself revealed an uncompromising secularist agenda, forcing traditionalist leaders to pick sides. In 1900, the anti-Zionist pamphlet &quot;Or la-Yesharim&quot;, endorsed by many Russian and Polish rabbis, largely demarcated the lines between the proto-&quot;Haredi&quot; majority and the Mizrahi minority, and terminated dialogue; in 1911, when the 10th World Zionist Congress voted in favour of propagating non-religious cultural work and education, a large segment of the Mizrahi seceded and joined the anti-Zionists.

In 1907, Eastern European proto-&quot;Haredi&quot; elements formed the Knesseth Israel party, a modern framework created in recognition of the deficiencies of existing institutions. It dissipated within a year. German Neo-Orthodoxy, in the meantime, developed a keen interest in the traditional Jewish masses of Russia and Poland; if at the past they were considered primitive, a disillusionment with emancipation and enlightenment made many young assimilated German Orthodox youth embark on journeys to East European &quot;yeshivot&quot;, in search of authenticity. The German secessionists already possessed a platform of their own, the &quot;&quot;, founded by Samson Raphael Hirsch in 1885. In 1912, two German FVIOJ leaders, Isaac Breuer and Jacob Rosenheim, managed to organize a meeting of 300 seceding Mizrahi, proto-&quot;Haredi&quot; and secessionist Neo-Orthodox delegate in Katowice, creating the &quot;Agudath Israel&quot; party. While the Germans were a tiny minority in comparison to the Eastern Europeans, their modern education made them a prominent elite in the new organization, which strove to provide a comprehensive response to world Jewry&#x27;s challenges in a strictly observant spirit. The Agudah immediately formed its Council of Torah Sages as supreme rabbinic leadership body. Many ultra-traditionalist elements in Eastern Europe, like the Belz and Lubavitch Hasidim, refused to join, viewing the movement as a dangerous innovation; and the organized Orthodox in Hungary rejected it as well, especially after it did not affirm a commitment to communal secession in 1923.

In the Interwar period, sweeping secularization and acculturation deracinated old Jewish society in Eastern Europe. The October Revolution granted civil equality and imposed anti-religious persecutions, radically transforming Russian Jewry within a decade; the lifting of formal discrimination also strongly affected the Jews of independent Poland, Lithuania and other states. In the 1930s, it was estimated that 20–33% of Poland&#x27;s Jews, the last stronghold of traditionalism where many were still living in rural and culturally-secluded communities, could be considered strictly observant. Only upon having become an embattled (though still quite large) minority, did the local traditionalists complete their transformation into Orthodox, albeit never as starkly as in Hungary or Germany. Eastern European Orthodoxy, whether Agudah or Mizrahi, always preferred cultural and educational independence to communal secession, and maintained strong ties and self-identification with the general Jewish public. Within its ranks, the 150-years-long struggle between Hasidim and Misnagdim was largely subsided; the latter were even dubbed henceforth as &quot;Litvaks&quot;, as the anti-Hasidic component in their identity was marginalized. In the interwar period, Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan emerged as the popular leader of the Eastern European Orthodox, particularly the Agudah-leaning.

=== United States ===

American Jewry of the 19th century was small and lacked traditional institutions or strong rabbinic presence due to its immigrant-based nature. This informality allow religious innovation to flourish. Voluntary congregations were the norm. Separation of church and state and dynamic religiosity along the Protestant model shaped synagogue life. In the mid-19th century, Reform Judaism spread rapidly, made popular by formally abandoning traditions that few upheld. The United States was labeled the &quot;Treife Medina&quot;, or &quot;Profane Country&quot;, in Yiddish.

==== Orthodox Judaism ====
Isaac Leeser was an ultra-traditionalist in the American context. In 1845 he introduced the words &quot;Orthodox&quot; and &quot;Orthodoxy&quot; into the American Jewish discourse, explicitly to oppose Reform. Leeser was a staunch proponent of Zecharias Frankel, whom he considered the &quot;leader of the Orthodox party&quot;. at a time when Positive-Historical and Orthodox positions were hardly distinguishable. In 1861, Leeser defended Frankel in a polemic instigated by Hirsch. Lesser became a rallying point for conservative elements, concerned mainly with public standards of observance in critical fields such as marriage.

==== Conservative Judaism ====
A broad non-Reform, relatively traditional camp slowly coalesced as the minority within American Jewry, serving the nonobservant. Their synagogues liberalized their approach: omission of &quot;piyyutim&quot; from the liturgy; English-language sermons; secular education for the clergy; and many did not partition men and women. In 1885, the antinomian Pittsburgh Platform moved conservative religious leaders to found the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS). Orthodoxy never became consistent and was mainly motivated by a rejection of Reform. They variously termed their ideology as &quot;Enlightened Orthodoxy&quot; or &quot;Conservative Judaism&quot;. The latter gradually became the preferred term.

==== Modern Orthodoxy ====
Strictly traditionalist Eastern European immigrants formed the Union of Orthodox Rabbis (UOR) in 1902, in direct opposition to the Americanized OU and JTS. The UOR frowned upon English-language sermons, secular education and any acculturation. In 1897, an old-style &quot;yeshiva&quot;, Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary (RIETS), was founded in New York. Its students rebelled in 1908, demanding rabbinic training more like that of their JTS peers. In 1915, RIETS was reorganized as a Modern Orthodox institution, and a merger with the JTS was discussed. In 1923, the Rabbinical Council of America was established as the OU&#x27;s clerical association.
Between the Haredim and Conservatives, Modern Orthodoxy emerged as a distinct movement. Its postwar leader, Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik, left Agudas Israel to adopt a positive, if reserved, attitude toward Western culture. As dean of RIETS and honorary chair of RCA&#x27;s &quot;halakha&quot; committee, Soloveitchik shaped Modern Orthodoxy for decades. RCA stressed the divinely revealed status of the Torah and a strict observance of &quot;halakha&quot;, separating it from Conservative ideology. Physically separate seating (symbolized by gender partitions) became the distinguishing mark of Orthodox/Conservative affiliation in the 1950s, and as pushed by the RCA. However, many Modern Orthodox followers were barely observant, and many synagogues did not use a gender partition. As late as 1997, seven OU congregations lacked a partition. By 2005, that number went down to one, and ceased to exist when that synagogue resigned from the OU in 2015 after understanding that the OU was planning to expel it.

==== Hardening boundaries ====
In the postwar era, the vague traditional coalition came to a definite end. During and after the Holocaust, a new wave of strictly observant refugees arrived from Eastern and Central Europe. They typically regarded the UOR as overly Americanized. Typical of these was Rabbi Aaron Kotler, who established Lakewood Yeshiva in New Jersey in 1943. Alarmed by the American innovations, Kotler turned his institution into an enclave, around which a community slowly evolved. It was unlike his prewar &quot;yeshiva&quot; at Kletsk, Poland, whose students mingled with the rest of the population. Lakewood pioneered the homogeneous, voluntary and enclavist model of postwar &quot;Haredi&quot; communities, which were independent entities developing their own subculture. The new arrivals soon dominated the traditionalist wing of American Jewry, forcing locals to adopt their views. The younger generation in the JTS and the Rabbinical Assembly concurrently demanded greater clarity, theological unambiguity and &quot;halakhic&quot; independence from the Orthodox veto on serious innovations. In 1935, for example, the RA shelved its proposal for a solution to the &quot;agunah&quot; predicament. &quot;Conservative Judaism&quot; was adopted as an exclusive label by most JTS graduates and RA members, became a distinct movement. In 1950, the Conservatives signaled their break with Orthodoxy by acceptance of a far-reaching legal decision, which allowed one to drive to the synagogue and to use electricity on Sabbath.

== Theology ==
=== Orthodox attitudes ===
Judaism never formulated a conclusive credo; whether it reflects a dogma remains controversial. Some researchers argued that the importance of daily practice and adherence to &quot;halakha&quot; (Jewish law) mooted theoretical issues. Others dismissed this view entirely, citing ancient rabbinic debates that castigated various heresies with little reference to observance. However, even without a uniform doctrine, Orthodox Judaism is basically united in its core beliefs. Disavowing them is a major blasphemy..

Several medieval authorities attempted to codify these beliefs, including Saadia Gaon and Joseph Albo. Each composed a creed, although the 13 principles expounded by Maimonides in his 1160s &quot;Commentary on the Mishna&quot;, remained the most widely accepted. Various points were contested by many of Maimonides&#x27; contemporaries and later sages, such as the exact formulation and the status of disbelievers (either misinformed or expelled heretics). Similarly, Albo listed only three fundamentals, and did not regard the Messiah as a key tenet. Many who objected argued that the entire corpus of the Torah and the sayings of ancient sages were of canonical stature, rather than a few selected points. In later centuries, the 13 Principles became considered universally binding and cardinal by Orthodox authorities.

During the Middle Ages, two systems of thought competed for primacy. The rationalist-philosophic school endeavored to present all commandments as serving higher moral and ethical purposes, while the mystical tradition, exemplified in Kabbalah, assigned each rite with a role in hidden dimensions of reality. Sheer obedience, derived from faithfulness to one&#x27;s community and ancestry, was believed sufficient for the common people, while the educated chose one of the two schools. In the modern era, the prestige of both declined, and &quot;naive faith&quot; became popular. At a time when contemplation in matters of belief was associated with secularization, luminaries such as Yisrael Meir Kagan stressed the importance of simple, unsophisticated commitment to the precepts passed down from the Beatified Sages. This became standard in the Haredi world.

=== God ===

Judaism adheres to monotheism, the belief in one God. The basic tenets of Orthodoxy, drawn from ancient sources like the Talmud and later sages, chiefly include the attributes of God in Judaism: one and indivisible, preceding all creation, which God alone brought into being, eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, absolutely incorporeal, and beyond human reason. This basis is evoked in many foundational texts, and is repeated often in daily prayers, such as in Judaism&#x27;s creed-like &quot;Shema Yisrael&quot;: &quot;Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is One.&quot;

Maimonides delineated this understanding of a personal God in his opening six articles. The six concern God&#x27;s status as the sole creator, his oneness, his impalpability, that he is first and last, that God alone, and no other being, may be worshipped, and that he is omniscient. The supremacy of the God of Israel is even applied to non-Jews. According to most rabbinic opinions, non-Jews are banned from the worship of other deities. However, they are allowed to &quot;associate&quot; lower divine beings with their faith in God (mostly to allow contact with Christians, accepting that they were not idolaters with whom business dealings and the like are forbidden.)

The utter imperceptibility of God, considered as beyond human reason and only reachable through what he chooses to reveal, was emphasized among others in the ancient ban on making any image of him. Maimonides and virtually all sages in his time and thereafter stressed that the creator is incorporeal, lacking &quot;any semblance of a body&quot;. While incorporeality has almost been taken for granted since the Middle Ages, Maimonides and his contemporaries reported that anthropomorphic conceptions of God were quite common in their time.

The medieval tension between God&#x27;s transcendence and equanimity, and his contact and interest in his creation, found its most popular resolution in the &quot;Kabbalah&quot;. Kabbalists asserted that while God himself is beyond the universe, he progressively unfolds into the created realm via a series of emanations, or &quot;sefirot&quot;, each a refraction of the perfect godhead. While widely received, this system proved contentious and some authorities lambasted it as a threat to God&#x27;s unity. In modern times it is upheld, at least tacitly, in many traditionalist Orthodox circles, while Modern Orthodoxy mostly simply ignores it.

=== Revelation ===
The defining doctrine of Orthodox Judaism is the belief that God revealed the Torah (&quot;Teaching&quot; or &quot;Law&quot;) to Moses on Mount Sinai, both the written scripture of the Torah and the Oral Torah explicating it, and that sages promulgated it faithfully from Sinai in an unbroken chain. One of the foundational texts of rabbinic literature is the list opening the &quot;Pirkei Avot&quot;, enumerating the sages, from Moses through Joshua, the Seventy Elders, and Prophets, and then onward until Hillel the Elder and Shammai. This core belief is referred to in classical sources as &quot;The Law/Teaching is from the Heavens&quot; (&quot;Torah min HaShamayim&quot;).

Orthodoxy holds that the body of revelation is total and complete. Its interpretation and application under new circumstances, required of every generation&#x27;s scholars, is an act of inferring and elaborating, not of innovation or addition. One clause in the Jerusalem Talmud asserts that anything that a veteran disciple shall teach was given at Sinai: a story in the Babylonian Talmud claims that Moses was taken aback upon seeing the immensely intricate deduction of future Rabbi Akiva in a vision, until Akiva proclaimed that Moses had received everything he was teaching. The Written and Oral Torah are held to be intertwined and mutually reliant. The latter is a source of many divine commandments, and the text of the Pentateuch is seen as incomprehensible. God&#x27;s will may be surmised only by appealing to the Oral Torah, which revealed the text&#x27;s allegorical, anagogical, or tropological meaning, rather than by a literal reading.

Lacunae in received tradition or disagreements between early sages are attributed to disruptions, especially persecutions such that &quot;the Torah was forgotten in Israel.&quot; According to rabbinic lore, these eventually compelled the legists to write down the Oral Law in the Mishna and Talmud. The wholeness of the original divine message and the reliability of those who transmitted it are axiomatic. One of the primary intellectual exercises of Torah scholars is to locate discrepancies between Talmudic or other passages and then demonstrate by complex logical steps (presumably proving each passage referred to a slightly different situation, etc.) that no contradiction is obtained. Orthodox Judaism considers revelation as propositional, explicit, verbal, and unambiguous. Revelation serves as a firm source of authority for religious commandments. Modernist understandings of revelation as a subjective, humanly-conditioned experience are rejected. Some thinkers at the liberal end of the liberal wing promoted such views, although they found virtually no acceptance from the establishment.

An important ramification of &quot;Torah min HaShamayim&quot; in modern times is the reserved, and often totally rejectionist, attitude of Orthodoxy toward the historical-critical method, particularly higher Biblical criticism. The refusal by rabbis to employ such tools, insisting on traditional methods and the need for consensus and continuity with past authorities, separates the most liberal-leaning Orthodox rabbinic circles from the most conservative non-Orthodox ones.

While the Sinai event is held to be the supreme act of revelation, rabbinic tradition acknowledges matters addressed by the Prophets and God&#x27;s later announcements. Kabbalah, as revealed to illustrious past figures and passed on through elitist circles, is widely (albeit not universally) esteemed. While some prominent rabbis considered Kabbalah a late forgery, most generally accepted it as legitimate. However, its status in determining normative halakhic decision-making, which is binding for the entire community, and not just for spiritualists who voluntarily adopt kabbalistic strictures, was always controversial. Leading decisors openly applied criteria from Kabbalah in their rulings, while others did so only inadvertently, and many denied it any normative role. A closely related mystical phenomenon is the belief in &quot;Magidim&quot;, supposed dreamlike apparitions or visions, that may inform those who experience them with certain divine knowledge.

=== Eschatology ===

Belief in a future Messiah is central to Orthodox Judaism. According to this doctrine, a king will arise from King David&#x27;s lineage, and will bring with him signs such as the restoration of the Temple, peace, and universal acceptance of the God of Israel. The Messiah will embark on a quest to gather all Jews to the Holy Land, will proclaim prophethood, and will restore the Davidic Monarchy.

Classical Judaism incorporated a tradition of belief in the resurrection of the dead. The scriptural basis for this doctrine, as quoted by the Mishnah is: &quot;All Israelites have a share in the World-to-Come, as it is written: &quot;And your people, all of them righteous, Shall possess the land for all time; They are the shoot that I planted, My handiwork in which I glory.&quot;. The Mishnah also brands as heretics any Jew who rejects the doctrine of resurrection or its Torah origin. Those who deny the doctrine are deemed to receive no share in the World-to-Come. The Pharisees believed in both a bodily resurrection and an immortal soul. They also believed that acts in this world would affect the state of life in the next world. Mishnah &quot;Sahedrin&quot; 10 clarifies that only those who follow the correct theology have a place in the World to Come.

Other passing references to the afterlife appear in Mishnaic tractates. &quot;Berakhot&quot; informs that the Jewish belief in the afterlife was established long before the compilation of the Mishnah. Biblical tradition mentions Sheol sixty-five times. It is described as an underworld containing the gathering of the dead with their families. states that Korah went into Sheol alive to describe his death in divine retribution. The deceased who reside in Sheol have a &quot;nebulous&quot; existence. No reward or punishment comes in Sheol, which is represented as a dark and gloomy place. But a distinction is made for kings who are said to be greeted by other kings when entering Sheol. Biblical poetry suggests that resurrection from Sheol is possible. Prophetic narratives of resurrection in the Bible have been labelled as an external cultural influence by some scholars.

Talmudic discourse expanded on the details of the World to Come. This was to motivate Jewish compliance with religious codes. In brief, the righteous will be rewarded with a place in Gan Eden, the wicked will be punished in Gehinnom, and the resurrection will take place in the Messianic age. The sequence of these events is unclear. Rabbis support the concept of resurrection with Biblical citations and show it as a sign of God&#x27;s omnipotence.

== Practice ==

=== Intensity ===
A relatively thorough observance of &quot;halakha&quot; – rather than theological and doctrinal matters, which produce diverse opinions – is the concrete demarcation line separating Orthodoxy from other Jewish movements. As noted by researchers and communal leaders, Orthodox subgroups have a sense of commitment towards the Law, perceiving it as seriously binding, which is rarely visible outside the movement.

=== Law, custom, and tradition ===
The &quot;halakha&quot;, like any jurisprudence, is not a definitive set of rules, but rather an expanding discourse. Its authority is derived from the belief in divine revelation, but rabbis interpret and apply it, basing their mandate on biblical verses such as &quot;and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform thee&quot;. From ancient to modern times, rabbinic discourse was wrought with controversy (&quot;machloket&quot;) and sages disagreeing over various points of law. The Talmud itself is mainly a record of such disputes. The Orthodox continue to believe that such disagreements flow naturally from the divinity of Jewish Law, which is presumed to contain a solution for any possible question. As long as both contesting parties base their arguments on received hermeneutics and precedents and are driven by sincere faith, &quot;both these and those are the words of the Living God&quot; (Talmudic statement originally attributed to a divine proclamation during a dispute between the House of Hillel and House of Shammai). Majority opinions were accepted and reified, though many disagreements remain unresolved as new ones appear. This plurality of opinion allows decisors, rabbis tasked with determining the legal stance in subjects without precedent, to weigh a range of options, based on methods derived from earlier authorities. The most basic form of &quot;halakhic&quot; discourse is the responsa literature, in which rabbis answered questions directed from commoners or other rabbis, thus setting precedent.

The system&#x27;s oldest and most basic sources are the Mishna and the Talmuds, augmented by the Geonim. Those were followed by the great codes which sought to assemble and standardize the laws, including Rabbi Isaac Alfasi&#x27;s &quot;Hilchot HaRif&quot;, Maimonides&#x27; &quot;Mishneh Torah&quot;, and Rabbi Asher ben Jehiel&#x27;s work (colloquially called &quot;the Rosh&quot;). These three works were the main basis of Rabbi Jacob ben Asher&#x27;s &quot;Arba&#x27;ah Turim&quot;, which in turn became the basis of one of the latest and most authoritative codifications – the 1565 &quot;Shulchan Aruch&quot;, or &quot;Set Table&quot;, by Rabbi Joseph Karo. This work gained canonical status and became almost synonymous, with the &quot;halakhic&quot; system. However, no later authority accepted it in its entirety (for example, Orthodox Jews wear phylacteries in a manner different from the one advocated there), and it was immediately contested or re-interpreted by various commentaries, most prominently the gloss written by Rabbi Moses Isserles named &quot;HaMapah (&quot;The Tablecloth&quot;)&quot;. &quot;Halakhic&quot; literature continued to expand and evolve. New authoritative guides continued to be compiled and canonized, until the popular 20th century works such as the &quot;Mishnah Berurah&quot; arrived.

The most important distinction within &quot;halakha&quot; is between all laws derived from God&#x27;s revelation (&quot;d&#x27;Oraita&quot;) and those enacted by human authorities (&quot;d&#x27;Rabanan&quot;), who are believed to have been empowered by God to legislate as necessary. The former are either directly understood, derived via various hermeneutics or attributed to commandments handed down to Moses. The authority to pass measures &quot;d&#x27;Rabanan&quot; is itself subject to debate – Maimonides stated that absolute obedience to rabbinic decrees is stipulated by the verse &quot;and thou shalt observe&quot;, while Nachmanides argued that such severity is unfounded, while accepting such enactments as binding, albeit less so than the divine commandments. A Talmudic maxim states that when in doubt regarding a matter &quot;d&#x27;Oraita&quot;, one must rule strenuously, but leniently when it concerns &quot;d&#x27;Rabanan&quot;. Many arguments in &quot;halakhic&quot; literature revolve over whether a detail is derived from the former or the latter source, and under which circumstances. Commandments or prohibitions &quot;d&#x27;Rabanan&quot;, though less stringent than &quot;d&#x27;Oraita&quot;, are an important facet of Jewish law. They range from the 2nd century BCE establishment of Hanukkah, to bypassing the Biblical ban on charging interest via the &quot;Prozbul&quot;, and up to the 1950 marital rules standardized by the Chief Rabbinate of Israel, which forbade polygamy and levirate marriage even in communities that still practiced them.

==== Minhag ====
A third major component buttressing Orthodox and other practice is local or familial custom, &quot;Minhag&quot;. The development and acceptance of customs as binding, more than disagreements between decisors, is the main source of diversity in matters of practice across geographic or ethnic boundaries. While the reverence accorded to &quot;Minhag&quot; across rabbinic literature covers the extremes, including &quot;a custom may uproot &quot;halakha&quot;&quot; and wholly dismissive attitudes, it was generally accepted as binding by scholars, and drew its power from popular adherence and routine.

The most important aspect of &quot;Minhag&quot; is in the disparities between various Jewish ethnic or communal groups, which each possess a distinctive tradition of &quot;halakhic&quot; rulings, stemming from the opinions of local rabbis. Ashkenazim, Sephardim, Teimanim, and others have distinct prayer rites, kosher emphases (for example, by the 12th century, it became an Ashkenazi custom to avoid legumes in Passover) and other distinctions.

Eating in the Sukkah on Shemini Atzeret is an area where &quot;Minhag&quot; varies; likewise, how to accommodate the idea of eating some dairy on &quot;Shavuos&quot;. The influence of custom upset scholars who noted that the common masses observe &quot;Minhag&quot;, yet ignore important divine decrees.

=== Rabbinic authority ===

Rabbinic leadership, assigned with implementing and interpreting tradition, changed considerably over the centuries, separating Orthodox from pre-modern Judaism. Since the demise of the Geonim, who led the Jewish world up to 1038, &quot;halakha&quot; was adjudicated locally, and the final arbiter was mostly the local rabbi, the &quot;Mara d&#x27;Athra&quot; (Master of the Area). He was responsible to judicially instruct his community. Emancipation and modern transport and communication made this model untenable. While Orthodox communities, especially the more conservative ones, have rabbis who technically fill this capacity, the public generally follows more broadly known authorities who are not limited by geography, and based on reverence and peer pressure more than coercion. These may be either popular chairs of Talmudic academies, renowned decisors, and, in the Hasidic world, hereditary &quot;rebbe&quot;s.

Their influence varies considerably: In conservative Orthodox circles, mainly Haredi, rabbis possess strong authority, and often exercise leadership. Bodies such as the Council of Torah Sages, Council of Torah Luminaries, the Central Rabbinical Congress, and the Orthodox Council of Jerusalem are all held as the arbiters in their respective communities. In the more liberal Orthodox sectors, rabbis are revered and consulted, but rarely exert direct control.

=== Daily life ===
Orthodox Judaism emphasizes practicing rules of &quot;kashrut&quot;, Shabbat, family purity, and &quot;tefilah&quot; (daily prayer).

Many Orthodox can be identified by their dress and family lifestyle. Orthodox men and women dress modestly covering most of their skin. Married women cover their hair, with scarves (&quot;tichel&quot;), &quot;snoods&quot;, turbans, hats, berets, or wigs.

Orthodox men wear a ritual fringe called &quot;Tzitzit&quot;, and wear a head-covering for males. Many men grow beards, and Haredi men wear suits with black hats over a skullcap. Modern Orthodox Jews may adopt the dress of general society, although they, too, wear &quot;kippahs&quot; and &quot;tzitzit.&quot; On Shabbat, Modern Orthodox men wear suits (or at least a dress shirt) and dress pants, while women wear clothing.

Orthodox Jews follow the laws of &quot;negiah&quot; (touch). The Orthodox do not engage in physical contact with those of the opposite sex other than their spouse, or immediate family members. &quot;Kol Isha&quot; prohibits a woman&#x27;s singing to a man (except as per &quot;negiah&quot;).

Doorposts have a &quot;mezuzah.&quot; Separate sinks for meat and dairy have become increasingly common.

== Diversity ==

Orthodox Judaism lacks a central framework and a common leadership. It is not a &quot;denomination&quot; in the structural sense, but a spectrum of groups, united in broadly affirming matters of belief and practice, which share a consciousness and a common discourse. Individual rabbis often gain respect across boundaries, particularly recognized decisors, but each community largely elevates its own leaders (for example, the Haredi world shares a sense of common identity, while distinct subgroups include hundreds of independent communities with their own rabbis). The limits and boundaries of Orthodoxy are also controversial. No encompassing definition has found acceptance. Moderately conservative subgroups hotly criticize more liberal groups for deviation, while strict hard-liners dismiss the latter as non-Orthodox. Contentious topics range from the abstract and theoretical, such as the attitude toward the study of scripture, to the mundane and pressing, such as modesty rules.

As in any other broad religious movement, an intrinsic tension connects the ideological and the sociological dimensions of Orthodox Judaism – while elites and intellectuals define adherence in theoretical terms, the masses use societal, familial, and institutional affiliation. The latter may be neither strictly observant nor fully accept the tenets of faith.

== Demographics ==

Professors Daniel Elazar and Rela Mintz Geffen, according to calculations in 1990, found there to be at least 2,000,000 observant Orthodox Jews worldwide in 2012, and at least 2,000,000 additional members and supporters who identified as such. This estimate held Orthodoxy to be the largest Jewish group.

In the State of Israel, where the total Jewish population is about 6.5 million, 22% of all Jewish respondents to a 2016 Pew survey declared themselves as observant Orthodox (9% &quot;Haredim&quot;, 13% &quot;Datiim&quot;, &quot;religious&quot;). 29% described themselves as &quot;traditional&quot;, a label implying less observance, but identification with Orthodoxy.

The Orthodox community of the United States is the second-largest in the world, concentrated in the Northeast and specifically in New York and New Jersey. A 2013 Pew survey found that 10% of respondents identified as Orthodox, among a total Jewish population of at least 5.5 million. 3% were Modern Orthodox, 6% were Haredi, and 1% were &quot;other&quot; (Sephardic, liberal Orthodox, etc.)

In the United Kingdom, of 79,597 households with at least one Jewish member that held synagogue membership in 2016, 66% affiliated with Orthodox synagogues: 53% in &quot;centrist Orthodox&quot;, and 13% in &quot;strictly Orthodox&quot; (further 3% were Sephardi, which technically eschews the title &quot;Orthodox&quot;).

The Orthodox have higher birth rates than others. Haredi communities have some of the world&#x27;s highest birth rates, averaging six children per household. A nearly non-existent rate of intermarriage with members of other faiths (Orthodox vehemently oppose the phenomenon) contributes to their growing share of the world&#x27;s Jewish population. Among American Jewish children, the Orthodox share is an estimated 61% in New York, including 49% Haredi. Similar patterns are observed in other countries. With present trends sustained, Orthodox Jews are projected to numerically dominate British Jewry by 2031, and American Jewry by 2058. However, large numbers of members leave their communities and observant lifestyle. Among the 2013 Pew respondents, 17% of those under 30 who were raised Orthodox disaffiliated (in earlier generations, this trend was far more prevalent, and 77% of those over 65 left).

== Groups ==

=== Haredim ===
The most recognizable sub-group is the &quot;Haredim&quot; (literally, &#x27;trembling&#x27; or &#x27;fervent&#x27;), also known as &quot;strictly Orthodox&quot;, and the like. They are the most traditional part of the Orthodox. &quot;Haredim&quot; have minimal engagement with/wholesale rejection of modern society, avow precedence to religious values, and accept a high degree of rabbinic involvement in daily life. &quot;Haredi&quot; rabbis and communities generally accept each other, and accord them legitimacy. They are organized in large political structures, mainly Agudath Israel of America and the Israeli United Torah Judaism party. Other organized groups include the Anti-Zionist Central Rabbinical Congress and the Edah HaChareidis. They are easily discerned by their mode of dress, often mostly black for men and very modest, by religious standards, for women (including hair covering, long skirts, etc.).

The &quot;Haredim&quot; may be roughly classified into three sub-groups:

==== Hasidic ====

Hasidic Jews originated in 18th-century Eastern Europe, where they formed as a revival movement that defied the rabbinical establishment. The threat of modernity turned the movement towards conservatism and reconciled it with traditionalist elements. Hasidism espouses a mystical interpretation of religion. Each Hasidic community aligned with a hereditary leader known as &quot;rebbe&quot; (who is almost always an ordained rabbi). While the spiritualist element of Hasidism declined through the centuries, the &quot;rebbe&quot;s&#x27; authority stems from the mystical belief that the holiness of their ancestors is inborn. They exercise tight control over their followers. Each of the hundreds of independent Hasidic groups/sects (also called &quot;courts&quot; or &quot;dynasties&quot;) has its own line of &quot;rebbes&quot;. Groups range in size from large ones with thousands of member households to very small. Courts often possess unique customs, religious emphases, philosophies, and styles of dress. Hasidic men, especially on the Sabbath, don long garments and fur hats, which were once a staple of Eastern European Jews, but are now associated almost exclusively with them. As of 2016, 130,000 Hasidic households were counted.

==== Litvaks ====
The second &quot;Haredi&quot; group are the Litvaks, or Yeshivish. They originated, loosely, with the Misnagdim, the opponents of Hasidism, who were mainly concentrated in old Lithuania. The confrontation with the Hasid bred distinct ideologies and institutions, especially great &quot;yeshivas&quot;, learning halls, where the study of Torah for its own sake and admiration for the scholars who headed these schools was enshrined. With the advent of secularization, the Misnagdim largely abandoned their hostility towards Hasidism. They became defined by affiliation with their &quot;yeshiva&quot;s, and their communities were sometimes composed of alumni. The prestige ascribed to them as centers of Torah study (after they were rebuilt in Israel and America, bearing the names of Eastern European &quot;yeshiva&quot;s destroyed in the Holocaust) persuaded many who were not Misnagdic, and the term &quot;Litvak&quot; lost its original ethnic connotation. It is granted to all non-Hasidic Haredim of Ashkenazi descent. The Litvak sector is led mainly by heads of &quot;yeshiva&quot;s.

==== Sephardic ====

The third &quot;Haredi&quot; movement consists of the Sephardic &quot;Haredim&quot;, who live mostly in Israel. There they are linked to the Shas party and the legacy of Rabbi Ovadia Yosef. Originating in the Mizrahi (Middle Eastern and North African Jews) immigrants to the country who arrived in the 1950s, most of the Sephardi Haredim were educated in Litvak yeshivas. They adopted their educators&#x27; mentality. Their identity developed in reaction to the racism they encountered. Shas arose in the 1980s, with the aim of reclaiming Sephardi religious legacy, in opposition to both secularism and the hegemony of European-descended &quot;Haredim&quot;. While living in strictly observant circles, they maintain a strong bond with non-Haredi masses of Israeli Mizrahi society.

=== Modern Orthodoxy ===
In the West, especially in the United States, Modern Orthodoxy, or &quot;Centrist Orthodoxy&quot;, is an umbrella term for communities that seek an observant lifestyle and traditional theology, while at the same time ascribing positive value to engagement (if not &quot;synthesis&quot;) with the modern world.

In the United States, the Modern Orthodox form a cohesive community, influenced by the legacy of leaders such as Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik, and concentrated around Yeshiva University and institutions such as the OU or National Council of Young Israel. They affirm strict obedience to Jewish Law, the centrality of Torah study, and the importance of positive engagement with modern culture.

=== Religious Zionism ===

In Israel, Religious Zionism represents the largest Orthodox public and are fervent Zionists. Religious Zionism supports Israel and ascribes an inherent religious value to it. The dominant ideological school, influenced by Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook&#x27;s thought, regards the state in messianic terms. Religious Zionism is not a uniform group, and the split between its conservative flank (often named &quot;Chardal&quot;, or &quot;National-&quot;Haredi&quot;&quot;) and more liberal elements has increased since the 1990s. The National Religious Party, once the single political platform, dissolved, and the common educational system became torn on issues such as gender separation in elementary school or secular studies.

=== European Centrist Orthodoxy ===
In Europe, &quot;Centrist Orthodoxy&quot; is represented by organizations such as the British United Synagogue and the Israelite Central Consistory of France, both the dominant official rabbinates in their respective countries. The laity is often non-observant, retaining formal affiliation due to familial piety or a sense of Jewish identity.

=== Israeli Masorti (traditional) ===

Another large demographic usually considered Orthodox are the Israeli &quot;Masortim&quot;, or &quot;traditionals&quot;. This moniker originated with Mizrahi immigrants who were secularized and reverent toward their communal heritage. However, Mizrahi intellectuals, in recent years, developed a more reflective, nuanced understanding of this term, eschewing its shallow image and not necessarily agreeing with the formal deference to Orthodox rabbis. Self-conscious &quot;Masorti&quot; identity is limited to small, elitist circles.

== See also ==

* Hashkafa
* List of Orthodox Jewish communities in the United States
* Open Orthodoxy
* Orthodoxy
== References ==
== External links ==

* The State of Orthodox Judaism Today
* Orthodox Jewish population growth and political changes
* Orthodox Retention and Kiruv: The Bad News and the Good News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="0" end="16" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="86" end="93" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="95" end="108" title="Theologically" label="Theologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="149" end="154" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="161" end="168" title="Torah" label="Written"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="173" end="177" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="192" end="200" title="revelation" label="revealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="204" end="207" title="God in Judaism" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q169924" start="211" end="222" title="Mount Sinai (Bible)" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="344" end="351" title="halakha" label="halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="374" end="400" title="Posek" label="interpreted and determined"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="710" end="717" title="Kosher" label="dietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q358404" start="719" end="725" title="Tumah and taharah" label="purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816453" start="891" end="915" title="39 Melakhot" label="numerous routine actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="923" end="930" title="Jewish sabbath" label="Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="966" end="972" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q215459" start="1041" end="1054" title="kippah" label="head covering"/>
<link wikidata="Q48300" start="1059" end="1066" title="Tzitzit" label="tassels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308383" start="1079" end="1094" title="Tzniut" label="modest clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="1174" end="1198" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156645" start="1268" end="1286" title="Election of Israel" label="Election of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915332" start="1310" end="1327" title="Mosaic covenant" label="covenant with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072928" start="1345" end="1358" title="Messianic Age" label="Messianic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="1379" end="1386" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1409" end="1432" title="Third Temple#Orthodox Judaism" label="the Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527373" start="1437" end="1462" title="Gathering of Israel" label="gather the people to Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="1684" end="1698" title="Haredi Judaism" label="Haredi Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771622" start="1766" end="1789" title="Modern Orthodox Judaism" label="Modern Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="2279" end="2293" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q821914" start="2846" end="2871" title="Berlinische Monatsschrift" label="Berlinische Monatsschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2954" end="2967" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="3160" end="3174" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="3570" end="3591" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q384859" start="3692" end="3711" title="Azriel Hildesheimer" label="Azriel Hildesheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q423604" start="3884" end="3916" title="Hildesheimer Rabbinical Seminary" label="Hildesheimer Rabbinical Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="5389" end="5404" title="Interwar period" label="Interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916490" start="5416" end="5440" title="History of the Jews under Muslim rule" label="Jews of the Muslim lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488015" start="6482" end="6490" title="parnasim" label="parnasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q831124" start="6521" end="6537" title="rabbinical court" label="rabbinical court"/>
<link wikidata="Q806853" start="6870" end="6885" title="Herem (censure)" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7428" end="7445" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="7700" end="7710" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="8050" end="8063" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q269348" start="8363" end="8373" title="Sabbateans" label="Sabbateans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491116" start="8377" end="8386" title="Frankists (Sabbateanism)" label="Frankists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404008" start="8751" end="8767" title="Elazar Fleckeles" label="Elazar Fleckeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="8785" end="8791" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="8992" end="8999" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293953" start="9007" end="9020" title="Raphael Cohen" label="Raphael Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14952" start="9225" end="9233" title="headgear" label="headgear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9293" end="9322" title="Kohen#Effects on marital status" label="members of the priestly caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q16341436" start="9381" end="9393" title="Invalidity of gentile courts" label="state courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896766" start="9414" end="9432" title="Bishul Yisrael" label="cooked by Gentiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="9811" end="9819" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q77000" start="9890" end="9905" title="Hartwig Wessely" label="Hartwig Wessely"/>
<link wikidata="Q76997" start="9907" end="9924" title="Moses Mendelssohn" label="Moses Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034468" start="9970" end="9996" title="Words of Peace and Truth" label="reform of Jewish education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185071" start="9998" end="10044" title="Jerusalem (Mendelssohn)" label="abolition of coercion in matters of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q743097" start="10529" end="10536" title="cheders" label="cheders"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="10548" end="10563" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="10582" end="10589" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q66435" start="10843" end="10858" title="Israel Jacobson" label="Israel Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="10905" end="10911" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q540934" start="10925" end="10931" title="Seesen" label="Seesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q321749" start="11042" end="11056" title="Hamburg Temple" label="Hamburg Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="11124" end="11133" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q370163" start="11373" end="11382" title="Obscurantism" label="obscurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="11753" end="11759" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411350" start="12085" end="12107" title="Hamburg Temple disputes" label="Hamburg Temple dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q707498" start="12379" end="12390" title="Moses Sofer" label="Moses Sofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="12394" end="12403" title="Pressburg" label="Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="12405" end="12412" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q706669" start="12424" end="12434" title="Jacob Katz" label="Jacob Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="12869" end="12878" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q998840" start="13998" end="14006" title="wordplay" label="wordplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777964" start="14057" end="14064" title="Chadash" label="Chadash"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="14588" end="14595" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="15087" end="15105" title="Hungarian nobility" label="Hungarian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="15706" end="15721" title="Ultra orthodox" label="ultra-Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q831124" start="16042" end="16047" title="Dayan (rabbinic judge)" label="Dayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q72133" start="16065" end="16078" title="Isaac Bernays" label="Isaac Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q324708" start="16663" end="16670" title="cassock" label="cassock"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="16813" end="16822" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825371" start="17157" end="17170" title="Torah im Derech Eretz" label="Neo-Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q88948" start="17231" end="17246" title="Jacob Ettlinger" label="Jacob Ettlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="17298" end="17306" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="17581" end="17602" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q384859" start="17607" end="17626" title="Azriel Hildesheimer" label="Azriel Hildesheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="19346" end="19384" title="Historical-critical method" label="historical-critical study of scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="19438" end="19442" title="Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="19447" end="19452" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q329170" start="19487" end="19505" title="Science of Judaism" label="Science of Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76998" start="19566" end="19578" title="Leopold Zunz" label="Leopold Zunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="19610" end="19628" title="Liberal Protestant" label="Liberal Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="19763" end="19768" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915314" start="19776" end="19781" title="Chazal" label="Sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q60844" start="19933" end="19947" title="Abraham Geiger" label="Abraham Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="19961" end="19975" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="20044" end="20056" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="20058" end="20067" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="20072" end="20079" title="Breslau" label="Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771636" start="20207" end="20220" title="Hirsch Lehren" label="Hirsch Lehren"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="20224" end="20233" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q88948" start="20244" end="20259" title="Jacob Ettlinger" label="Jacob Ettlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="20263" end="20269" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="20511" end="20525" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20534" end="20548" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="21028" end="21037" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="21068" end="21078" title="Nahmanides" label="Nahmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891013" start="21099" end="21120" title="Midrash halakha" label="the Talmudic exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="21150" end="21155" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910405" start="21181" end="21193" title="Talmudical hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599045" start="21213" end="21226" title="d&amp;#x27;Oraita" label="d&amp;#x27;Oraita"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="21356" end="21366" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391091" start="22042" end="22048" title="Malbim" label="Malbim"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="22257" end="22263" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q384859" start="22268" end="22280" title="Azriel Hildesheimer" label="Hildesheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q458733" start="22947" end="22965" title="David Zvi Hoffmann" label="David Zvi Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q459194" start="23017" end="23043" title="Graf-Wellhausen hypothesis" label="Graf-Wellhausen hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64883" start="23407" end="23424" title="Zecharias Frankel" label="Zecharias Frankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321692" start="23444" end="23482" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of Breslau" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="23866" end="23873" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659506" start="23927" end="23954" title="Law given to Moses at Sinai" label="Law given to Moses at Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q722525" start="23995" end="24011" title="Asher ben Jehiel" label="Asher ben Jehiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="24555" end="24575" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="25018" end="25023" title="Poznań" label="Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q707498" start="25047" end="25058" title="Moses Sofer" label="Moses Sofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q88948" start="25190" end="25205" title="Jacob Ettlinger" label="Jacob Ettlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808430" start="25582" end="25597" title="tinok shenishba" label="tinok shenishba"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="26591" end="26598" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="27085" end="27102" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q332473" start="27504" end="27511" title="Neolog Judaism" label="Neology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126321" start="27692" end="27702" title="Eisenstadt" label="Eisenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903959" start="27776" end="27788" title="Moshe Schick" label="Moshe Schick"/>
<link wikidata="Q791779" start="27839" end="27860" title="Samuel Benjamin Sofer" label="Samuel Benjamin Sofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="27953" end="27962" title="Pressburg" label="Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129200" start="28252" end="28283" title="Unterlander Jews" label="northeastern regions of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762980" start="28298" end="28317" title="Hillel Lichtenstein" label="Hillel Lichtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410434" start="28334" end="28357" title="Akiva Yosef Schlesinger" label="Akiva Yosef Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067830" start="28370" end="28381" title="Chaim Sofer" label="Chaim Sofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="28715" end="28722" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262061" start="29040" end="29056" title="Yetzer hara" label="Evil Inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q460925" start="29837" end="29847" title="Nagymihály" label="Nagymihály"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406966" start="30501" end="30556" title="Schism in Hungarian Jewry" label="Hungarian government convened a General Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q988524" start="30853" end="30871" title="Meir Eisenstaedter" label="Meir Eisenstaedter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679041" start="31285" end="31298" title="Adam Ferziger" label="Adam Ferziger"/>
<link wikidata="Q423604" start="31803" end="31828" title="Hildesheimer Rabbinical Seminary" label="established his seminary."/>
<link wikidata="Q96516" start="32333" end="32356" title="Seligman Baer Bamberger" label="Seligman Baer Bamberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127441" start="34138" end="34156" title="Central Consistory" label="French Consistoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470068" start="34233" end="34247" title="Salomon Ulmann" label="Salomon Ulmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558693" start="34260" end="34273" title="Solomon Klein" label="Solomon Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q130994" start="34277" end="34283" title="Colmar" label="Colmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="34299" end="34307" title="Alsace" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78287" start="34434" end="34453" title="Nathan Marcus Adler" label="Nathan Marcus Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893580" start="34461" end="34477" title="United Synagogue" label="United Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241289" start="34562" end="34583" title="David Woolf Marks" label="ideological reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812353" start="34623" end="34636" title="Todd Endelman" label="Todd Endelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="34958" end="34973" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q743097" start="35172" end="35177" title="heder" label="heder"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="35194" end="35201" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="35237" end="35243" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="35277" end="35284" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="35369" end="35376" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q742796" start="35391" end="35400" title="Misnagdic" label="Misnagdic"/>
<link wikidata="Q896086" start="35453" end="35457" title="Czar of Russia" label="Czar"/>
<link wikidata="Q75286" start="35529" end="35543" title="Max Lilienthal" label="Max Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203031" start="35632" end="35647" title="Crown rabbi (Russia)" label="official rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q569868" start="36025" end="36043" title="Pale of Settlement" label="Pale of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="36172" end="36180" title="Haskalah" label="Haskalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="36445" end="36452" title="Austrian Poland" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861531" start="36494" end="36500" title="Netziv" label="Netziv"/>
<link wikidata="Q941726" start="36655" end="36677" title="Yitzchak Yaacov Reines" label="Yitzchak Yaacov Reines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686101" start="36682" end="36702" title="Yechiel Michel Pines" label="Yechiel Michel Pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q742539" start="37142" end="37163" title="Moshe Leib Lilienblum" label="Moshe Leib Lilienblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="37294" end="37311" title="Religious Zionism" label="Religious Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="37374" end="37381" title="Haredim" label="Haredim"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="37470" end="37477" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="38213" end="38226" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q694415" start="38583" end="38605" title="World Zionist Congress" label="World Zionist Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q76985" start="39414" end="39435" title="Samson Raphael Hirsch" label="Samson Raphael Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q216566" start="39480" end="39492" title="Isaac Breuer" label="Isaac Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q106237" start="39497" end="39512" title="Jacob Rosenheim" label="Jacob Rosenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="39636" end="39644" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035344" start="39665" end="39679" title="World Agudath Israel" label="Agudath Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083556" start="39996" end="40018" title="Council of Torah Sages" label="Council of Torah Sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="40358" end="40373" title="Interwar period" label="Interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="40471" end="40489" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="40680" end="40698" title="Second Polish Republic" label="independent Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="40700" end="40709" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27162357" start="41416" end="41423" title="Hasidim" label="Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q742796" start="41428" end="41437" title="Misnagdim" label="Misnagdim"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="41619" end="41637" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Yisrael Meir Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="42129" end="42143" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="42320" end="42327" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673417" start="42357" end="42369" title="Isaac Leeser" label="Isaac Leeser"/>
<link wikidata="Q64883" start="42601" end="42618" title="Zecharias Frankel" label="Zecharias Frankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q781402" start="43213" end="43219" title="piyyut" label="piyyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915604" start="43323" end="43332" title="Mechitza" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898421" start="43372" end="43391" title="Pittsburgh Platform" label="Pittsburgh Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688743" start="43442" end="43480" title="Jewish Theological Seminary of America" label="Jewish Theological Seminary of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="43656" end="43676" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886675" start="43823" end="43847" title="Union of Orthodox Rabbis" label="Union of Orthodox Rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="44032" end="44039" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278540" start="44047" end="44088" title="Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary" label="Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569750" start="44336" end="44365" title="Rabbinical Council of America" label="Rabbinical Council of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q374965" start="44535" end="44557" title="Joseph B. Soloveitchik" label="Joseph B. Soloveitchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915604" start="44964" end="44981" title="Mechitza" label="gender partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="45561" end="45570" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920505" start="45738" end="45750" title="Aaron Kotler" label="Aaron Kotler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904179" start="45768" end="45784" title="Lakewood Yeshiva" label="Lakewood Yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q200937" start="45981" end="45987" title="Kletsk" label="Kletsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="45989" end="45995" title="Interwar Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278551" start="46381" end="46400" title="Rabbinical Assembly" label="Rabbinical Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917605" start="46627" end="46633" title="agunah" label="agunah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139456" start="47057" end="47062" title="credo" label="credo"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="47086" end="47091" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889997" start="47347" end="47355" title="Heresy in Judaism" label="heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="47520" end="47529" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="47607" end="47618" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q559622" start="47623" end="47634" title="Joseph Albo" label="Joseph Albo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152751" start="47672" end="47685" title="13 principles of faith" label="13 principles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47729" end="47753" title="Mishnah#Commentaries" label="Commentary on the Mishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="48061" end="48068" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="48590" end="48598" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q733140" start="49040" end="49058" title="Yisrael Meir Kagan" label="Yisrael Meir Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="49250" end="49260" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="49410" end="49424" title="God in Judaism" label="God in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207607" start="49721" end="49734" title="Shema Yisrael" label="Shema Yisrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932138" start="49855" end="49867" title="personal God" label="personal God"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524576" start="50284" end="50293" title="Shituf" label="associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="50374" end="50384" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989418" start="50415" end="50424" title="Idolatry in Judaism" label="idolaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q938946" start="50487" end="50509" title="Apophatic theology" label="utter imperceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403830" start="50641" end="50679" title="Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image" label="ancient ban on making any image of him"/>
<link wikidata="Q406365" start="51083" end="51093" title="Apatheia" label="equanimity"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="51188" end="51196" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="51356" end="51363" title="sefirot" label="sefirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="51770" end="51775" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="51821" end="51826" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="51877" end="51882" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="51891" end="51901" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915314" start="51927" end="51932" title="chazal" label="sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q740699" start="52075" end="52086" title="Pirkei Avot" label="Pirkei Avot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734" start="52136" end="52142" title="Joshua" label="Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797797" start="52148" end="52162" title="Moses Elects Seventy Elders" label="Seventy Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="52168" end="52176" title="Hebrew Prophet" label="Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q319219" start="52200" end="52216" title="Hillel the Elder" label="Hillel the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q467138" start="52221" end="52228" title="Shammai" label="Shammai"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="52634" end="52650" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="52744" end="52761" title="Babylonian Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q310821" start="52852" end="52863" title="Rabbi Akiva" label="Rabbi Akiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q484026" start="53253" end="53263" title="anagogical" label="anagogical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846257" start="53268" end="53280" title="tropological" label="tropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807148" start="53563" end="53569" title="legist" label="legist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="53605" end="53611" title="Mishna" label="Mishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="53616" end="53622" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q508091" start="54630" end="54655" title="higher Biblical criticism" label="higher Biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908887" start="55044" end="55074" title="Bat qol" label="God&amp;#x27;s later announcements"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="55076" end="55084" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="55541" end="55549" title="Posek" label="decisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731071" start="55746" end="55753" title="Magid (Jewish mysticism)" label="Magidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="56358" end="56382" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="56874" end="56883" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358436" start="57052" end="57060" title="Sanhedrin (tractate)" label="Sahedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211504" start="57242" end="57250" title="Berakhot (tractate)" label="Berakhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q31780" start="57393" end="57398" title="Sheol" label="Sheol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337316" start="57520" end="57525" title="Korah" label="Korah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="58225" end="58233" title="Gan Eden" label="Gan Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q558093" start="58266" end="58274" title="Gehinnom" label="Gehinnom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="59476" end="59482" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="59767" end="59779" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908887" start="59940" end="59959" title="Bath Kol" label="divine proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710285" start="59989" end="60004" title="House of Hillel" label="House of Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710285" start="60009" end="60025" title="House of Shammai" label="House of Shammai"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="60170" end="60178" title="Posek" label="decisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427762" start="60400" end="60419" title="History of responsa in Judaism" label="responsa literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="60578" end="60584" title="Mishna" label="Mishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="60593" end="60599" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="60619" end="60625" title="Geonim" label="Geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q523491" start="60727" end="60745" title="Isaac Alfasi" label="Rabbi Isaac Alfasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q523491" start="60759" end="60772" title="Hilchot HaRif" label="Hilchot HaRif"/>
<link wikidata="Q201029" start="60803" end="60816" title="Mishneh Torah" label="Mishneh Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q722525" start="60828" end="60850" title="Rabbi Asher ben Jehiel" label="Rabbi Asher ben Jehiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376849" start="60948" end="60969" title="Rabbi Jacob ben Asher" label="Rabbi Jacob ben Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533443" start="60983" end="61001" title="Arba&amp;#x27;ah Turim" label="Arba&amp;#x27;ah Turim"/>
<link wikidata="Q822206" start="61115" end="61129" title="Shulchan Aruch" label="Shulchan Aruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q467148" start="61166" end="61183" title="Rabbi Joseph Karo" label="Rabbi Joseph Karo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="61539" end="61544" title="gloss (annotation)" label="gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949189" start="61562" end="61576" title="Moses Isserles" label="Moses Isserles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703131" start="61817" end="61832" title="Mishnah Berurah" label="Mishnah Berurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599045" start="61969" end="61982" title="d&amp;#x27;Oraita" label="d&amp;#x27;Oraita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599045" start="62030" end="62056" title="De-&amp;#x27;oraita and de-rabbanan" label="&amp;quot;d&amp;#x27;Rabanan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="62480" end="62491" title="Nachmanides" label="Nachmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q130881" start="63158" end="63166" title="Hanukkah" label="Hanukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909577" start="63233" end="63240" title="Prozbul" label="Prozbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622615" start="63301" end="63326" title="Chief Rabbinate of Israel" label="Chief Rabbinate of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="63342" end="63350" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278853" start="63355" end="63372" title="Yibbum" label="levirate marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628649" start="63537" end="63543" title="Minhag" label="Minhag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509271" start="64128" end="64141" title="Jewish ethnic groups" label="Jewish ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="64282" end="64292" title="Ashkenazim" label="Ashkenazim"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="64294" end="64303" title="Sephardim" label="Sephardim"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="64305" end="64313" title="Teimanim" label="Teimanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469047" start="64340" end="64352" title="Nusach (Jewish custom)" label="prayer rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="64354" end="64360" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920150" start="64438" end="64451" title="Kitniyot" label="avoid legumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="64455" end="64463" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q496417" start="64504" end="64510" title="Sukkah" label="Sukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q932711" start="64514" end="64529" title="Shemini Atzeret" label="Shemini Atzeret"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="64636" end="64655" title="Shavuot" label="&amp;quot;Shavuos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="65009" end="65015" title="Geonim" label="Geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308372" start="65639" end="65667" title="Rosh yeshiva" label="chairs of Talmudic academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="65678" end="65686" title="posek" label="decisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="65700" end="65707" title="Hasidic" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="65732" end="65737" title="rebbe" label="rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083556" start="65916" end="65938" title="Council of Torah Sages" label="Council of Torah Sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822049" start="65940" end="65967" title="Moetzet Chachmei HaTorah" label="Council of Torah Luminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893253" start="65973" end="66000" title="Central Rabbinical Congress" label="Central Rabbinical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q779184" start="66010" end="66039" title="Orthodox Council of Jerusalem" label="Orthodox Council of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="66281" end="66288" title="kashrut" label="kashrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="66296" end="66303" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466089" start="66305" end="66318" title="family purity" label="family purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625118" start="66549" end="66555" title="tichel" label="tichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278045" start="66564" end="66582" title="Snood (headgear)" label="&amp;quot;snoods&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48300" start="66664" end="66671" title="Tzitzit" label="Tzitzit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908449" start="67082" end="67088" title="negiah" label="negiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q247034" start="67359" end="67366" title="mezuzah" label="mezuzah"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="67545" end="67557" title="Religious denomination" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q931732" start="67807" end="67815" title="Posek" label="decisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="67887" end="67893" title="Haredi" label="Haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217613" start="68844" end="68857" title="Daniel Elazar" label="Daniel Elazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="69146" end="69161" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="69259" end="69262" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="69322" end="69329" title="Haredim" label="Haredim"/>
<link wikidata="Q14396128" start="69419" end="69430" title="Masortim" label="traditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593124" start="69512" end="69551" title="List of Orthodox Jewish communities in the United States" label="Orthodox community of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="69608" end="69617" title="northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149600" start="69638" end="69646" title="Jews in New York" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822560" start="69651" end="69661" title="Jews in New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="69864" end="69873" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="70248" end="70258" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="71206" end="71213" title="Haredim" label="Haredim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694525" start="71735" end="71760" title="Agudath Israel of America" label="Agudath Israel of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466053" start="71777" end="71797" title="United Torah Judaism" label="United Torah Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893253" start="71853" end="71880" title="Central Rabbinical Congress" label="Central Rabbinical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q779184" start="71889" end="71905" title="Edah HaChareidis" label="Edah HaChareidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="72175" end="72187" title="Hasidic Jews" label="Hasidic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="72215" end="72229" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q742796" start="73536" end="73545" title="Misnagdim" label="Misnagdim"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="73606" end="73619" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="old Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="73720" end="73727" title="yeshiva" label="yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="74272" end="74281" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="74436" end="74445" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q904635" start="74684" end="74688" title="Shas" label="Shas"/>
<link wikidata="Q467172" start="74719" end="74731" title="Ovadia Yosef" label="Ovadia Yosef"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="74752" end="74759" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771622" start="75397" end="75413" title="Modern Orthodoxy" label="Modern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75418" end="75448" title="Torah Umadda#Centrist Orthodoxy" label="&amp;quot;Centrist Orthodoxy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75615" end="75636" title="Torah Umadda#Synthesis" label="&amp;quot;synthesis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="75647" end="75659" title="Modernity" label="modern world"/>
<link wikidata="Q374965" start="75781" end="75803" title="Joseph B. Soloveitchik" label="Joseph B. Soloveitchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278540" start="75829" end="75847" title="Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary" label="Yeshiva University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971951" start="75883" end="75915" title="National Council of Young Israel" label="National Council of Young Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="76094" end="76111" title="Religious Zionism" label="Religious Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="76167" end="76175" title="Zionists" label="Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q330110" start="76312" end="76330" title="Abraham Isaac Kook" label="Abraham Isaac Kook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335584" start="76491" end="76498" title="Chardal" label="Chardal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212912" start="76530" end="76536" title="Haredi" label="Haredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501088" start="76611" end="76635" title="National Religious Party" label="National Religious Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893580" start="76938" end="76954" title="United Synagogue" label="United Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127441" start="76963" end="77001" title="Israelite Central Consistory of France" label="Israelite Central Consistory of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q14396128" start="77304" end="77312" title="Masortim" label="Masortim"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="77378" end="77385" title="Mizrahim" label="Mizrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125475" start="77781" end="77789" title="Hashkafa" label="Hashkafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593124" start="77792" end="77848" title="List of Orthodox Jewish communities in the United States" label="List of Orthodox Jewish communities in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905591" start="77851" end="77865" title="Open Orthodoxy" label="Open Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="77868" end="77877" title="Orthodoxy" label="Orthodoxy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="22519" wikidata="Q105349" url="?curid=22519" title="Oscar Peterson">
<text>Oscar Emmanuel Peterson (August 15, 1925 – December 23, 2007) was a Canadian jazz pianist and composer. As a virtuoso who is considered to be one of the greatest jazz pianists of all time, Peterson released more than 200 recordings, won eight Grammy Awards, as well as a lifetime achievement award from the Recording Academy, and received numerous other awards and honours. He played thousands of concerts worldwide in a career lasting more than 60 years. He was called the &quot;Maharaja of the keyboard&quot; by Duke Ellington, simply &quot;O.P.&quot; by his friends, and informally in the jazz community, &quot;the King of inside swing&quot;.

Peterson worked in duos with Sam Jones, Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen, Joe Pass, Irving Ashby, Count Basie, and Herbie Hancock. He considered the trio with Ray Brown and Herb Ellis &quot;the most stimulating&quot; and productive setting for public performances and studio recordings. In the early 1950s, he began performing with Brown and drummer Charlie Smith as the Oscar Peterson Trio. Shortly afterward Smith was replaced by guitarist Irving Ashby, who had been a member of the Nat King Cole Trio. Ashby, who was a swing guitarist, was soon replaced by Barney Kessel. Their last recording, &quot;On the Town with the Oscar Peterson Trio&quot;, recorded live at the Town Tavern in Toronto, captured a remarkable degree of emotional as well as musical understanding among three players.

Peterson won eight Grammy Awards during his lifetime between 1975 and 1997. He is considered among the best jazz pianists and jazz improvisers of the twentieth century.

==Biography==
===Early years===
Peterson was born in Montreal, Quebec, to immigrants from the West Indies (Saint Kitts and Nevis and the British Virgin Islands): his mother, Kathleen, was a domestic worker; his father, Daniel, worked as a porter for Canadian Pacific Railway and was an amateur musician who taught himself to play the organ, trumpet and piano. Peterson grew up in the neighbourhood of Little Burgundy in Montreal. It was in this predominantly black neighbourhood that he encountered the jazz culture. At the age of five, Peterson began honing his skills on trumpet and piano, but a bout of tuberculosis when he was seven prevented him from playing the trumpet again, so he directed all his attention to the piano. His father was one of his first music teachers, and his sister Daisy taught him classical piano. Peterson was persistent at practicing scales and classical études.

As a child, Peterson studied with Hungarian-born pianist Paul de Marky, a student of István Thomán, who was himself a pupil of Franz Liszt, so his early training was predominantly based on classical piano. But he was captivated by traditional jazz and boogie-woogie and learned several ragtime pieces. He was called &quot;the Brown Bomber of the Boogie-Woogie&quot;.

At the age of nine, Peterson played piano with a degree of control that impressed professional musicians. For many years his piano studies included four to six hours of daily practice. Only in his later years did he decrease his practice to one or two hours daily. In 1940, at fourteen years of age, he won the national music competition organized by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. After that victory, he dropped out of the High School of Montreal, where he played in a band with Maynard Ferguson. He became a professional pianist, starring in a weekly radio show and playing at hotels and music halls. In his teens he was a member of the Johnny Holmes Orchestra. From 1945 to 1949 he worked in a trio and recorded for Victor Records. He gravitated toward boogie-woogie and swing with a particular fondness for Nat King Cole and Teddy Wilson. By the time he was in his 20s, he had developed a reputation as a technically brilliant and melodically inventive pianist.

===Duos, trios, and quartets===

According to an interview with Norman Granz, he heard a radio program broadcasting from a local club while taking a cab to the Montreal airport. He was so impressed that he told the driver to take him to the club so he could meet the pianist. Granz had seen Peterson before this but was underwhelmed. In 1949 he introduced Peterson in New York City at a Jazz at the Philharmonic concert at Carnegie Hall. He remained Peterson&#x27;s manager for most of his career. This was more than a managerial relationship; Peterson praised Granz for standing up for him and other black jazz musicians in the segregationist south US of the 1950s and 1960s. In the documentary video &quot;Music in the Key of Oscar&quot;, Peterson tells how Granz stood up to a gun-toting Southern policeman who wanted to stop the trio from using &quot;whites-only&quot; taxis.

In 1950, Peterson worked in a duo with double bassist Ray Brown. Two years later they added guitarist Barney Kessel. Then Herb Ellis stepped in after Kessel grew weary of touring. The trio remained together from 1953 to 1958, often touring with Jazz at the Philharmonic. By 1956, Peterson&#x27;s performances were also showcased on national radio networks by Ben Selvin within the RCA Thesaurus transcriptions library.

Peterson also worked in duos with Sam Jones, Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen, Joe Pass, Irving Ashby, Count Basie, and Herbie Hancock.

He considered the trio with Brown and Ellis &quot;the most stimulating&quot; and productive setting for public performances and studio recordings. In the early 1950s, he began performing with Brown and drummer Charlie Smith as the Oscar Peterson Trio. Shortly afterward Smith was replaced by guitarist Irving Ashby, who had been a member of the Nat King Cole Trio. Ashby, who was a swing guitarist, was soon replaced by Kessel. Their last recording, &quot;On the Town with the Oscar Peterson Trio&quot;, recorded live at the Town Tavern in Toronto, captured a remarkable degree of emotional as well as musical understanding among three players.

When Ellis departed in 1958, they hired drummer Ed Thigpen because they felt no guitarist could compare to Ellis. Brown and Thigpen worked with Peterson on his albums &quot;Night Train&quot; and &quot;Canadiana Suite&quot;. Both left in 1965 and were replaced by bassist Sam Jones and drummer Louis Hayes (and later, drummer Bobby Durham). The trio performed together until 1970. In 1969 Peterson recorded &quot;Motions and Emotions&quot; with orchestral arrangements of &quot;Yesterday&quot; and &quot;Eleanor Rigby&quot; by The Beatles. In the fall of 1970, Peterson&#x27;s trio released the album &quot;Tristeza on Piano&quot;. Jones and Durham left in 1970.

In the 1970s Peterson formed a trio with guitarist Joe Pass and bassist Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen. This trio emulated the success of the 1950s trio with Brown and Ellis and gave acclaimed performances at festivals. Their album &quot;The Trio&quot; won the 1974 Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance by a Group. On April 22, 1978, Peterson performed in the interval act for the Eurovision Song Contest 1978 that was broadcast live from the Palais des congrès de Paris. In 1974 he added British drummer Martin Drew. This quartet toured and recorded extensively worldwide. Pass said in a 1976 interview, &quot;The only guys I&#x27;ve heard who come close to total mastery of their instruments are Art Tatum and Peterson&quot;.

Peterson was open to experimental collaborations with jazz musicians such as saxophonist Ben Webster, trumpeter Clark Terry, and vibraphonist Milt Jackson. In 1961, the Peterson trio with Jackson recorded the album &quot;Very Tall&quot;. His solo recordings were rare until &quot;Exclusively for My Friends&quot; (MPS), a series of albums that were his response to pianists such as Bill Evans and McCoy Tyner. He recorded for Pablo, led by Norman Granz, after the label was founded in 1973, including the soundtrack for the 1978 thriller &quot;The Silent Partner&quot;. In the 1980s he played in a duo with pianist Herbie Hancock. In the late 1980s and 1990s, after a stroke, he made performances and recordings with his protégé Benny Green. In the 1990s and 2000s he recorded several albums accompanied by a combo for Telarc.

===Ill health and later years===

Peterson had arthritis from his youth, and in later years he had trouble buttoning his shirt. Never slender, his weight increased to , hindering his mobility. He had hip replacement surgery in the early 1990s. Although the surgery was successful, his mobility was still hampered. He then mentored the York University jazz program and was the Chancellor of the university for several years in the early 1990s. He published jazz piano etudes for practice.

In 1993, a stroke weakened his left side and removed him from work for two years. During the same year, incoming prime minister Jean Chrétien, his friend and fan, offered him the position of Lieutenant-Governor of Ontario. According to Chrétien, Peterson declined the job due to ill health related to the stroke.

Although he recovered some dexterity in his left hand, his piano playing was diminished, and his style relied principally on his right hand. In 1995 he returned to occasional public performances and recorded for Telarc. In 1997 he received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award and an International Jazz Hall of Fame Award. His friend, Canadian politician and amateur pianist Bob Rae, said, &quot;a one-handed Oscar was better than just about anyone with two hands.&quot;

In 2003, Peterson recorded the DVD &quot;A Night in Vienna&quot; for Verve with Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen, Ulf Wakenius, and Martin Drew. He continued to tour the U.S. and Europe, though at most one month a year, with rest between concerts. In 2007, his health declined. He canceled his plans to perform at the Toronto Jazz Festival and a Carnegie Hall all-star concert that was to be given in his honour. Peterson died on December 23, 2007, of kidney failure at his home in Mississauga, Ontario.

==Personal life, composer and teacher==
Peterson was married four times. He had seven children with three of his wives. He smoked cigarettes and a pipe and often tried to break the habit, but he gained weight every time he stopped. He loved to cook and remained overweight throughout his life.

Peterson taught piano and improvisation in Canada, mainly in Toronto. With associates, he started and headed the Advanced School of Contemporary Music in Toronto for five years during the 1960s, but it closed because touring called him and his associates away, and it did not have government funding.

==Musical style and influences==
Peterson was influenced by Teddy Wilson, Nat King Cole, James P. Johnson, and Art Tatum, to whom many compared Peterson in later years. After his father played a record of Tatum&#x27;s &quot;Tiger Rag&quot;, he was intimidated and disillusioned, quitting the piano for several weeks. &quot;Tatum scared me to death,&quot; said Peterson, adding that he was &quot;never cocky again&quot; about his ability at the piano. Tatum was a model for Peterson&#x27;s musicianship during the 1940s and 1950s. Tatum and Peterson became good friends, although Peterson was always shy about being compared to Tatum and rarely played the piano in Tatum&#x27;s presence.

Peterson also credited his sister—a piano teacher in Montreal who also taught several other Canadian jazz musicians—with being an important teacher and influence on his career. Under his sister&#x27;s tutelage, Peterson expanded into classical piano training and broadened his range while mastering the core classical pianism from scales to preludes and fugues by Johann Sebastian Bach. He asked his students to study the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, especially &quot;The Well-Tempered Clavier&quot;, the &quot;Goldberg Variations&quot;, and &quot;The Art of Fugue&quot;, considering these piano pieces essential for every serious pianist. Among his students were pianists Benny Green and Oliver Jones.

Building on Tatum&#x27;s pianism and aesthetics, Peterson also absorbed Tatum&#x27;s musical influences, notably from piano concertos by Sergei Rachmaninoff. Rachmaninoff&#x27;s harmonizations, as well as direct quotations from his 2nd Piano Concerto, are scattered throughout many recordings by Peterson, including his work with the most familiar formulation of the Oscar Peterson Trio, with bassist Ray Brown and guitarist Herb Ellis. During the 1960s and 1970s Peterson made numerous trio recordings highlighting his piano performances; they reveal more of his eclectic style, absorbing influences from various genres of jazz, popular, and classical music.

According to pianist and educator Mark Eisenman, some of Peterson&#x27;s best playing was as an understated accompanist to singer Ella Fitzgerald and trumpeter Roy Eldridge.

==Legacy==
Peterson is considered one of history&#x27;s great jazz pianists. He was called the &quot;Maharaja of the keyboard&quot; by Duke Ellington, simply &quot;O.P.&quot; by his friends, and informally in the jazz community as &quot;the King of inside swing&quot;.

Peterson was honoured on two postage stamps: one from Austrian Post in 2003, and another from Canada Post in 2005.

In 2021, Barry Avrich produced a documentary on Peterson&#x27;s life titled &quot;Oscar Peterson: Black + White&quot; that had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival.

Oscar Peterson was featured on a circulating commemorative one dollar coin (a &#x27;loonie&#x27;) from the Canadian mint in 2022.

==Awards and honours==
===Grammy Awards===
*1975 Best Jazz Performance by a Group &quot;The Trio&quot;
*1977 Best Jazz Performance by a Soloist &quot;The Giants&quot; 
*1978 Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Soloist &quot;Oscar Peterson Jam – Montreux &#x27;77&quot;
*1979 Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Soloist &quot;Oscar Peterson and The Trumpet Kings – Jousts&quot;
*1990 Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Group &quot;Live at the Blue Note&quot;
*1990 Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Soloist &quot;The Legendary Oscar Peterson Trio Live at the Blue Note&quot;
*1991 Best Jazz Instrumental Performance, Group &quot;Saturday Night at the Blue Note&quot;
*1997 Lifetime Achievement Award Instrumental Soloist Lifetime Achievement

===Other awards===
* Pianist of the year, &quot;DownBeat&quot; magazine, 1950, and won again for the next 12 years
* Order of Canada, Officer, 1972; Companion, 1984
* Canadian Version of the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal, 1977
* Canadian Music Hall of Fame, 1978
* Martin Luther King Jr. Achievement Award, Black Theatre Workshop, 1986
* Roy Thomson Award, 1987
* Toronto Arts Award for lifetime achievement, 1991
* Governor General&#x27;s Performing Arts Award, 1992
* Order of Ontario, member 1992
* 125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal, 1992
* Glenn Gould Prize, 1993
* International Society for Performing Artists award, 1995
* Loyola Medal of Concordia University, 1997
* Praemium Imperiale World Art Award, 1999
* Oscar Peterson Concert Hall named at Concordia University, 1999
* UNESCO Music Prize, 2000
* Toronto Musicians&#x27; Association Musician of the Year, 2001
* Canadian Version of the Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Medal, 2002
* SOCAN Special Achievement Award, 2008
* Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame, 2013
* Canadian Jazz and Blues Hall of Fame
* Juno Award Hall of Fame
* BBC Radio Lifetime Achievement Award
* National Order of Quebec, Chevalier 
* Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, France
* Civic Award of Merit, City of Mississauga, 2003
* Oscar Peterson Theatre, Canadian Embassy, Tokyo, Japan, 2007
* Oscar Peterson Hall, University of Toronto Mississauga, 2008
* Oscar Peterson Public School, Stouffville, 2009 
* Parc Oscar-Peterson, Little Burgundy, Montreal, renamed in Peterson&#x27;s honour 2009
* Statue of Oscar Peterson unveiled in Ottawa by Queen Elizabeth II, 2010
* &quot;Jazz Born Here&quot;, mural by Gene Pendon depicting Oscar Peterson, at Rue Saint-Jacques and Rue des Seigneurs in Montreal
* Historica Canada Heritage Minute, 2021
*Honorary degrees from Berklee College of Music, Carleton University, Queen&#x27;s University, Concordia University, Université Laval, McMaster University, Mount Allison University, Niagara University, Northwestern University, University of Toronto, University of the West Indies, University of Western Ontario, University of Victoria, and York University
* (Announced) Public square to be named in honour of Oscar Peterson, Montreal, 2021

== Instruments ==
*Bösendorfer pianos – 1980s and 2000s, some performances from the 70s onward.
*Yamaha – Acoustic and Disklavier; used from 1998 to 2006 in Canada (Touring and Recording)
*Steinway &amp; Sons Model A (which currently resides at Village Studios in Los Angeles) – most performances from the 1940s through the 1980s, some recordings.
*Baldwin pianos – some performances in the US, some recordings.
*C. Bechstein Pianofortefabrik pianos – some performances and recordings in Europe.
*Petrof pianos – some performances in Europe.
*Clavichord – on album &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot; with Joe Pass
*Fender Rhodes electric piano – several recordings.
*Synthesizer – several recordings.
*Hammond organ – some live performances and several recordings.
*Vocals – some live performances and several recordings.

==Discography==
==See also==
*Music of Canada
*List of jazz pianists

==References==
==Further reading==
* Oscar Peterson. &quot;A Jazz Odyssey: The Life of Oscar Peterson&quot;. (Autobiography of the pianist edited by Richard Palmer). Continuum Press. 2002. London and New York.

==External links==
* With Marian McPartland on &quot;Piano Jazz&quot; 
* Video interview in which his passion for photography is discussed
* At Jazz Police
* Entry at the Jazz Discography Project
* Oscar Peterson: A Jazz Sensation—A Virtual Exhibition
* Oscar Peterson postage stamp
* CBC Digital Archives: Oscar Peterson: A Jazz Giant
* Piano transcriptions

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105349" start="0" end="23" title="Oscar Peterson" label="Oscar Emmanuel Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="77" end="81" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="109" end="117" title="virtuoso" label="virtuoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403364" start="162" end="175" title="Jazz piano" label="jazz pianists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="243" end="256" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="307" end="324" title="The Recording Academy" label="Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="480" end="488" title="Maharaja" label="Maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="514" end="528" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q275250" start="676" end="685" title="Samuel Jones (musician)" label="Sam Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q520796" start="687" end="716" title="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen" label="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320883" start="718" end="726" title="Joe Pass" label="Joe Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577823" start="728" end="740" title="Irving Ashby" label="Irving Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="742" end="753" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="759" end="773" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="803" end="812" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q499662" start="817" end="827" title="Herb Ellis" label="Herb Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066996" start="994" end="1007" title="Charlie Smith (drummer)" label="Charlie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577823" start="1086" end="1098" title="Irving Ashby" label="Irving Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q498745" start="1204" end="1217" title="Barney Kessel" label="Barney Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091564" start="1247" end="1287" title="On the Town with the Oscar Peterson Trio" label="On the Town with the Oscar Peterson Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830016" start="1316" end="1327" title="Town Tavern" label="Town Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1331" end="1338" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1660" end="1668" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1670" end="1676" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="1701" end="1712" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="1714" end="1735" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305" start="1744" end="1766" title="British Virgin Islands" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231592" start="1846" end="1852" title="Railway porter" label="porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="1857" end="1881" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="1914" end="1928" title="Autodidacticism" label="taught himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="1941" end="1946" title="Organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="1948" end="1955" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1960" end="1965" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377317" start="2008" end="2023" title="Little Burgundy" label="Little Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q365539" start="2066" end="2071" title="Black Canadians" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2213" end="2225" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209771" start="2400" end="2405" title="Daisy Sweeney" label="Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="2472" end="2478" title="Scale (music)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q207841" start="2493" end="2498" title="étude" label="étude"/>
<link wikidata="Q375024" start="2587" end="2600" title="István Thomán" label="István Thomán"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="2629" end="2640" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="2754" end="2767" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q185652" start="2788" end="2795" title="ragtime" label="ragtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q273206" start="2828" end="2840" title="Joe Louis" label="Brown Bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="3225" end="3258" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528364" start="3302" end="3325" title="High School of Montreal" label="High School of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q353822" start="3358" end="3374" title="Maynard Ferguson" label="Maynard Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="3597" end="3611" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q14867674" start="3652" end="3657" title="Swing (jazz performance style)" label="swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="3689" end="3702" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q506052" start="3707" end="3719" title="Teddy Wilson" label="Teddy Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382555" start="3909" end="3921" title="Norman Granz" label="Norman Granz"/>
<link wikidata="Q736627" start="4005" end="4021" title="Montréal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport" label="Montreal airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q613153" start="4232" end="4256" title="Jazz at the Philharmonic" label="Jazz at the Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="4268" end="4281" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="4780" end="4789" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q498745" start="4828" end="4841" title="Barney Kessel" label="Barney Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q499662" start="4848" end="4858" title="Herb Ellis" label="Herb Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q304517" start="5085" end="5095" title="Ben Selvin" label="Ben Selvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276062" start="5107" end="5120" title="RCA Thesaurus" label="RCA Thesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q275250" start="5180" end="5189" title="Samuel Jones (musician)" label="Sam Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q520796" start="5191" end="5220" title="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen" label="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320883" start="5222" end="5230" title="Joe Pass" label="Joe Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577823" start="5232" end="5244" title="Irving Ashby" label="Irving Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="5246" end="5257" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="5263" end="5277" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066996" start="5490" end="5503" title="Charlie Smith (drummer)" label="Charlie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577823" start="5582" end="5594" title="Irving Ashby" label="Irving Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091564" start="5736" end="5776" title="On the Town with the Oscar Peterson Trio" label="On the Town with the Oscar Peterson Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830016" start="5805" end="5816" title="Town Tavern" label="Town Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q521528" start="5974" end="5984" title="Ed Thigpen" label="Ed Thigpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983679" start="6099" end="6110" title="Night Train (Oscar Peterson album)" label="Night Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030911" start="6127" end="6142" title="Canadiana Suite" label="Canadiana Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q330240" start="6219" end="6230" title="Louis Hayes" label="Louis Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725133" start="6251" end="6263" title="Bobby Durham (jazz musician)" label="Bobby Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917822" start="6338" end="6358" title="Motions and Emotions" label="Motions and Emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q202698" start="6403" end="6412" title="Yesterday (Beatles song)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q200799" start="6429" end="6442" title="Eleanor Rigby" label="Eleanor Rigby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="6452" end="6463" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844181" start="6532" end="6549" title="Tristeza on Piano" label="Tristeza on Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q520796" start="6661" end="6690" title="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen" label="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770237" start="6820" end="6840" title="The Trio (1973 album)" label="&amp;quot;The Trio&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q211754" start="6971" end="6999" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1978" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781591" start="7033" end="7060" title="Palais des congrès de Paris" label="Palais des congrès de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903655" start="7095" end="7106" title="Martin Drew" label="Martin Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q438460" start="7408" end="7419" title="Ben Webster" label="Ben Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q432924" start="7431" end="7442" title="Clark Terry" label="Clark Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q435665" start="7461" end="7473" title="Milt Jackson" label="Milt Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923086" start="7540" end="7549" title="Very Tall" label="Very Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419703" start="7599" end="7625" title="Exclusively for My Friends" label="Exclusively for My Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q319256" start="7633" end="7636" title="MPS Records" label="MPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q208205" start="7701" end="7711" title="Bill Evans" label="Bill Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q318619" start="7716" end="7727" title="McCoy Tyner" label="McCoy Tyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809823" start="7745" end="7750" title="Pablo Records" label="Pablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764228" start="7824" end="7834" title="The Silent Partner (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750419" start="7863" end="7881" title="The Silent Partner (1978 film)" label="The Silent Partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q818057" start="8048" end="8059" title="Benny Green (pianist)" label="Benny Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142419" start="8138" end="8144" title="Telarc International Corporation" label="Telarc"/>
<link wikidata="Q849751" start="8482" end="8497" title="York University" label="York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="8647" end="8653" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="8764" end="8777" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544432" start="8827" end="8857" title="Lieutenant-Governor of Ontario" label="Lieutenant-Governor of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="9194" end="9227" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q888208" start="9326" end="9333" title="Bob Rae" label="Bob Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="9492" end="9497" title="Verve Records" label="Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q353092" start="9534" end="9546" title="Ulf Wakenius" label="Ulf Wakenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826429" start="9738" end="9759" title="Toronto Jazz Festival" label="Toronto Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="9872" end="9886" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="9902" end="9913" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q506052" start="10582" end="10594" title="Teddy Wilson" label="Teddy Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="10596" end="10609" title="Nat King Cole" label="Nat King Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q550541" start="10611" end="10627" title="James P. Johnson" label="James P. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109053" start="10633" end="10642" title="Art Tatum" label="Art Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361342" start="10746" end="10755" title="Tiger Rag" label="Tiger Rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="11574" end="11595" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="11641" end="11662" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q211971" start="11681" end="11706" title="The Well-Tempered Clavier" label="The Well-Tempered Clavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q213728" start="11724" end="11743" title="Goldberg Variations" label="Goldberg Variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q465878" start="11761" end="11777" title="The Art of Fugue" label="The Art of Fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q818057" start="11886" end="11897" title="Benny Green (pianist)" label="Benny Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116211" start="11902" end="11914" title="Oliver Jones (pianist)" label="Oliver Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861" start="12054" end="12073" title="Sergei Rachmaninoff" label="Sergei Rachmaninoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955297" start="12129" end="12139" title="Musical quotation" label="quotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q210224" start="12149" end="12167" title="Piano Concerto No. 2 (Rachmaninoff)" label="2nd Piano Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q354542" start="12318" end="12327" title="Ray Brown (musician)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q499662" start="12342" end="12352" title="Herb Ellis" label="Herb Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="12708" end="12723" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q376146" start="12738" end="12750" title="Roy Eldridge" label="Roy Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163330" start="12854" end="12862" title="Maharaja" label="Maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="12888" end="12902" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763505" start="13077" end="13090" title="Austrian Post" label="Austrian Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="13117" end="13128" title="Canada Post" label="Canada Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863981" start="13148" end="13160" title="Barry Avrich" label="Barry Avrich"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13221" end="13250" title="Oscar Peterson: Black + White" label="Oscar Peterson: Black + White"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="13292" end="13327" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345019" start="13389" end="13399" title="Loonie" label="one dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770237" start="13549" end="13557" title="The Trio (1973 album)" label="The Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736378" start="13611" end="13621" title="The Giants (album)" label="The Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357025" start="13685" end="13723" title="Oscar Peterson Jam – Montreux &amp;#x27;77" label="Oscar Peterson Jam – Montreux &amp;#x27;77"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106201" start="13786" end="13831" title="Oscar Peterson and The Trumpet Kings – Jousts" label="Oscar Peterson and The Trumpet Kings – Jousts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6656620" start="13892" end="13913" title="Live at the Blue Note (Oscar Peterson album)" label="Live at the Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426729" start="14092" end="14123" title="Saturday Night at the Blue Note" label="Saturday Night at the Blue Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253128" start="14248" end="14277" title="DownBeat" label="&amp;quot;DownBeat&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="14323" end="14338" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059227" start="14397" end="14436" title="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362499" start="14445" end="14472" title="Canadian Music Hall of Fame" label="Canadian Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922009" start="14523" end="14545" title="Black Theatre Workshop" label="Black Theatre Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474750" start="14554" end="14571" title="Roy Thomson, 1st Baron Thomson of Fleet" label="Roy Thomson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405815" start="14632" end="14677" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Performing Arts Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Performing Arts Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q742162" start="14686" end="14702" title="Order of Ontario" label="Order of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548436" start="14718" end="14772" title="125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal" label="125th Anniversary of the Confederation of Canada Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531033" start="14781" end="14798" title="Glenn Gould Prize" label="Glenn Gould Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q326342" start="14866" end="14878" title="Loyola Medal" label="Loyola Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q268670" start="14911" end="14929" title="Praemium Imperiale" label="Praemium Imperiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="15020" end="15026" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581457" start="15136" end="15175" title="Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Golden Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207432" start="15184" end="15189" title="SOCAN" label="SOCAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="15224" end="15250" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="15298" end="15308" title="Juno Award" label="Juno Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q795541" start="15324" end="15360" title="BBC Jazz Awards" label="BBC Radio Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q391911" start="15363" end="15387" title="National Order of Quebec" label="National Order of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="15402" end="15431" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120110" start="15576" end="15609" title="University of Toronto Mississauga" label="University of Toronto Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q483334" start="15648" end="15659" title="Whitchurch-Stouffville" label="Stouffville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377317" start="15690" end="15705" title="Little Burgundy" label="Little Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161143" start="15758" end="15782" title="Statue of Oscar Peterson" label="Statue of Oscar Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984253" start="15964" end="15980" title="Historica Canada" label="Historica Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q785796" start="15981" end="15996" title="Heritage Minutes" label="Heritage Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q248970" start="16026" end="16050" title="Berklee College of Music" label="Berklee College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="16052" end="16071" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="16073" end="16096" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University at Kingston" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q326342" start="16098" end="16118" title="Concordia University (Montreal)" label="Concordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067935" start="16120" end="16136" title="Université Laval" label="Université Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="16138" end="16157" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q742150" start="16159" end="16183" title="Mount Allison University" label="Mount Allison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551657" start="16185" end="16203" title="Niagara University" label="Niagara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="16205" end="16228" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="16230" end="16251" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q746153" start="16253" end="16282" title="University of the West Indies" label="University of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="16284" end="16313" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458113" start="16315" end="16337" title="University of Victoria" label="University of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q849751" start="16343" end="16358" title="York University" label="York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="16428" end="16436" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q664799" start="16463" end="16474" title="Bösendorfer" label="Bösendorfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="16541" end="16547" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228789" start="16563" end="16573" title="Disklavier" label="Disklavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q156391" start="16633" end="16652" title="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons" label="Steinway &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647991" start="16689" end="16704" title="The Village (studio)" label="Village Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q118663" start="16793" end="16800" title="Baldwin Piano Company" label="Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q697519" start="16857" end="16886" title="C. Bechstein Pianofortefabrik" label="C. Bechstein Pianofortefabrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q701235" start="16941" end="16947" title="Petrof" label="Petrof"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="16987" end="16997" title="Clavichord" label="Clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q320883" start="17041" end="17049" title="Joe Pass" label="Joe Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q743659" start="17051" end="17064" title="Fender Rhodes" label="Fender Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="17138" end="17151" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942037" start="17289" end="17304" title="Music of Canada" label="Music of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365154" start="17306" end="17327" title="List of jazz pianists" label="List of jazz pianists"/>
</links>
</doc>
