<doc id="19591" wikidata="Q5419" url="?curid=19591" title="Missouri River">
<text>The Missouri River is a river in the Central and Mountain West regions of the United States. The nation&#x27;s longest, it rises in the eastern Centennial Mountains of the Bitterroot Range of the Rocky Mountains of southwestern Montana, then flows east and south for before entering the Mississippi River north of St. Louis, Missouri. The river drains semi-arid watershed of more than 500,000 square miles (1,300,000 km2), which includes parts of ten U.S. states and two Canadian provinces. Although a tributary of the Mississippi, the Missouri River is slightly longer and carries a comparable volume of water. When combined with the lower Mississippi River, it forms the world&#x27;s fourth-longest river system.

For over 12,000 years, people have depended on the Missouri River and its tributaries as a source of sustenance and transportation. More than ten major groups of Native Americans populated the watershed, with most leading a nomadic lifestyle and dependent on enormous bison herds that roamed through the Great Plains. The first Europeans encountered the river in the late seventeenth century, and the region passed through Spanish and French hands before becoming part of the United States through the Louisiana Purchase.

The Missouri River was one of the main routes for the westward expansion of the United States during the 19th century. The growth of the fur trade in the early 19th century laid much of the groundwork as trappers explored the region and blazed trails. Pioneers headed west &quot;en masse&quot; beginning in the 1830s, first by covered wagon, then by the growing numbers of steamboats that entered service on the river. Conflict between settlers and Native Americans in the watershed led to some of the most longstanding and violent of the American Indian Wars.

During the 20th century, the Missouri River basin was extensively developed for irrigation, flood control, and the generation of hydroelectric power. Fifteen dams impound the main stem of the river, with hundreds more on tributaries. Meanders have been cut off and the river channelized to improve navigation, reducing its length by almost from pre-development times. Although the lower Missouri valley is now a populous and highly productive agricultural and industrial region, heavy development has taken its toll on wildlife and fish populations as well as water quality.

==Course==
From the Rocky Mountains, three streams rise to form the headwaters of the Missouri River:

*The longest source stream begins near Brower&#x27;s Spring in southwest Montana, above sea level on the southeastern slopes of Mount Jefferson in the Centennial Mountains. From there it flows west then north; runs first in Hell Roaring Creek then west into the Red Rock; swings northeast to become the Beaverhead River; and finally joins with the Big Hole to form the Jefferson River.
*The Firehole River, which originates in northwest Wyoming at Yellowstone National Park&#x27;s Madison Lake, joins with the Gibbon River to form the Madison River.
*The Gallatin River flows out of Gallatin Lake which is also in Yellowstone National Park.
The Missouri River officially starts at the confluence of the Jefferson and Madison in Missouri Headwaters State Park near Three Forks, Montana, and is joined by the Gallatin a mile (1.6 km) downstream. It then passes through Canyon Ferry Lake, a reservoir west of the Big Belt Mountains. Issuing from the mountains near Cascade, the river flows northeast to the city of Great Falls, where it drops over the Great Falls of the Missouri, a series of five substantial waterfalls. It then winds east through a scenic region of canyons and badlands known as the Missouri Breaks, receiving the Marias River from the west then widening into the Fort Peck Lake reservoir a few miles above the confluence with the Musselshell River. Farther on, the river passes through the Fort Peck Dam, and immediately downstream, the Milk River joins from the north.

Flowing eastward through the plains of eastern Montana, the Missouri receives the Poplar River from the north before crossing into North Dakota where the Yellowstone River, its greatest tributary by volume, joins from the southwest. At the confluence, the Yellowstone is actually the larger river.
The Missouri then meanders east past Williston and into Lake Sakakawea, the reservoir formed by Garrison Dam. Below the dam the Missouri receives the Knife River from the west and flows south to Bismarck, the capital of North Dakota, where the Heart River joins from the west. It slows into the Lake Oahe reservoir just before the Cannonball River confluence. While it continues south, eventually reaching Oahe Dam in South Dakota, the Grand, Moreau and Cheyenne Rivers all join the Missouri from the west.

The Missouri makes a bend to the southeast as it winds through the Great Plains, receiving the Niobrara River and many smaller tributaries from the southwest. It then proceeds to form the boundary of South Dakota and Nebraska and is joined by the James River from the north. At Sioux City the Big Sioux River comes in from the north, after which the Missouri forms the Iowa–Nebraska boundary. It flows south to the city of Omaha where it receives its longest tributary, the Platte River, from the west. Downstream, it begins to define the border between the states of Nebraska and Missouri, then flows between the states of Missouri and Kansas. The Missouri swings east at Kansas City, where the Kansas River enters from the west, and so on into north-central Missouri. To the east of Kansas City, the Missouri receives, on the left side, the Grand River. It passes south of Columbia and receives the Osage and Gasconade Rivers from the south downstream of Jefferson City. The river then rounds the northern side of St. Louis to join the Mississippi River on the border between Missouri and Illinois.

==Watershed==
With a drainage basin spanning ,
the Missouri River&#x27;s catchment encompasses nearly one-sixth of the area of the United States or just over five percent of the continent of North America. Comparable to the size of the Canadian province of Quebec, the watershed encompasses most of the central Great Plains, stretching from the Rocky Mountains in the west to the Mississippi River Valley in the east and from the southern extreme of western Canada to the border of the Arkansas River watershed. Compared with the Mississippi River above their confluence, the Missouri is twice as long
and drains an area three times as large.
The Missouri accounts for 45 percent of the annual flow of the Mississippi past St. Louis, and as much as 70 percent in certain droughts.

In 1990, the Missouri River watershed was home to about 12 million people. This included the entire population of the U.S. state of Nebraska, parts of the U.S. states of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wyoming, and small southern portions of the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. The watershed&#x27;s largest city is Denver, Colorado, with a population of more than six hundred thousand. Denver is the main city of the Front Range Urban Corridor whose cities had a combined population of over four million in 2005, making it the largest metropolitan area in the Missouri River basin. Other major population centers – mostly in the watershed&#x27;s southeastern portion – include Omaha, Nebraska, north of the confluence of the Missouri and Platte Rivers; Kansas City, Missouri – Kansas City, Kansas, at the confluence of the Missouri with the Kansas River; and the St. Louis metropolitan area, south of the Missouri River just below the latter&#x27;s mouth, on the Mississippi. In contrast, the northwestern part of the watershed is sparsely populated. However, many northwestern cities, such as Billings, Montana, are among the fastest growing in the Missouri basin.

With more than under the plow, the Missouri River watershed includes roughly one-fourth of all the agricultural land in the United States, providing more than a third of the country&#x27;s wheat, flax, barley, and oats. However, only of farmland in the basin is irrigated. A further of the basin is devoted to the raising of livestock, mainly cattle. Forested areas of the watershed, mostly second-growth, total about . Urban areas, on the other hand, comprise less than of land. Most built-up areas are along the main stem and a few major tributaries, including the Platte and Yellowstone Rivers.
Elevations in the watershed vary widely, ranging from just over at the Missouri&#x27;s mouth to the summit of Mount Lincoln in central Colorado. The river drops from Brower&#x27;s Spring, the farthest source. Although the plains of the watershed have extremely little local vertical relief, the land rises about 10 feet per mile (1.9 m/km) from east to west. The elevation is less than at the eastern border of the watershed, but is over above sea level in many places at the base of the Rockies.

The Missouri&#x27;s drainage basin has highly variable weather and rainfall patterns, Overall, the watershed is defined by a continental climate with warm, wet summers and harsh, cold winters. Most of the watershed receives an average of of precipitation each year. However, the westernmost portions of the basin in the Rockies as well as southeastern regions in Missouri may receive as much as . The vast majority of precipitation occurs in summer in most of the lower and middle basin, although the upper basin is known for short-lived but intense summer thunderstorms such as the one which produced the 1972 Black Hills flood through Rapid City, South Dakota. Winter temperatures in the northern and western portions of the basin typically drop to or lower every winter with extremes as low as , while summer highs occasionally exceed in all areas except the higher elevations of Montana, Wyoming and Colorado. Extreme maxima — almost all prior to 1960 — have exceeded in all US states in the basin.

As one of the continent&#x27;s most significant river systems, the Missouri&#x27;s drainage basin borders on many other major watersheds of the United States and Canada. The Continental Divide, running along the spine of the Rocky Mountains, forms most of the western border of the Missouri watershed. The Clark Fork and Snake River, both part of the Columbia River basin, drain the area west of the Rockies in Montana, Idaho and western Wyoming. The Columbia, Missouri and Colorado River watersheds meet at Three Waters Mountain in Wyoming&#x27;s Wind River Range. South of there, the Missouri basin is bordered on the west by the drainage of the Green River, a tributary of the Colorado, then on the south by the mainstem of the Colorado. Both the Colorado and Columbia Rivers flow to the Pacific Ocean. However, a large endorheic drainage called the Great Divide Basin exists between the Missouri and Green watersheds in western Wyoming. This area is sometimes counted as part of the Missouri River watershed, even though its waters do not flow to either side of the Continental Divide.

To the north, the much lower Laurentian Divide separates the Missouri River watershed from those of the Oldman River, a tributary of the South Saskatchewan River, as well as the Souris, Sheyenne, and smaller tributaries of the Red River of the North. All of these streams are part of Canada&#x27;s Nelson River drainage basin, which empties into Hudson Bay. There are also several large endorheic basins between the Missouri and Nelson watersheds in southern Alberta and Saskatchewan. The Minnesota and Des Moines Rivers, tributaries of the upper Mississippi, drain most of the area bordering the eastern side of the Missouri River basin. Finally, on the south, the Ozark Mountains and other low divides through central Missouri, Kansas and Colorado separate the Missouri watershed from those of the White River and Arkansas River, also tributaries of the Mississippi River.

===Major tributaries===
Over 95 significant tributaries and hundreds of smaller ones feed the Missouri River, with most of the larger ones coming in as the river draws close to the mouth. Most rivers and streams in the Missouri River basin flow from west to east, following the incline of the Great Plains; however, some eastern tributaries such as the James, Big Sioux and Grand River systems flow from north to south.

The Missouri&#x27;s largest tributaries by runoff are the Yellowstone in Montana and Wyoming, the Platte in Wyoming, Colorado, and Nebraska, and the Kansas–Republican/Smoky Hill and Osage in Kansas and Missouri. Each of these tributaries drains an area greater than or has an average discharge greater than . The Yellowstone River has the highest discharge, even though the Platte is longer and drains a larger area. In fact, the Yellowstone&#x27;s flow is about – accounting for sixteen percent of total runoff in the Missouri basin and nearly double that of the Platte. On the other end of the scale is the tiny Roe River in Montana, which at long is one of the world&#x27;s shortest rivers.

The table on the right lists the ten longest tributaries of the Missouri, along with their respective catchment areas and flows. Length is measured to the hydrologic source, regardless of naming convention. The main stem of the Kansas River, for example, is long. However, including the longest headwaters tributaries, the Republican River and the Arikaree River, brings the total length to . Similar naming issues are encountered with the Platte River, whose longest tributary, the North Platte River, is more than twice as long as its mainstream.

The Missouri&#x27;s headwaters above Three Forks extend much farther upstream than the main stem. Measured to the farthest source at Brower&#x27;s Spring, the Jefferson River is long. Thus measured to its highest headwaters, the Missouri River stretches for . When combined with the lower Mississippi, the Missouri and its headwaters form part of the fourth-longest river system in the world, at .

===Discharge===

By discharge, the Missouri is the ninth largest river of the United States, after the Mississippi, St. Lawrence, Ohio, Columbia, Niagara, Yukon, Detroit, and St. Clair. The latter two, however, are sometimes considered part of a strait between Lake Huron and Lake Erie. Among rivers of North America as a whole, the Missouri is thirteenth largest, after the Mississippi, Mackenzie, St. Lawrence, Ohio, Columbia, Niagara, Yukon, Detroit, St. Clair, Fraser, Slave, and Koksoak.

As the Missouri drains a predominantly semi-arid region, its discharge is much lower and more variable than other North American rivers of comparable length. Before the construction of dams, the river flooded twice each year – once in the &quot;April Rise&quot; or &quot;Spring Fresh&quot;, with the melting of snow on the plains of the watershed, and in the &quot;June Rise&quot;, caused by snowmelt and summer rainstorms in the Rocky Mountains. The latter was far more destructive, with the river increasing to over ten times its normal discharge in some years. The Missouri&#x27;s discharge is affected by over 17,000 reservoirs with an aggregate capacity of some . By providing flood control, the reservoirs dramatically reduce peak flows and increase low flows. Evaporation from reservoirs significantly reduces the river&#x27;s runoff, causing an annual loss of over from mainstem reservoirs alone.

The United States Geological Survey operates fifty-one stream gauges along the Missouri River. The river&#x27;s average discharge at Bismarck, from the mouth, is . This is from a drainage area of , or 35% of the total river basin. At Kansas City, from the mouth, the river&#x27;s average flow is . The river here drains about , representing about 91% of the entire basin.

The lowermost gage with a period of record greater than fifty years is at Hermann, Missouri – upstream of the mouth of the Missouri – where the average annual flow was from 1897 to 2010. About , or 98.7% of the watershed, lies above Hermann. The highest annual mean was in 1993, and the lowest was in 2006. Extremes of the flow vary even further. The largest discharge ever recorded was over on July 31, 1993, during a historic flood. The lowest, a mere – caused by the formation of an ice dam – was measured on December 23, 1963.

==Geology==
The Rocky Mountains of southwestern Montana at the headwaters of the Missouri River first rose in the Laramide Orogeny, a mountain-building episode that occurred from around 70 to 45 million years ago (the end of the Mesozoic through the early Cenozoic). This orogeny uplifted Cretaceous rocks along the western side of the Western Interior Seaway, a vast shallow sea that stretched from the Arctic Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico, and deposited the sediments that now underlie much of the drainage basin of the Missouri River.
This Laramide uplift caused the sea to retreat and laid the framework for a vast drainage system of rivers flowing from the Rocky and Appalachian Mountains, the predecessor of the modern-day Mississippi watershed. The Laramide Orogeny is essential to modern Missouri River hydrology, as snow and ice melt from the Rockies provide the majority of the flow in the Missouri and its tributaries.

The Missouri and many of its tributaries cross the Great Plains, flowing over or cutting into the Ogallala Group and older mid-Cenozoic sedimentary rocks. The lowest major Cenozoic unit, the White River Formation, was deposited between roughly 35 and 29 million years ago and consists of claystone, sandstone, limestone, and conglomerate. Channel sandstones and finer-grained overbank deposits of the fluvial Arikaree Group were deposited between 29 and 19 million years ago. The Miocene-age Ogallala and the slightly younger Pliocene-age Broadwater Formation deposited atop the Arikaree Group, and are formed from material eroded off of the Rocky Mountains during a time of increased generation of topographic relief; these formations stretch from the Rocky Mountains nearly to the Iowa border and give the Great Plains much of their gentle but persistent eastward tilt, and also constitute a major aquifer.

Immediately before the Quaternary Ice Age, the Missouri River was likely split into three segments: an upper portion that drained northwards into Hudson Bay,
and middle and lower sections that flowed eastward down the regional slope.
As the Earth plunged into the Ice Age, a pre-Illinoian (or possibly the Illinoian) glaciation diverted the Missouri River southeastward toward its present confluence with the Mississippi and caused it to integrate into a single river system that cuts across the regional slope. In western Montana, the Missouri River is thought to have once flowed north then east around the Bear Paw Mountains. Sapphires are found in some spots along the river in western Montana. Advances of the continental ice sheets diverted the river and its tributaries, causing them to pool up into large temporary lakes such as Glacial Lakes Great Falls, Musselshell and others. As the lakes rose, the water in them often spilled across adjacent local drainage divides, creating now-abandoned channels and coulees including the Shonkin Sag, long. When the glaciers retreated, the Missouri flowed in a new course along the south side of the Bearpaws, and the lower part of the Milk River tributary took over the original main channel.

The Missouri&#x27;s nickname, the &quot;Big Muddy&quot;, was inspired by its enormous loads of sediment or silt – some of the largest of any North American river. In its pre-development state, the river transported some per year. The construction of dams and levees has drastically reduced this to in the present day. Much of this sediment is derived from the river&#x27;s floodplain, also called the meander belt; every time the river changed course, it would erode tons of soil and rocks from its banks. However, damming and channeling the river has kept it from reaching its natural sediment sources along most of its course. Reservoirs along the Missouri trap roughly of sediment each year. Despite this, the river still transports more than half the total silt that empties into the Gulf of Mexico; the Mississippi River Delta, formed by sediment deposits at the mouth of the Mississippi, constitutes a majority of sediments carried by the Missouri.

==First people==

Archaeological evidence, especially in Missouri, suggests that human beings first inhabited the watershed of the Missouri River between 10,000 and 12,000 years ago at the end of the Pleistocene. During the end of the last glacial period, large migration of humans were taking place, such as those via the Bering land bridge between the Americas and Eurasia. Over centuries, the Missouri River formed one of these main migration paths. Most migratory groups that passed through the area eventually settled in the Ohio Valley and the lower Mississippi River Valley, but many, including the Mound builders, stayed along the Missouri, becoming the ancestors of the later Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains.
Indigenous peoples of North America who have lived along the Missouri have historically had access to ample food, water, and shelter. Many migratory animals naturally inhabit the plains area. Before they were hunted by colonists and Native Americans, these animals, such as the buffalo, provided meat, clothing, and other everyday items; there were also great riparian areas in the river&#x27;s floodplain that provided habitat for herbs and other staple foods. No written records from the tribes and peoples of the pre-European contact period exist because they did not yet use writing. According to the writings of early colonists, some of the major tribes along the Missouri River included the Otoe, Missouria, Omaha, Ponca, Dakota, Lakota, Arikara, Hidatsa, Mandan, Assiniboine, Gros Ventres and Blackfeet.

In this pre-colonial and early-colonial era, the Missouri river was used as a path of trade and transport, and the river and its tributaries often formed territorial boundaries. Most of the Indigenous peoples in the region at that time had semi-nomadic cultures, with many tribes maintaining different summer and winter camps. However, the center of Native American wealth and trade lay along the Missouri River in the Dakotas region on its great bend south. A large cluster of walled Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara villages situated on bluffs and islands of the river was home to thousands, and later served as a market and trading post used by early French and British explorers and fur traders. Following the introduction of horses to Missouri River tribes, possibly from feral European-introduced populations, Natives&#x27; way of life changed dramatically. The use of the horse allowed them to travel greater distances, and thus facilitated hunting, communications, warfare, the Siouxoan genocide and expulsion of many tribes,and the abundance of trade.

Once, tens of millions of American bison (commonly called buffalo), one of the keystone species of the Great Plains and the Ohio Valley, roamed the plains of the Missouri River basin. Most Native American nations in the basin relied heavily on the bison as a food source, and their hides and bones served to create other household items. In time, the species came to benefit from the indigenous peoples&#x27; periodic controlled burnings of the grasslands surrounding the Missouri to clear out old and dead growth. The large bison population of the region gave rise to the term &quot;great bison belt&quot;, an area of rich annual grasslands that extended from Alaska to Mexico along the eastern flank of the Continental Divide. However, after the arrival of Europeans in North America, both the bison and the Native Americans saw a rapid decline in population. Massive over-hunting for sport by colonists eliminated bison populations east of the Mississippi River by 1833 and reduced the numbers in the Missouri basin to a mere few hundred. Foreign diseases brought by settlers, such as smallpox, raged across the land, decimating Native American populations. Left without their primary source of sustenance, many of the remaining indigenous people were forced onto resettlement areas and reservations, often at gunpoint.

==Early European explorers==

In May 1673, the French-Canadian explorer Louis Jolliet and the French explorer Jacques Marquette left the settlement of St. Ignace on Lake Huron and traveled down the Wisconsin and Mississippi Rivers, aiming to reach the Pacific Ocean. In late June, Jolliet and Marquette became the first documented European discoverers of the Missouri River, which according to their journals was in full flood. &quot;I never saw anything more terrific,&quot; Jolliet wrote, &quot;a tangle of entire trees from the mouth of the Pekistanoui [Missouri] with such impetuosity that one could not attempt to cross it without great danger. The commotion was such that the water was made muddy by it and could not clear itself.&quot; They recorded &quot;Pekitanoui&quot; or &quot;Pekistanoui&quot; as the local name for the Missouri. However, the party never explored the Missouri beyond its mouth, nor did they linger in the area. In addition, they later learned that the Mississippi drained into the Gulf of Mexico and not the Pacific as they had originally presumed; the expedition turned back about short of the Gulf at the confluence of the Arkansas River with the Mississippi.

In 1682, France expanded its territorial claims in North America to include land on the western side of the Mississippi River, which included the lower portion of the Missouri. However, the Missouri itself remained formally unexplored until Étienne de Veniard, Sieur de Bourgmont commanded an expedition in 1714 that reached at least as far as the mouth of the Platte River. It is unclear exactly how far Bourgmont traveled beyond there; he described the blond-haired Mandans in his journals, so it is likely he reached as far as their villages in present-day North Dakota. Later that year, Bourgmont published &quot;The Route To Be Taken To Ascend The Missouri River&quot;, the first known document to use the name &quot;Missouri River&quot;; many of the names he gave to tributaries, mostly from the native tribes that lived along them, are still in use today. The expedition&#x27;s discoveries eventually found their way to cartographer Guillaume Delisle, who used the information to create a map of the lower Missouri. In 1718, Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville requested that the French government bestow upon Bourgmont the Cross of St. Louis because of his &quot;outstanding service to France&quot;.

Bourgmont had in fact been in trouble with the French colonial authorities since 1706, when he deserted his post as commandant of Fort Detroit after poorly handling an attack by the Ottawa that resulted in thirty-one deaths. However, his reputation was enhanced in 1720 when the Pawnee – who had earlier been befriended by Bourgmont – massacred the Spanish Villasur expedition near present-day Columbus, Nebraska, on the Missouri River, temporarily ending Spanish encroachment on French Louisiana.

Bourgmont established Fort Orleans, the first European settlement of any kind on the Missouri River, near present-day Brunswick, Missouri, in 1723. The following year Bourgmont led an expedition to enlist Comanche support against the Spanish, who continued to show interest in taking over the Missouri. In 1725 Bourgmont brought the chiefs of several Missouri River tribes to visit France. There he was raised to the rank of nobility and did not accompany the chiefs back to North America. Fort Orleans was either abandoned or its small contingent massacred by Native Americans in 1726.

The French and Indian War erupted when territorial disputes between France and Great Britain in North America reached a head in 1754. By 1763, France&#x27;s army in North America had been defeated by a combined British-American force and was forced to sue for peace. In the Treaty of Paris, France ceded its Canadian possessions to the British, gaining Louisiana from the Spanish in return.
Initially, the Spanish did not extensively explore the Missouri and let French traders continue their activities under license. However, this ended after news of incursions by trappers working for the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company in the upper Missouri River watershed was brought back following an expedition by Jacques D&#x27;Eglise in the early 1790s. In 1795 the Spanish chartered the Company of Discoverers and Explorers of the Missouri, popularly referred to as the &quot;Missouri Company&quot;, and offered a reward for the first person to reach the Pacific Ocean via the Missouri. In 1794 and 1795 expeditions led by Jean-Baptiste Truteau and Antoine Simon Lecuyer de la Jonchšre did not even make it as far north as the Mandan villages in central North Dakota.

Arguably the most successful of the Missouri Company expeditions was that of James MacKay and John Evans. The two set out along the Missouri, and established Fort Charles about south of present-day Sioux City as a winter camp in 1795. At the Mandan villages in North Dakota, they forcefully expelled several British traders, and while talking to the populace they pinpointed the location of the Yellowstone River, which was called &quot;Roche Jaune&quot; (&quot;Yellow Rock&quot;) by the French. Although MacKay and Evans failed to accomplish their original goal of reaching the Pacific, they did create the first accurate map of the upper Missouri River.

In 1795, the young United States and Spain signed Pinckney&#x27;s Treaty, which recognized American rights to navigate the Mississippi River and store goods for export in New Orleans. Three years later, Spain revoked the treaty and in 1800 secretly returned Louisiana to Napoleonic France in the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. This transfer was so secret that the Spanish continued to administer the territory. In 1801, Spain restored rights to use the Mississippi and New Orleans to the United States.
Fearing that the cutoffs could occur again, President Thomas Jefferson proposed to buy the port of New Orleans from France for $10 million. Instead, faced with a debt crisis, Napoleon offered to sell the entirety of Louisiana, including the Missouri River, for $15 million – amounting to less than 3¢ per acre. The deal was signed in 1803, doubling the size of the United States with the acquisition of the Louisiana Territory.
In 1803, Jefferson instructed Meriwether Lewis to explore the Missouri and search for a water route to the Pacific Ocean. By then, it had been discovered that the Columbia River system, which drains into the Pacific, had a similar latitude as the headwaters of the Missouri River, and it was widely believed that a connection or short portage existed between the two. However, Spain balked at the takeover, citing that they had never formally returned Louisiana to the French. Spanish authorities warned Lewis not to take the journey and forbade him from seeing the MacKay and Evans map of the Missouri, although Lewis eventually managed to gain access to it.

Meriwether Lewis and William Clark began their famed expedition in 1804 with a party of thirty-three people in three boats. Although they became the first Europeans to travel the entire length of the Missouri and reach the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia, they found no trace of the Northwest Passage. The maps made by Lewis and Clark, especially those of the Pacific Northwest region, provided a foundation for future explorers and emigrants. They also negotiated relations with numerous Native American tribes and wrote extensive reports on the climate, ecology and geology of the region. Many present-day names of geographic features in the upper Missouri basin originated from their expedition.

==American frontier==
===Fur trade===

As early as the 18th century, fur trappers entered the extreme northern basin of the Missouri River in the hopes of finding populations of beaver and river otter, the sale of whose pelts drove the thriving North American fur trade. They came from many different places – some from the Canadian fur corporations at Hudson Bay, some from the Pacific Northwest (&quot;see also&quot;: Maritime fur trade), and some from the midwestern United States. Most did not stay in the area for long, as they failed to find significant resources.

The first glowing reports of country rich with thousands of game animals came in 1806 when Meriwether Lewis and William Clark returned from their two-year expedition. Their journals described lands amply stocked with thousands of buffalo, beaver, and river otter; and also an abundant population of sea otters on the Pacific Northwest coast. In 1807, explorer Manuel Lisa organized an expedition which would lead to the explosive growth of the fur trade in the upper Missouri River country. Lisa and his crew traveled up the Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers, trading manufactured items in return for furs from local Native American tribes, and established a fort at the confluence of the Yellowstone and a tributary, the Bighorn, in southern Montana. Although the business started small, it quickly grew into a thriving trade.

Lisa&#x27;s men started construction of Fort Raymond, which sat on a bluff overlooking the confluence of the Yellowstone and Bighorn, in the fall of 1807. The fort would serve primarily as a trading post for bartering with the Native Americans for furs. This method was unlike that of the Pacific Northwest fur trade, which involved trappers hired by the various fur enterprises, namely Hudson&#x27;s Bay. Fort Raymond was later replaced by Fort Lisa at the confluence of the Missouri and Yellowstone in North Dakota; a second fort also called Fort Lisa was built downstream on the Missouri River in Nebraska. In 1809 the St. Louis Missouri Fur Company was founded by Lisa in conjunction with William Clark and Pierre Choteau, among others. In 1828, the American Fur Company founded Fort Union at the confluence of the Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers. Fort Union gradually became the main headquarters for the fur trade in the upper Missouri basin.
Fur trapping activities in the early 19th century encompassed nearly all of the Rocky Mountains on both the eastern and western slopes. Trappers of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company, St. Louis Missouri Fur Company, American Fur Company, Rocky Mountain Fur Company, North West Company and other outfits worked thousands of streams in the Missouri watershed as well as the neighboring Columbia, Colorado, Arkansas, and Saskatchewan river systems. During this period, the trappers, also called mountain men, blazed trails through the wilderness that would later form the paths pioneers and settlers would travel by into the West. Transport of the thousands of beaver pelts required ships, providing one of the first large motives for river transport on the Missouri to start.

As the 1830s drew to a close, the fur industry slowly began to die as silk replaced beaver fur as a desirable clothing item. By this time, also, the beaver population of streams in the Rocky Mountains had been decimated by intense hunting. Furthermore, frequent Native American attacks on trading posts made it dangerous for employees of the fur companies. In some regions, the industry continued well into the 1840s, but in others such as the Platte River valley, declines of the beaver population contributed to an earlier demise. The fur trade finally disappeared in the Great Plains around 1850, with the primary center of industry shifting to the Mississippi Valley and central Canada. Despite the demise of the once-prosperous trade, however, its legacy led to the opening of the American West and a flood of settlers, farmers, ranchers, adventurers, hopefuls, financially bereft, and entrepreneurs took their place.

===Settlers and pioneers===
The river roughly defined the American frontier in the 19th century, particularly downstream from Kansas City, where it takes a sharp eastern turn into the heart of the state of Missouri, an area known as the Boonslick. As first area settled by Europeans along the river it was largely populated by slave-owning southerners following the Boone&#x27;s Lick Road. The major trails for the opening of the American West all have their starting points on the river, including the California, Mormon, Oregon, and Santa Fe trails. The first westward leg of the Pony Express was a ferry across the Missouri at St. Joseph, Missouri. Similarly, most emigrants arrived at the eastern terminus of the First transcontinental railroad via a ferry ride across the Missouri between Council Bluffs, Iowa, and Omaha. The Hannibal Bridge became the first bridge to cross the Missouri River in 1869, and its location was a major reason why Kansas City became the largest city on the river upstream from its mouth at St. Louis.

True to the then-ideal of Manifest Destiny, over 500,000 people set out from the river town of Independence, Missouri, to their various destinations in the American West from the 1830s to the 1860s. These people had many reasons to embark on this strenuous year-long journey – economic crisis, and later gold strikes including the California Gold Rush, for example. For most, the route took them up the Missouri to Omaha, Nebraska, where they would set out along the Platte River, which flows from the Rocky Mountains in Wyoming and Colorado eastward through the Great Plains. An early expedition led by Robert Stuart from 1812 to 1813 proved the Platte impossible to navigate by the dugout canoes they used, let alone the large sidewheelers and sternwheelers that would later ply the Missouri in increasing numbers. One explorer remarked that the Platte was &quot;too thick to drink, too thin to plow&quot;. Nevertheless, the Platte provided an abundant and reliable source of water for the pioneers as they headed west. Covered wagons, popularly referred to as &quot;prairie schooners&quot;, provided the primary means of transport until the beginning of regular boat service on the river in the 1850s.

During the 1860s, gold strikes in Montana, Colorado, Wyoming, and northern Utah attracted another wave of hopefuls to the region. Although some freight was hauled overland, most transport to and from the gold fields was done through the Missouri and Kansas Rivers, as well as the Snake River in western Wyoming and the Bear River in Utah, Idaho, and Wyoming. It is estimated that of the passengers and freight hauled from the Midwest to Montana, over 80 percent were transported by boat, a journey that took 150 days in the upstream direction. A route more directly west into Colorado lay along the Kansas River and its tributary the Republican River as well as pair of smaller Colorado streams, Big Sandy Creek and the South Platte River, to near Denver. The gold rushes precipitated the decline of the Bozeman Trail as a popular emigration route, as it passed through land held by often-hostile Native Americans. Safer paths were blazed to the Great Salt Lake near Corinne, Utah, during the gold rush period, which led to the large-scale settlement of the Rocky Mountains region and eastern Great Basin.
As settlers expanded their holdings into the Great Plains, they ran into land conflicts with Native American tribes. This resulted in frequent raids, massacres and armed conflicts, leading to the federal government creating multiple treaties with the Plains tribes, which generally involved establishing borders and reserving lands for the indigenous. As with many other treaties between the U.S. and Native Americans, they were soon broken, leading to huge wars. Over 1,000 battles, big and small, were fought between the U.S. military and Native Americans before the tribes were forced out of their land onto reservations.

Conflicts between natives and settlers over the opening of the Bozeman Trail in the Dakotas, Wyoming and Montana led to Red Cloud&#x27;s War, in which the Lakota and Cheyenne fought against the U.S. Army. The fighting resulted in a complete Native American victory. In 1868, the Treaty of Fort Laramie was signed, which &quot;guaranteed&quot; the use of the Black Hills, Powder River Country and other regions surrounding the northern Missouri River to Native Americans without white intervention. The Missouri River was also a significant landmark as it divides northeastern Kansas from western Missouri; pro-slavery forces from Missouri would cross the river into Kansas and spark mayhem during Bleeding Kansas, leading to continued tension and hostility even today between Kansas and Missouri. Another significant military engagement on the Missouri River during this period was the 1861 Battle of Boonville, which did not affect Native Americans but rather was a turning point in the American Civil War that allowed the Union to seize control of transport on the river, discouraging the state of Missouri from joining the Confederacy.

However, the peace and freedom of the Native Americans did not last for long. The Great Sioux War of 1876–77 was sparked when American miners discovered gold in the Black Hills of western South Dakota and eastern Wyoming. These lands were originally set aside for Native American use by the Treaty of Fort Laramie. When the settlers intruded onto the lands, they were attacked by Native Americans. U.S. troops were sent to the area to protect the miners, and drive out the natives from the new settlements. During this bloody period, both the Native Americans and the U.S. military won victories in major battles, resulting in the loss of nearly a thousand lives. The war eventually ended in an American victory, and the Black Hills were opened to settlement. Native Americans of that region were relocated to reservations in Wyoming and southeastern Montana.

==Dam-building era==
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a great number of dams were built along the course of the Missouri, transforming 35 percent of the river into a chain of reservoirs. River development was stimulated by a variety of factors, first by growing demand for electricity in the rural northwestern parts of the basin, and by floods and droughts that plagued rapidly growing agricultural and urban areas along the lower Missouri River. Small, privately owned hydroelectric projects have existed since the 1890s, but the large flood-control and storage dams that characterize the middle reaches of the river today were not constructed until the 1950s.

Between 1890 and 1940, five dams were built in the vicinity of Great Falls to generate power from the Great Falls of the Missouri, a chain of giant waterfalls formed by the river in its path through western Montana. Black Eagle Dam, built in 1891 on Black Eagle Falls, was the first dam of the Missouri. Replaced in 1926 with a more modern structure, the dam was little more than a small weir atop Black Eagle Falls, diverting part of the Missouri&#x27;s flow into the Black Eagle power plant. The largest of the five dams, Ryan Dam, was built in 1913. The dam lies directly above the Big Falls, the largest waterfall of the Missouri.
In the same period, several private establishments – most notably the Montana Power Company – began to develop the Missouri River above Great Falls and below Helena for power generation. A small run-of-the river structure completed in 1898 near the present site of Canyon Ferry Dam became the second dam built on the Missouri. This rock-filled timber crib dam generated seven and a half megawatts of electricity for Helena and the surrounding countryside. The nearby steel Hauser Dam was finished in 1907, but failed in 1908 because of structural deficiencies, causing catastrophic flooding all the way downstream past Craig. At Great Falls, a section of the Black Eagle Dam was dynamited to save nearby factories from inundation. Hauser was rebuilt in 1910 as a concrete gravity structure, and stands to this day.

Holter Dam, about downstream of Helena, was the third hydroelectric dam built on this stretch of the Missouri River. When completed in 1918 by the Montana Power Company and the United Missouri River Power Company, its reservoir flooded the Gates of the Mountains, a limestone canyon which Meriwether Lewis described as &quot;the most remarkable clifts that we have yet seen ... the tow[er]ing and projecting rocks in many places seem ready to tumble on us.&quot; In 1949, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) began construction on the modern Canyon Ferry Dam to provide flood control to the Great Falls area. By 1954, the rising waters of Canyon Ferry Lake submerged the old 1898 dam, whose powerhouse still stands underwater about upstream of the present-day dam.
 &quot;uncertain as the actions of a jury or the state of a woman&#x27;s mind&quot;.
The Missouri basin suffered a series of catastrophic floods around the turn of the 20th century, most notably in 1844, 1881, and 1926–1927. In 1940, as part of the Great Depression-era New Deal, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) completed Fort Peck Dam in Montana. Construction of this massive public works project provided jobs for more than 50,000 laborers during the Depression and was a major step in providing flood control to the lower half of the Missouri River. However, Fort Peck only controls runoff from 11 percent of the Missouri River watershed, and had little effect on a severe snowmelt flood that struck the lower basin three years later. This event was particularly destructive as it submerged manufacturing plants in Omaha and Kansas City, greatly delaying shipments of military supplies in World War II.
Flooding damages on the Mississippi–Missouri river system were one of the primary reasons for which Congress passed the Flood Control Act of 1944, opening the way for the USACE to develop the Missouri on a massive scale. The 1944 act authorized the Pick–Sloan Missouri Basin Program (Pick–Sloan Plan), which was a composite of two widely varying proposals. The Pick plan, with an emphasis on flood control and hydroelectric power, called for the construction of large storage dams along the main stem of the Missouri. The Sloan plan, which stressed the development of local irrigation, included provisions for roughly 85 smaller dams on tributaries.

In the early stages of Pick–Sloan development, tentative plans were made to build a low dam on the Missouri at Riverdale, North Dakota, and 27 smaller dams on the Yellowstone River and its tributaries. This was met with controversy from inhabitants of the Yellowstone basin, and eventually the USBR proposed a solution: to greatly increase the size of the proposed dam at Riverdale – today&#x27;s Garrison Dam, thus replacing the storage that would have been provided by the Yellowstone dams. Because of this decision, the Yellowstone is now the longest free-flowing river in the contiguous United States. In the 1950s, construction commenced on the five mainstem dams – Garrison, Oahe, Big Bend, Fort Randall, and Gavins Point – proposed under the Pick-Sloan Plan. Along with Fort Peck, which was integrated as a unit of the Pick-Sloan Plan in the 1940s, these dams now form the Missouri River Mainstem System.

The flooding of lands along the Missouri River heavily impacted Native American groups whose reservations included fertile bottomlands and floodplains, especially in the arid Dakotas where it was some of the only good farmland they had. These consequences were pronounced in North Dakota&#x27;s Fort Berthold Indian Reservation, where of land was taken by the construction of Garrison Dam. The Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara / Sanish tribes sued the federal government on the basis of the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie which provided that reservation land could not be taken without the consent of both the tribes and Congress. After a lengthy legal battle the tribes were coerced in 1947 to accept a $5.1 million ($55 million today) settlement for the land, just $33 per acre. In 1949 this was increased to $12.6 million. The tribes were even denied the right to use the reservoir shore &quot;for grazing, hunting, fishing, and other purposes&quot;.
The six dams of the Mainstem System, chiefly Fort Peck, Garrison, and Oahe, are among the largest dams in the world by volume; their sprawling reservoirs also rank among the biggest of the nation. Holding up to in total, the six reservoirs can store more than three years&#x27; worth of the river&#x27;s flow as measured below Gavins Point, the lowermost dam. This capacity makes it the largest reservoir system in the United States and one of the largest in North America. In addition to storing irrigation water, the system also includes an annual flood-control reservation of . Mainstem power plants generate about 9.3 billion KWh annually – equal to a constant output of almost 1,100 megawatts. Along with nearly 100 smaller dams on tributaries, namely the Bighorn, Platte, Kansas, and Osage Rivers, the system provides irrigation water to nearly of land.

The table at left lists statistics of all fifteen dams on the Missouri River, ordered downstream. Many of the run-of-the-river power generation dams on the Missouri (marked in yellow) form very small impoundments which may or may not have been given names; those unnamed are left blank. All dams are on the upper half of the river above Sioux City; the lower river is uninterrupted due to its longstanding use as a shipping channel.

==Navigation==

 &quot;never achieved its expectations. Even under the very best of circumstances, it was never a huge industry&quot;.

Boat travel on the Missouri began with the wood-framed canoes and bull boats that Native Americans used for thousands of years before the colonization of the Great Plains introduced larger craft to the river. The first steamboat on the Missouri was the &quot;Independence&quot;, which started running between St. Louis and Keytesville, Missouri, around 1819. By the 1830s, large mail and freight-carrying vessels were running regularly between Kansas City and St. Louis, and many traveled even farther upstream. A handful, such as the &quot;Western Engineer&quot; and the &quot;Yellowstone&quot;, could make it up the river as far as eastern Montana.

During the early 19th century, at the height of the fur trade, steamboats and keelboats travelled nearly the whole length of the Missouri from Montana&#x27;s rugged Missouri Breaks to the mouth, carrying beaver and buffalo furs to and from the areas the trappers frequented. This resulted in the development of the Missouri River mackinaw, which specialized in carrying furs. Since these boats could only travel downriver, they were dismantled and sold for lumber upon their arrival at St. Louis.

Water transport increased through the 1850s with multiple craft ferrying pioneers, emigrants and miners; many of these runs were from St. Louis or Independence to near Omaha. There, most of these people would set out overland along the large but shallow and unnavigable Platte River, which pioneers described as &quot;a mile wide and an inch deep&quot; and &quot;the most magnificent and useless of rivers&quot;. Steamboat navigation peaked in 1858 with over 130 boats operating full-time on the Missouri, with many more smaller vessels. Many of the earlier vessels were built on the Ohio River before being transferred to the Missouri. Side-wheeler steamboats were preferred over the larger sternwheelers used on the Mississippi and Ohio because of their greater maneuverability.


The industry&#x27;s success, however, did not guarantee safety. In the early decades before man controlled the river&#x27;s flow, its sketchy rises and falls and its massive amounts of sediment, which prevented a clear view of the bottom, wrecked some 300 vessels. Because of the dangers of navigating the Missouri River, the average ship&#x27;s lifespan was only about four years. The development of the Transcontinental and Northern Pacific Railroads marked the beginning of the end of steamboat commerce on the Missouri. Outcompeted by trains, the number of boats slowly dwindled, until there was almost nothing left by the 1890s. Transport of agricultural and mining products by barge, however, saw a revival in the early twentieth century.

===Passage to Sioux City===
Since the beginning of the 20th century, the Missouri River has been extensively engineered for water transport purposes, and about 32 percent of the river now flows through artificially straightened channels. In 1912, the USACE was authorized to maintain the Missouri to a depth of from the Port of Kansas City to the mouth, a distance of . This was accomplished by constructing levees and wing dams to direct the river&#x27;s flow into a straight, narrow channel and prevent sedimentation. In 1925, the USACE began a project to widen the river&#x27;s navigation channel to ; two years later, they began dredging a deep-water channel from Kansas City to Sioux City. These modifications have reduced the river&#x27;s length from some in the late 19th century to in the present day.
Construction of dams on the Missouri under the Pick-Sloan Plan in the mid-twentieth century was the final step in aiding navigation. The large reservoirs of the Mainstem System help provide a dependable flow to maintain the navigation channel year-round, and are capable of halting most of the river&#x27;s annual freshets. However, high and low water cycles of the Missouri – notably the protracted early-21st-century drought in the Missouri River basin and historic floods in 1993 and 2011 – are difficult for even the massive Mainstem System reservoirs to control.

In 1945, the USACE began the Missouri River Bank Stabilization and Navigation Project, which would permanently increase the river&#x27;s navigation channel to a width of and a depth of . During work that continues to this day, the navigation channel from Sioux City to St. Louis has been controlled by building rock dikes to direct the river&#x27;s flow and scour out sediments, sealing and cutting off meanders and side channels, and dredging the riverbed. However, the Missouri has often resisted the efforts of the USACE to control its depth. In 2006, the U.S. Coast Guard stated that commercial barge tows ran aground in the Missouri River because the navigation channel had been severely silted. The USACE was blamed for failing to maintain the channel to the minimum depth.


In 1929, the Missouri River Navigation Commission estimated the amount of goods shipped on the river annually at 15 million tons (13.6 million metric tons), providing widespread consensus for the creation of a navigation channel. However, shipping traffic has since been far lower than expected – shipments of commodities including produce, manufactured items, lumber, and oil averaged only 683,000 tons (616,000 t) per year from 1994 to 2006.

By tonnage of transported material, Missouri is by far the largest user of the river accounting for 83 percent of river traffic, while Kansas has 12 percent, Nebraska three percent and Iowa two percent. Almost all of the barge traffic on the Missouri River ships sand and gravel dredged from the lower of the river; the remaining portion of the shipping channel now sees little to no use by commercial vessels.

For navigation purposes, the Missouri River is divided into two main sections. The Upper Missouri River is north of Gavins Point Dam, the last hydroelectric dam of fifteen on the river, just upstream from Sioux City, Iowa. The Lower Missouri River is the of river below Gavins Point until it meets the Mississippi just above St. Louis. The Lower Missouri River has no hydroelectric dams or locks but it has a plethora of wing dams that enable barge traffic by directing the flow of the river into a , channel. These wing dams have been put in place by and are maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and there are no plans to construct any locks to replace these wing dams on the Missouri River.

===Traffic decline===
Tonnage of goods shipped by barges on the Missouri River has seen a serious decline from the 1960s to the present. In the 1960s, the USACE predicted an increase to per year by 2000, but instead the opposite has happened. The amount of goods plunged from in 1977 to just in 2000. One of the largest drops has been in agricultural products, especially wheat. Part of the reason is that irrigated land along the Missouri has only been developed to a fraction of its potential. In 2006, barges on the Missouri hauled only of products which is equal to the &quot;daily&quot; freight traffic on the Mississippi.

Drought conditions in the early 21st century and competition from other modes of transport – mainly railroads – are the primary reason for decreasing river traffic on the Missouri. The USACE&#x27;s failure to consistently maintain the navigation channel has also hampered the industry. Efforts are being made to revive the shipping industry on the Missouri River, because of the efficiency and cheapness of river transport to haul agricultural products, and the overcrowding of alternative transportation routes. Solutions such as expanding the navigation channel and releasing more water from reservoirs during the peak of the navigation season are under consideration.
Drought conditions lifted in 2010, in which about were barged on the Missouri, representing the first significant increase in shipments since 2000. However, flooding in 2011 closed record stretches of the river to boat traffic – &quot;wash[ing] away hopes for a bounce-back year&quot;.

There are no lock and dams on the lower Missouri River, but there are plenty of wing dams that jettie out into the river and make it harder for barges to navigate. In contrast, the upper Mississippi has 29 locks and dams and averaged 61.3 million tons of cargo annually from 2008 to 2011, and its locks are closed in the winter.

==Ecology==
===Natural history===

Historically, the thousands of square miles that comprised the floodplain of the Missouri River supported a wide range of plant and animal species. Biodiversity generally increased proceeding downstream from the cold, subalpine headwaters in Montana to the temperate, moist climate of Missouri. Today, the river&#x27;s riparian zone consists primarily of cottonwoods, willows and sycamores, with several other types of trees such as maple and ash. Average tree height generally increases farther from the riverbanks for a limited distance, as land next to the river is vulnerable to soil erosion during floods. Because of its large sediment concentrations, the Missouri does not support many aquatic invertebrates. However, the basin supports about 300 species of birds and 150 species of fish, some of which are endangered such as the pallid sturgeon. The Missouri&#x27;s aquatic and riparian habitats also support several species of mammals, such as minks, river otters, beavers, muskrats, and raccoons.

The World Wide Fund For Nature divides the Missouri River watershed into three freshwater ecoregions: the Upper Missouri, Lower Missouri and Central Prairie. The Upper Missouri, roughly encompassing the area within Montana, Wyoming, southern Alberta and Saskatchewan, and North Dakota, comprises mainly semiarid shrub-steppe grasslands with sparse biodiversity because of Ice Age glaciations. There are no known endemic species within the region. Except for the headwaters in the Rockies, there is little precipitation in this part of the watershed. The Middle Missouri ecoregion, extending through Colorado, southwestern Minnesota, northern Kansas, Nebraska, and parts of Wyoming and Iowa, has greater rainfall and is characterized by temperate forests and grasslands. Plant life is more diverse in the Middle Missouri, which is also home to about twice as many animal species. Finally, the Central Prairie ecoregion is situated on the lower part of the Missouri, encompassing all or parts of Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma and Arkansas. Despite large seasonal temperature fluctuations, this region has the greatest diversity of plants and animals of the three. Thirteen species of crayfish are endemic to the lower Missouri.

===Human impacts===

Since river commerce and industrial development began in the 1800s, human activity has severely polluted the Missouri and degraded its water quality. Most of the river&#x27;s floodplain habitat is long gone, replaced by irrigated agricultural land. Development of the floodplain has led to increasing numbers of people and infrastructure within areas at high risk of inundation. Levees have been constructed along more than a third of the river to keep floodwater within the channel, but with the consequences of faster stream velocity and a resulting increase of peak flows in downstream areas. Fertilizer runoff, which causes elevated levels of nitrogen and other nutrients, is a major problem along the Missouri River, especially in Iowa and Missouri. This form of pollution also affects the upper Mississippi, Illinois and Ohio Rivers. Low oxygen levels in rivers and the vast Gulf of Mexico dead zone at the end of the Mississippi Delta are both results of high nutrient concentrations in the Missouri and other tributaries of the Mississippi.
Channelization of the lower Missouri waters has made the river narrower, deeper and less accessible to riparian flora and fauna. Many dams and bank stabilization projects have been built to help convert of Missouri River floodplain to agricultural land. Channel control has reduced the volume of sediment transported downstream by the river and eliminated critical habitat for fish, birds and amphibians. By the early 21st century, declines in populations of native species prompted the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to issue a biological opinion recommending restoration of river habitats for federally endangered bird and fish species.

The USACE began work on ecosystem restoration projects along the lower Missouri River in the early 21st century. Because of the low use of the shipping channel in the lower Missouri maintained by the USACE, it is now considered feasible to remove some of the levees, dikes, and wing dams that constrict the river&#x27;s flow, thus allowing it to naturally restore its banks. By 2001, there were of riverside floodplain undergoing active restoration.

Restoration projects have re-mobilized some of the sediments that had been trapped behind bank stabilization structures, prompting concerns of exacerbated nutrient and sediment pollution locally and downstream in the northern Gulf of Mexico. A 2010 National Research Council report assessed the roles of sediment in the Missouri River, evaluating current habitat restoration strategies and alternative ways to manage sediment. The report found that a better understanding of sediment processes in the Missouri River, including the creation of a &quot;sediment budget&quot; – an accounting of sediment transport, erosion, and deposition volumes for the length of the Missouri River – would provide a foundation for projects to improve water quality standards and protect endangered species.

===National Wild and Scenic River===
Several sections of the Missouri River were added to the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System from Fort Benton to Robinson Bridge, Gavins Point Dam to Ponca State Park and Fort Randall Dam to Lewis and Clark Lake. A total of of the river were designated including of wild river and of scenic river in Montana. of the river is listed as recreational under the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System.

==Tourism and recreation==

With over of open water, the six reservoirs of the Missouri River Mainstem System provide some of the main recreational areas within the basin. Visitation has increased from 10 million visitor-hours in the mid-1960s to over 60 million visitor-hours in 1990. Development of visitor facilities was spurred by the Federal Water Project Recreation Act of 1965, which required the USACE to build and maintain boat ramps, campgrounds and other public facilities along major reservoirs. Recreational use of Missouri River reservoirs is estimated to contribute $85–100 million to the regional economy each year.

The Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail, some long, follows nearly the entire Missouri River from its mouth to its source, retracing the route of the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Extending from Wood River, Illinois, in the east, to Astoria, Oregon, in the west, it also follows portions of the Mississippi and Columbia Rivers. The trail, which spans through eleven U.S. states, is maintained by various federal and state government agencies; it passes through some 100 historic sites, notably archaeological locations including the Knife River Indian Villages National Historic Site.

Parts of the river itself are designated for recreational or preservational use. The Missouri National Recreational River consists of portions of the Missouri downstream from Fort Randall and Gavins Point Dams that total . These reaches exhibit islands, meanders, sandbars, underwater rocks, riffles, snags, and other once-common features of the lower river that have now disappeared under reservoirs or have been destroyed by channeling. About forty-five steamboat wrecks are scattered along these reaches of the river.

Downstream from Great Falls, Montana, about of the river course through a rugged series of canyons and badlands known as the Missouri Breaks. This part of the river, designated a U.S. National Wild and Scenic River in 1976, flows within the Upper Missouri Breaks National Monument, a preserve comprising steep cliffs, deep gorges, arid plains, badlands, archaeological sites, and whitewater rapids on the Missouri itself. The preserve includes a wide variety of plant and animal life; recreational activities include boating, rafting, hiking and wildlife observation.

In north-central Montana, some along over of the Missouri River, centering on Fort Peck Lake, comprise the Charles M. Russell National Wildlife Refuge. The wildlife refuge consists of a native northern Great Plains ecosystem that has not been heavily affected by human development, except for the construction of Fort Peck Dam. Although there are few designated trails, the whole preserve is open to hiking and camping.

Many U.S. national parks, such as Glacier National Park, Rocky Mountain National Park, Yellowstone National Park and Badlands National Park are, at least partially, in the watershed. Parts of other rivers in the basin are set aside for preservation and recreational use – notably the Niobrara National Scenic River, which is a protected stretch of the Niobrara River, one of the Missouri&#x27;s longest tributaries. The Missouri flows through or past many National Historic Landmarks, which include Three Forks of the Missouri, Fort Benton, Montana, Big Hidatsa Village Site, Fort Atkinson, Nebraska and Arrow Rock Historic District.

==See also==
* &quot;Across the Wide Missouri (book)&quot;
* List of tributaries of the Mississippi River
* List of longest main-stem rivers in the United States
* List of crossings of the Missouri River
* List of populated places along the Missouri River
* Missouri National Recreational River
* U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
* Montana Stream Access Law
* Montana Wilderness Association
* Sacagawea
* Arabia Steamboat Museum
* Container on barge

==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="4" end="18" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="24" end="29" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140343" start="37" end="44" title="Central United States" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q527825" start="49" end="62" title="Mountain states" label="Mountain West"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="78" end="91" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059183" start="144" end="164" title="Centennial Mountains" label="Centennial Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q879014" start="172" end="188" title="Bitterroot Range" label="Bitterroot Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="196" end="211" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="228" end="235" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="287" end="304" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="314" end="323" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="352" end="361" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="362" end="371" title="Drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="502" end="511" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q486047" start="673" end="713" title="List of rivers by length" label="world&amp;#x27;s fourth-longest river system"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="790" end="801" title="Tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="878" end="893" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="984" end="989" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="1020" end="1032" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="1218" end="1236" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="1376" end="1385" title="North American fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="1491" end="1498" title="American pioneer" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q515329" start="1566" end="1579" title="covered wagon" label="covered wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="1612" end="1621" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1778" end="1798" title="American Indian Wars#Great Plains" label="American Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1930" end="1949" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q573344" start="1976" end="1985" title="main stem" label="main stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="2035" end="2042" title="Meander" label="Meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187134" start="2076" end="2087" title="Channelization (river)" label="channelized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879626" start="2188" end="2203" title="Missouri River Valley" label="Missouri valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975912" start="2519" end="2539" title="Brower&amp;#x27;s Spring" label="Brower&amp;#x27;s Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="2553" end="2560" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921487" start="2608" end="2623" title="Mount Jefferson (Bitterroot Range)" label="Mount Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059183" start="2631" end="2651" title="Centennial Mountains" label="Centennial Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q54874250" start="2704" end="2722" title="Hell Roaring Creek" label="Hell Roaring Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304926" start="2742" end="2750" title="Red Rock River (Montana)" label="Red Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878247" start="2783" end="2799" title="Beaverhead River" label="Beaverhead River"/>
<link wikidata="Q858903" start="2828" end="2836" title="Big Hole River" label="Big Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q284790" start="2849" end="2864" title="Jefferson River" label="Jefferson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418956" start="2871" end="2885" title="Firehole River" label="Firehole River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2917" end="2924" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="2928" end="2953" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522836" start="2990" end="3002" title="Gibbon River" label="Gibbon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q947477" start="3015" end="3028" title="Madison River" label="Madison River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325962" start="3035" end="3049" title="Gallatin River" label="Gallatin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939190" start="3208" end="3238" title="Missouri Headwaters State Park" label="Missouri Headwaters State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q966283" start="3244" end="3264" title="Three Forks, Montana" label="Three Forks, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034204" start="3347" end="3364" title="Canyon Ferry Lake" label="Canyon Ferry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905077" start="3390" end="3408" title="Big Belt Mountains" label="Big Belt Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q965267" start="3442" end="3449" title="Cascade, Montana" label="Cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="3492" end="3503" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q37774" start="3529" end="3556" title="Great Falls (Missouri River)" label="Great Falls of the Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q595366" start="3710" end="3722" title="Marias River" label="Marias River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492006" start="3760" end="3774" title="Fort Peck Lake" label="Fort Peck Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955484" start="3827" end="3844" title="Musselshell River" label="Musselshell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426242" start="3887" end="3900" title="Fort Peck Dam" label="Fort Peck Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217739" start="3934" end="3944" title="Milk River (Alberta–Montana)" label="Milk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229424" start="4050" end="4062" title="Poplar River (Montana–Saskatchewan)" label="Poplar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="4099" end="4111" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="4122" end="4139" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999172" start="4303" end="4312" title="Williston, North Dakota" label="Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801077" start="4322" end="4336" title="Lake Sakakawea" label="Lake Sakakawea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426217" start="4362" end="4374" title="Garrison Dam" label="Garrison Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087297" start="4416" end="4427" title="Knife River" label="Knife River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="4461" end="4469" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592419" start="4510" end="4521" title="Heart River (North Dakota)" label="Heart River"/>
<link wikidata="Q474408" start="4561" end="4570" title="Lake Oahe" label="Lake Oahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033473" start="4597" end="4613" title="Cannonball River" label="Cannonball River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966525" start="4672" end="4680" title="Oahe Dam" label="Oahe Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="4684" end="4696" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542869" start="4702" end="4707" title="Grand River (South Dakota)" label="Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367713" start="4709" end="4715" title="Moreau River (South Dakota)" label="Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116752" start="4720" end="4734" title="Cheyenne River" label="Cheyenne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124558" start="4869" end="4883" title="Niobrara River" label="Niobrara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="4991" end="4999" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542610" start="5021" end="5032" title="James River (Dakotas)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q489255" start="5052" end="5062" title="Sioux City" label="Sioux City"/>
<link wikidata="Q859274" start="5067" end="5082" title="Big Sioux River" label="Big Sioux River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="5143" end="5147" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="5197" end="5202" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q655754" start="5248" end="5260" title="Platte River" label="Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="5355" end="5363" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="5411" end="5417" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="5447" end="5458" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="5470" end="5482" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595036" start="5617" end="5628" title="Grand River (Missouri)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q59670" start="5649" end="5657" title="Columbia, Missouri" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619907" start="5675" end="5680" title="Osage River" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526399" start="5685" end="5694" title="Gasconade River" label="Gasconade"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180" start="5731" end="5745" title="Jefferson City, Missouri" label="Jefferson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="5790" end="5799" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="5865" end="5873" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6133" end="6139" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879371" start="6256" end="6280" title="Mississippi River Valley" label="Mississippi River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="6362" end="6376" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="6980" end="6987" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="6992" end="7004" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="7043" end="7049" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067421" start="7145" end="7171" title="Front Range Urban Corridor" label="Front Range Urban Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="7405" end="7420" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="7481" end="7502" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q486472" start="7505" end="7524" title="Kansas City, Kansas" label="Kansas City, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q166304" start="7822" end="7839" title="Billings, Montana" label="Billings, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140056" start="8286" end="8299" title="Second-growth forest" label="second-growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q502645" start="8603" end="8616" title="Mount Lincoln (Colorado)" label="Mount Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q185005" start="9116" end="9135" title="continental climate" label="continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="9548" end="9560" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033970" start="9597" end="9619" title="Black Hills flood" label="1972 Black Hills flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="9628" end="9652" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q43743" start="10169" end="10187" title="Continental Divide of the Americas" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q664874" start="10301" end="10311" title="Clark Fork (river)" label="Clark Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="10316" end="10327" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="10346" end="10360" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="10415" end="10420" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="10469" end="10483" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14951374" start="10503" end="10524" title="Three Waters Mountain" label="Three Waters Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722116" start="10543" end="10559" title="Wind River Range" label="Wind River Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="10643" end="10654" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="10818" end="10836" title="endorheic" label="endorheic drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q675012" start="10848" end="10866" title="Great Divide Basin" label="Great Divide Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042803" start="11115" end="11132" title="Laurentian Divide" label="Laurentian Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514985" start="11190" end="11202" title="Oldman River" label="Oldman River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242" start="11223" end="11247" title="South Saskatchewan River" label="South Saskatchewan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q487925" start="11264" end="11270" title="Souris River" label="Souris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278535" start="11272" end="11280" title="Sheyenne River" label="Sheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q156006" start="11313" end="11335" title="Red River of the North" label="Red River of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292" start="11384" end="11396" title="Nelson River" label="Nelson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="11432" end="11442" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136502" start="11575" end="11584" title="Minnesota River" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q492787" start="11589" end="11599" title="Des Moines River" label="Des Moines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="11752" end="11767" title="The Ozarks" label="Ozark Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813795" start="11886" end="11897" title="White River (Arkansas)" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q859274" start="12322" end="12331" title="Big Sioux River" label="Big Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595036" start="12336" end="12347" title="Grand River (Missouri)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="12532" end="12538" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q673908" start="12539" end="12549" title="Republican River" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q177627" start="12550" end="12560" title="Smoky Hill River" label="Smoky Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410560" start="12997" end="13006" title="Roe River" label="Roe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069243" start="13426" end="13440" title="Arikaree River" label="Arikaree River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755015" start="13561" end="13579" title="North Platte River" label="North Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q486047" start="13979" end="14019" title="List of rivers by length" label="fourth-longest river system in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="14047" end="14056" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="14143" end="14155" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="14157" end="14161" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q182343" start="14173" end="14180" title="Niagara River" label="Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q104437" start="14182" end="14187" title="Yukon River" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318435" start="14189" end="14196" title="Detroit River" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054325" start="14202" end="14211" title="St. Clair River" label="St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="14288" end="14298" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="14303" end="14312" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411" start="14415" end="14424" title="Mackenzie River" label="Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q269710" start="14492" end="14498" title="Fraser River" label="Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226" start="14500" end="14505" title="Slave River" label="Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q44163" start="14511" end="14518" title="Koksoak River" label="Koksoak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627617" start="14792" end="14804" title="Freshet" label="Spring Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="15431" end="15462" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q505774" start="15482" end="15494" title="stream gauge" label="stream gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q966428" start="15874" end="15891" title="Hermann, Missouri" label="Hermann, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742723" start="16217" end="16233" title="Great Flood of 1993" label="a historic flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q262798" start="16286" end="16293" title="Ice jam" label="ice dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="16395" end="16405" title="headwaters" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q206492" start="16446" end="16462" title="Laramide Orogeny" label="Laramide Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925465" start="16466" end="16483" title="Mountain formation" label="mountain-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="16561" end="16569" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="16588" end="16596" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="16604" end="16611" title="orogeny" label="orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="16612" end="16620" title="Tectonic uplift" label="uplifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="16621" end="16631" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083697" start="16668" end="16691" title="Western Interior Seaway" label="Western Interior Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="17002" end="17023" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="17141" end="17150" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q444161" start="17359" end="17373" title="Ogallala Aquifer" label="Ogallala Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379420" start="17452" end="17473" title="White River Formation" label="White River Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931872" start="17549" end="17558" title="claystone" label="claystone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="17560" end="17569" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="17571" end="17580" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="17586" end="17598" title="Conglomerate (geology)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113548" start="17637" end="17653" title="overbank deposit" label="overbank deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="17662" end="17669" title="fluvial" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512786" start="17670" end="17684" title="Arikaree Group" label="Arikaree Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="17741" end="17748" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="17787" end="17795" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="18194" end="18204" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="18205" end="18212" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909996" start="18446" end="18459" title="pre-Illinoian" label="pre-Illinoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796459" start="18477" end="18486" title="Illinoian" label="Illinoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="18488" end="18498" title="Glacial period" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113863" start="18780" end="18798" title="Bear Paw Mountains" label="Bear Paw Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="18800" end="18808" title="Sapphire" label="Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476031" start="19022" end="19033" title="Glacial Lake Great Falls" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176129" start="19186" end="19192" title="coulee" label="coulee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500416" start="19208" end="19219" title="Shonkin Sag" label="Shonkin Sag"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="19510" end="19518" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445303" start="19618" end="19629" title="Sediment transport" label="transported"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="19788" end="19798" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528035" start="20223" end="20246" title="Mississippi River Delta" label="Mississippi River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="20571" end="20582" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="20606" end="20625" title="last glacial period" label="last glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="20694" end="20712" title="Beringia" label="Bering land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="20901" end="20912" title="Ohio Valley" label="Ohio Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="20977" end="20991" title="Mound builder (people)" label="Mound builders"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="21096" end="21131" title="Indigenous peoples of North America" label="Indigenous peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="21374" end="21381" title="American bison" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="21456" end="21464" title="Riparian zone" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790907" start="21793" end="21797" title="Otoe tribe" label="Otoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939219" start="21799" end="21808" title="Missouria" label="Missouria"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="21810" end="21815" title="Omaha (tribe)" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754891" start="21817" end="21822" title="Ponca" label="Ponca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="21824" end="21830" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="21832" end="21838" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="21840" end="21847" title="Arikara" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="21849" end="21856" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="21858" end="21864" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="21866" end="21877" title="Assiniboine people" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q510032" start="21879" end="21891" title="Gros Ventres" label="Gros Ventres"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="21896" end="21905" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="22991" end="23005" title="American bison" label="American bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="23044" end="23060" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600332" start="23549" end="23565" title="great bison belt" label="great bison belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="23626" end="23632" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="24053" end="24061" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="24361" end="24374" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Louis Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="24399" end="24416" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946253" start="24440" end="24450" title="St. Ignace, Michigan" label="St. Ignace"/>
<link wikidata="Q978496" start="24487" end="24496" title="Wisconsin River" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q535424" start="25723" end="25761" title="Étienne de Veniard, Sieur de Bourgmont" label="Étienne de Veniard, Sieur de Bourgmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="25950" end="25956" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389662" start="26422" end="26439" title="Guillaume Delisle" label="Guillaume Delisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55266" start="26514" end="26556" title="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville" label="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville"/>
<link wikidata="Q247777" start="26620" end="26638" title="Order of Saint Louis" label="Cross of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q74880" start="26828" end="26840" title="Fort Detroit" label="Fort Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485885" start="26866" end="26872" title="Siege of Fort Detroit" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="26880" end="26886" title="Ottawa (tribe)" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q750947" start="26977" end="26983" title="Pawnee people" label="Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066538" start="27055" end="27074" title="Villasur expedition" label="Villasur expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q932391" start="27092" end="27110" title="Columbus, Nebraska" label="Columbus, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077971" start="27219" end="27231" title="Fort Orleans" label="Fort Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q958967" start="27315" end="27334" title="Brunswick, Missouri" label="Brunswick, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="27402" end="27410" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="27789" end="27810" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="28059" end="28074" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q107419889" start="28157" end="28164" title="History of Spain (1700–1810)" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="28377" end="28402" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28797" end="28818" title="Jean-Baptiste Truteau" label="Jean-Baptiste Truteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q348948" start="29037" end="29047" title="John Evans (explorer)" label="John Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095499" start="29650" end="29672" title="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty" label="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="29871" end="29879" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="29896" end="29925" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="30157" end="30173" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500063" start="30510" end="30529" title="Louisiana Territory" label="Louisiana Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="30561" end="30577" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="30694" end="30708" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q355348" start="31213" end="31226" title="William Clark (explorer)" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="31233" end="31255" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="their famed expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="31551" end="31568" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="32069" end="32075" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="32080" end="32091" title="North American river otter" label="river otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="32136" end="32160" title="North American fur trade" label="North American fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q323002" start="32311" end="32329" title="Maritime fur trade" label="Maritime fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="32762" end="32771" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891628" start="32823" end="32834" title="Manuel Lisa" label="Manuel Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q859686" start="33183" end="33190" title="Bighorn River" label="Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10498202" start="33330" end="33342" title="Fort Raymond" label="Fort Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="33677" end="33694" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471525" start="33731" end="33740" title="Fort Lisa (North Dakota)" label="Fort Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471530" start="33834" end="33843" title="Fort Lisa (Nebraska)" label="Fort Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749918" start="33912" end="33942" title="St. Louis Missouri Fur Company" label="St. Louis Missouri Fur Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q464673" start="34044" end="34064" title="American Fur Company" label="American Fur Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362959" start="34073" end="34083" title="Fort Union Trading Post National Historic Site" label="Fort Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q623564" start="34472" end="34498" title="Rocky Mountain Fur Company" label="Rocky Mountain Fur Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142049" start="34500" end="34518" title="North West Company" label="North West Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308103" start="34726" end="34738" title="Mountain man" label="mountain men"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="35991" end="36008" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255182" start="36170" end="36179" title="Boonslick" label="Boonslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974152" start="36299" end="36321" title="Boone&amp;#x27;s Lick Road" label="Boone&amp;#x27;s Lick Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026956" start="36436" end="36446" title="California Trail" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q379356" start="36448" end="36454" title="Mormon Trail" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="36456" end="36462" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="36468" end="36476" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="36515" end="36527" title="Pony Express" label="Pony Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="36563" end="36583" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="36650" end="36681" title="First transcontinental railroad" label="First transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q695565" start="36727" end="36747" title="Council Bluffs, Iowa" label="Council Bluffs, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126864" start="36764" end="36779" title="Hannibal Bridge" label="Hannibal Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="36995" end="37011" title="Manifest Destiny" label="Manifest Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="37064" end="37086" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="37300" end="37320" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599790" start="37418" end="37448" title="Great Platte River Road" label="set out along the Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622408" start="37573" end="37586" title="Robert Stuart (explorer)" label="Robert Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q596073" start="37653" end="37665" title="dugout canoe" label="dugout canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="38250" end="38254" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="38455" end="38466" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q813008" start="38494" end="38504" title="Bear River (Great Salt Lake)" label="Bear River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906273" start="38871" end="38886" title="Big Sandy Creek (Colorado)" label="Big Sandy Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892" start="38895" end="38913" title="South Platte River" label="South Platte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q896134" start="38979" end="38992" title="Bozeman Trail" label="Bozeman Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="39121" end="39136" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q482710" start="39142" end="39155" title="Corinne, Utah" label="Corinne, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="39268" end="39279" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060306" start="40027" end="40047" title="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War" label="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="40062" end="40068" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="40073" end="40081" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="40186" end="40208" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="40265" end="40276" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q266864" start="40278" end="40298" title="Powder River Country" label="Powder River Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="40604" end="40619" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="40683" end="40702" title="Kansas and Missouri" label="Kansas and Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451867" start="40793" end="40817" title="Battle of Boonville" label="1861 Battle of Boonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="40895" end="40913" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="40931" end="40936" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="41033" end="41044" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="41129" end="41152" title="Great Sioux War of 1876" label="Great Sioux War of 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="42645" end="42656" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q37774" start="42684" end="42711" title="Great Falls of the Missouri" label="Great Falls of the Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920713" start="42798" end="42813" title="Black Eagle Dam" label="Black Eagle Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37774" start="42832" end="42849" title="Black Eagle Falls" label="Black Eagle Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384002" start="43106" end="43114" title="Ryan Dam" label="Ryan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599144" start="43167" end="43176" title="Big Falls (Missouri River waterfall)" label="Big Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953241" start="43287" end="43308" title="Montana Power Company" label="Montana Power Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="43375" end="43381" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="43412" end="43428" title="run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="run-of-the river"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034202" start="43482" end="43498" title="Canyon Ferry Dam" label="Canyon Ferry Dam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43561" end="43576" title="Dam#Timber dams" label="timber crib dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="43604" end="43612" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16904906" start="43684" end="43689" title="Steel dam" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268280" start="43690" end="43700" title="Hauser Dam" label="Hauser Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180655" start="43836" end="43841" title="Craig, Montana" label="Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060451" start="44033" end="44043" title="Holter Dam" label="Holter Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527136" start="44273" end="44295" title="Gates of the Mountains Wilderness" label="Gates of the Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010548" start="44509" end="44535" title="U.S. Bureau of Reclamation" label="U.S. Bureau of Reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034204" start="44673" end="44690" title="Canyon Ferry Lake" label="Canyon Ferry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599200" start="44997" end="45001" title="Great Flood of 1844" label="1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599203" start="45003" end="45007" title="Great Flood of 1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147270" start="45013" end="45022" title="Great Mississippi Flood of 1927" label="1926–1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="45048" end="45064" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="45069" end="45077" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="45083" end="45111" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="45814" end="45822" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460039" start="45834" end="45859" title="Flood Control Act of 1944" label="Flood Control Act of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="45885" end="45890" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="USACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190964" start="45963" end="45996" title="Pick–Sloan Missouri Basin Program" label="Pick–Sloan Missouri Basin Program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46659" end="46663" title="Bureau of ReclamationB" label="USBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885061" start="47052" end="47060" title="Big Bend Dam" label="Big Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279914" start="47062" end="47074" title="Fort Randall Dam" label="Fort Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965709" start="47080" end="47092" title="Gavins Point Dam" label="Gavins Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470821" start="47573" end="47605" title="Fort Berthold Indian Reservation" label="Fort Berthold Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241487" start="47764" end="47791" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1851)" label="1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216428" start="48310" end="48349" title="List of largest dams in the world" label="the largest dams in the world by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625032" start="48394" end="48419" title="List of largest reservoirs in the United States" label="the biggest of the nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="48854" end="48857" title="kilowatt hour" label="KWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="48912" end="48920" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q859686" start="48985" end="48992" title="Bighorn River" label="Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="49195" end="49233" title="run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="run-of-the-river power generation dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996543" start="49721" end="49730" title="bull boat" label="bull boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q957297" start="49978" end="49999" title="Keytesville, Missouri" label="Keytesville, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q22969554" start="50196" end="50212" title="Western Engineer" label="Western Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051980" start="50233" end="50244" title="Yellowstone (steamboat)" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q474161" start="50385" end="50393" title="keelboat" label="keelboat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50622" end="50645" title="Mackinaw boat#Development" label="Missouri River mackinaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="52014" end="52030" title="Northern Pacific Railroad" label="Northern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231168" start="52654" end="52673" title="Port of Kansas City" label="Port of Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128200" start="52753" end="52761" title="wing dam" label="wing dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="54272" end="54288" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54508" end="54544" title="Missouri River Navigation Commission" label="Missouri River Navigation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965709" start="55468" end="55484" title="Gavins Point Dam" label="Gavins Point Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148600" start="55516" end="55523" title="List of dams in the Missouri River watershed" label="fifteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q489255" start="55557" end="55573" title="Sioux City, Iowa" label="Sioux City, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="55677" end="55686" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="55720" end="55737" title="hydroelectric dam" label="hydroelectric dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="55742" end="55747" title="lock (water transport)" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128200" start="55773" end="55781" title="wing dam" label="wing dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16518" start="55795" end="55800" title="barge" label="barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="55930" end="55958" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128200" start="57724" end="57732" title="wing dam" label="wing dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="57739" end="57745" title="Jetty" label="jettie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626679" start="57847" end="57864" title="List of locks and dams of the Upper Mississippi River" label="29 locks and dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="58328" end="58341" title="riparian zone" label="riparian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768656" start="58364" end="58374" title="Hibiscus tiliaceus" label="cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="58377" end="58383" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q163025" start="58389" end="58397" title="Platanus" label="sycamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="58442" end="58447" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="58452" end="58455" title="Fraxinus" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="58822" end="58832" title="endangered species" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q921461" start="58845" end="58860" title="pallid sturgeon" label="pallid sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17700" start="58961" end="58965" title="mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="58991" end="58998" title="muskrat" label="muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="59005" end="59012" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="59020" end="59046" title="World Wide Fund For Nature" label="World Wide Fund For Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="59106" end="59115" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504320" start="59328" end="59340" title="shrub-steppe" label="shrub-steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="59388" end="59395" title="Ice age" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="59396" end="59406" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="59428" end="59443" title="endemic species" label="endemic species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="60195" end="60203" title="crayfish" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="60857" end="60867" title="Fertilizer" label="Fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="61075" end="61083" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236263" start="61142" end="61166" title="Gulf of Mexico dead zone" label="Gulf of Mexico dead zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="61797" end="61827" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="62650" end="62675" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="63286" end="63324" title="National Wild and Scenic Rivers System" label="National Wild and Scenic Rivers System"/>
<link wikidata="Q285655" start="63330" end="63341" title="Fort Benton, Montana" label="Fort Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14655637" start="63345" end="63360" title="Fred Robinson Bridge" label="Robinson Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965709" start="63362" end="63378" title="Gavins Point Dam" label="Gavins Point Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227576" start="63382" end="63398" title="Ponca State Park" label="Ponca State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279914" start="63403" end="63419" title="Fort Randall Dam" label="Fort Randall Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334123" start="63423" end="63443" title="Lewis and Clark Lake" label="Lewis and Clark Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123048" start="64268" end="64307" title="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail" label="Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q185601" start="64461" end="64481" title="Wood River, Illinois" label="Wood River, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="64499" end="64514" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485441" start="64799" end="64849" title="Knife River Indian Villages National Historic Site" label="Knife River Indian Villages National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q772673" start="64937" end="64973" title="Missouri National Recreational River" label="Missouri National Recreational River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790911" start="65144" end="65151" title="Riffle-pool sequence" label="riffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909080" start="65153" end="65158" title="Snag (ecology)" label="snags"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="65558" end="65588" title="National Wild and Scenic River" label="National Wild and Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499751" start="65615" end="65654" title="Upper Missouri Breaks National Monument" label="Upper Missouri Breaks National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492006" start="66021" end="66035" title="Fort Peck Lake" label="Fort Peck Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080495" start="66050" end="66093" title="Charles M. Russell National Wildlife Refuge" label="Charles M. Russell National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="66398" end="66419" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q777183" start="66421" end="66449" title="Rocky Mountain National Park" label="Rocky Mountain National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="66451" end="66476" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q306216" start="66481" end="66503" title="Badlands National Park" label="Badlands National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704989" start="66648" end="66678" title="Niobrara National Scenic River" label="Niobrara National Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="66820" end="66846" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939190" start="66863" end="66890" title="Missouri Headwaters State Park" label="Three Forks of the Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q285655" start="66892" end="66912" title="Fort Benton, Montana" label="Fort Benton, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905817" start="66914" end="66938" title="Big Hidatsa Village Site" label="Big Hidatsa Village Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748471" start="66940" end="66963" title="Fort Atkinson (Nebraska)" label="Fort Atkinson, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796131" start="66968" end="66996" title="Arrow Rock Historic District" label="Arrow Rock Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676514" start="67020" end="67051" title="Across the Wide Missouri (book)" label="Across the Wide Missouri (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461758" start="67060" end="67104" title="List of tributaries of the Mississippi River" label="List of tributaries of the Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626728" start="67107" end="67160" title="List of longest main-stem rivers in the United States" label="List of longest main-stem rivers in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614751" start="67163" end="67202" title="List of crossings of the Missouri River" label="List of crossings of the Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634350" start="67205" end="67254" title="List of populated places along the Missouri River" label="List of populated places along the Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q772673" start="67257" end="67293" title="Missouri National Recreational River" label="Missouri National Recreational River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="67296" end="67324" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904333" start="67327" end="67352" title="Montana Stream Access Law" label="Montana Stream Access Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904352" start="67355" end="67385" title="Montana Wilderness Association" label="Montana Wilderness Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q238960" start="67388" end="67397" title="Sacagawea" label="Sacagawea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512484" start="67400" end="67423" title="Arabia Steamboat Museum" label="Arabia Steamboat Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241249" start="67426" end="67444" title="Container on barge" label="Container on barge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19593" wikidata="Q1939219" url="?curid=19593" title="Missouria">
<text>The Missouria or Missouri (in their own language, Niúachi, also spelled Niutachi) are a Native American tribe that originated in the Great Lakes region of what is now the United States before European contact. The tribe belongs to the Chiwere division of the Siouan language family, together with the Ho-Chunk, Winnebago, Iowa, and Otoe.

Throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, the tribe lived in bands near the mouth of the Grand River and Missouri rivers at its confluence with the Missouri River, the mouth of the Missouri at its confluence with the Mississippi River, and in present-day Saline County, Missouri. Since Indian removal, they live primarily in Oklahoma. They are federally recognized as the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians, headquartered in Red Rock, Oklahoma.

==Name==
French colonists adapted a form of the Illinois language-name for the people: &quot;Wimihsoorita&quot;, which translates as &quot;One who has dugout canoes&quot;. In their own Siouan language, the Missouri call themselves &quot;Niúachi&quot;, also spelled &quot;Niutachi&quot;, meaning &quot;People of the River Mouth.&quot; The Osage called them the &quot;Waçux¢a,&quot; and the Quapaw called them the Wa-ju&#x27;-xd¢ǎ.

The state of Missouri and the Missouri River are named for the tribe.

==History==
=== 16th century ===

The tribe&#x27;s oral history tells that they once lived north of the Great Lakes, where they were part of a larger tribe that included the Ho-Chunk, Iowa, and Otoe. They began migrating south in the 16th century.

=== 17th century ===
The beginning of the 17th century, the Missouria lived near the confluence of the Grand and Missouri rivers, where they settled through the 18th century. Later, their oral history says that they split from the Otoe tribe, which belongs to the same Chiwere branch of the Siouan language, because of a love affair between the children of two tribal chiefs.

The 17th century brought hardships to the Missouria. The Sauk and Fox frequently attacked them. Their society was even more disrupted by the high fatalities from epidemics of smallpox and other Eurasian infectious diseases that accompanied contact with Europeans. The French explorer Jacques Marquette contacted the tribe in 1673 and paved the way for trade with the French.

=== 18th century ===

The Missouria migrated west of the Missouri River into Osage territory. During this time, they acquired horses and hunted bison. The French explorer Étienne de Veniard, Sieur de Bourgmont visited the people in the early 1720s. He married the daughter of a Missouria chief. They settled nearby, and Veniard created alliances with the people. He built Fort Orleans in 1723 as a trading post near present-day Brunswick, Missouri. It was occupied until 1726.

In 1730, an attack by the Sauk/Fox tribe nearly destroyed the Missouria, killing hundreds. Most survivors reunited with the Otoe, while some joined the Osage and Kansa. After a smallpox outbreak in 1829, fewer than 100 Missouria survived, and they all joined the Otoe.

=== 19th century ===
They signed treaties with the US government in 1830 and 1854 to cede their lands in Missouri. They relocated to the Otoe-Missouria reservation, created on the Big Blue River at the Kansas-Nebraska border. The US pressured the two tribes into ceding more lands in 1876 and 1881.

In 1880, the tribes split into two factions, the Coyote, who were traditionalists, and the Quakers, who were assimilationists. The Coyote settled on the Iowa Reservation in Indian Territory. The Quakers negotiated a small separate reservation in Indian Territory. By 1890, most of the Coyote band rejoined the Quakers on their reservation. 

=== 20th century ===
Under the Dawes Act, by 1907 members of the tribes were registered and allotted individual plots of land per household. The U.S. declared any excess communal land of the tribe as &quot;surplus&quot; and sold it to European-American settlers. The tribe merged with the Otoe tribe.

The Curtis Act disbanded tribal courts and governmental institutions to assimilate Native people into mainstream American society and prepare Indian Territory for statehood, but the tribe created their own court system in 1900. The Missouria were primarily farmers in the early 20th century. After oil was discovered on their lands in 1912, the U.S. government forced many of the tribe off their allotments.

=== 21st century ===
Today, Missouri are part of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians. They hold the Otoe-Missouria encampment each July and host social dances and ceremonies at the Otoe-Missouria Cultural Center in Red Rock, Oklahoma.

==Population==
According to the ethnographer James Mooney, the population of the tribe was about 200 families in 1702; 1000 people in 1780; 300 in 1805; 80 in 1829, when they were living with the Otoe; and 13 in 1910. Since then, their population numbers are combined with those of the Otoe.

==Notes==
==References==
* Pritzer, Barry M. &quot;A Native American Encyclopedia: History, Culture, and Peoples&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. 

==External links==

* History of Missouri Indian Tribes, Access Genealogy, extracts for Missouria from John R. Swanton, &quot;The Indian Tribes of North America,&quot; Bureau of American Ethnology, &quot;Bulletin 145,&quot; Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1953.
* Otoe-Missouria Genealogy
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1939219" start="4" end="13" title="Missouria" label="Missouria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939219" start="17" end="25" title="Missouria" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939219" start="50" end="57" title="Missouria" label="Niúachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939219" start="72" end="80" title="Missouria" label="Niutachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="88" end="103" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="133" end="144" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56737" start="235" end="242" title="Chiwere" label="Chiwere"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="259" end="265" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="301" end="309" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Ho-Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="311" end="320" title="Winnebago people" label="Winnebago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517496" start="322" end="326" title="Iowa people" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790907" start="332" end="336" title="Otoe" label="Otoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595036" start="426" end="437" title="Grand River (Missouri)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="485" end="499" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="554" end="571" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q489793" start="592" end="615" title="Saline County, Missouri" label="Saline County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="623" end="637" title="Indian removal" label="Indian removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="662" end="670" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="681" end="701" title="federally recognized" label="federally recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108926" start="709" end="740" title="Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians" label="Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277362" start="759" end="777" title="Red Rock, Oklahoma" label="Red Rock, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q56523" start="828" end="845" title="Illinois language" label="Illinois language"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="1118" end="1123" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268882" start="1169" end="1175" title="Quapaw" label="Quapaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="1333" end="1345" title="oral tradition" label="oral history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="1386" end="1397" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="1456" end="1464" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Ho-Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517496" start="1466" end="1470" title="Iowa people" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790907" start="1476" end="1480" title="Otoe" label="Otoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595036" start="1634" end="1639" title="Grand River (Missouri)" label="Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="1644" end="1652" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="1965" end="1969" title="Sauk people" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="1974" end="1977" title="Fox (tribe)" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2083" end="2091" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2111" end="2129" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="2192" end="2209" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="2361" end="2366" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="2428" end="2433" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q535424" start="2455" end="2493" title="Étienne de Veniard, Sieur de Bourgmont" label="Étienne de Veniard, Sieur de Bourgmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077971" start="2656" end="2668" title="Fort Orleans" label="Fort Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q958967" start="2712" end="2731" title="Brunswick, Missouri" label="Brunswick, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="2924" end="2929" title="Kaw (tribe)" label="Kansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905162" start="3212" end="3226" title="Big Blue River (Kansas)" label="Big Blue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242854" start="3441" end="3457" title="Americanization (of Native Americans)" label="assimilationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="3505" end="3521" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="3705" end="3714" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007791" start="3980" end="3990" title="Curtis Act" label="Curtis Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="4666" end="4678" title="James Mooney" label="James Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790907" start="4817" end="4821" title="Otoe tribe" label="Otoe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19594" wikidata="Q974850" url="?curid=19594" title="Missile">
<text>A missile is an airborne ranged weapon capable of self-propelled flight aided usually by a propellant, jet engine or rocket motor.

Historically, &#x27;missile&#x27; referred to any projectile that is thrown, shot or propelled towards a target; this usage is still recognized today with any unguided jet- or rocket-propelled weapons generally described as rocket artillery. Airborne explosive devices without propulsion are referred to as shells if fired by an artillery piece and bombs if dropped by an aircraft.

Missiles are also generally guided towards specific targets termed as guided missiles or guided rockets. Missile systems usually have five system components: targeting, guidance system, flight system, engine, and warhead. Missiles are primarily classified into different types based on firing source and target such as surface-to-surface, air-to-surface, surface-to-air and air-to-air missiles.

== History ==

Rockets were the precursor to modern missiles and the first rockets were used as propulsion systems for arrows as early as the 10th century in China. Usage of rockets as weapons before modern rocketry is attested to in China, Korea, India and Europe. In the 18th century, iron-cased rockets were used in India by the Kingdom of Mysore and Maratha Empire against the British which was developed into Congreve rocket and used in the Napoleonic Wars.

In the early 20th century, American Robert Goddard and German Hermann Oberth developed early rockets propelled by jet engines. In the 1920s, Soviet Union developed solid fuel rockets at the Gas Dynamics Laboratory. Later, the first missiles to be used operationally were a series of rocket based missiles developed by Nazi Germany during World War II including the V-1 flying bomb and V-2 rocket which used mechanical autopilot to keep the missile flying along a pre-chosen route. Less well known were a series of anti-ship and anti-aircraft missiles, typically based on a simple radio control (command guidance) system directed by the operator. However, these early systems in World War II were only built in small numbers. After World War II, the advent of the Cold War and development of nuclear weapons necessitated faster, more accurate and more versatile missiles with longer range and missile development was pursued by multiple countries.
=== Proliferation restrictions ===
Various attempts have been made to control the spread of long range missiles capable of carrying weapons of mass destruction, such as the Missile Technology Control Regime (1987) and the International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (2002). These were voluntary and not international treaties. Though not legally binding, more than 140 countries have been part of these agreements, and provide prior information on missile programs, expected launches, and tests. The gradual introduction of missile launched hypersonic glide vehicles since 2019, anti-satellite missiles, and the deployment of dual use missiles capable of carrying both conventional and nuclear warheads are proliferation concerns.

==Components==
===Guidance, targeting and flight systems===
A missile is most often guided by a guidance system though there are missiles that are unguided during some phases of flight. Missile guidance refers to methods of guiding a missile to its intended target. Effective guidance is important because reaching the target position accurately and precisely is a critical factor for its effectiveness. The missile guidance system accomplishes this by four steps: tracking the target, computing the directions using tracking information, directing the computed inputs to steering control and steering the missile by directing inputs to motors or flight control surfaces. The guidance system consists of three sections: launch, mid-course and terminal with same or different systems employed across sections.
The guidance and homing systems are generally classified broadly into active, semi-active and passive. In active homing systems, the missile carries the equipment needed to transmit the radiation needed to illuminate the target and receive the reflected energy. Once the homing is initiated, the missile directs independently towards the target. In semi-active systems, the source of the radiation is located outside the missile usually in the launch vehicle which might be an aircraft or a ship and the missile will receive the radiation to direct towards the target. As the source is located outside, the launch vehicle needs to continue supporting the missile till it is guided to the intended target. In a passive system, the missile relies solely on the information from the target. The homing system might use light such as infrared, laser or visible light, radio waves or other electromagnetic radiation to illuminate the target. Once the guidance system identifies the target, the target might required to be tracked continuously if it is in motion. A guidance system might use INS which consists of a gyroscope and accelerometer or might use satellite guidance (such as GPS) to track the missile’s position relative to a known target. The missile computers will compute the flight path required to steer the missile towards the target. In command guidance, a human operator may operate it manually or a support or launch system will transmit commands by using either optic fiber or radio to guide the missile. The flight system uses the data from the targeting or guidance system to maneuver the missile in flight which might be accomplished using vectored thrust of engines or aerodynamic maneuvering using flight control surfaces such as wings, fins and canards.

===Engine===
Missiles are powered by propellants igniting to produce thrust and might employ types of rocket or jet engines. Rockets might be fueled by solid-propellants which are comparatively easier to maintain and enables faster deployment. These propellants contain a fuel and oxidizer mixed in select proportions with the grain size and burn chamber determining the rate and time of burn. Larger missiles might use liquid-propellant rockets where propulsion is provided by a single or combination of liquid fuels. A hybrid system uses solid rocket fuel with a liquid oxidizer. Jet engines are generally used in cruise missiles, most commonly of the turbojet type, because of their relative simplicity and low frontal area while turbofans and ramjets can also be theoretically used. Long-range missiles have multiple engine stages and might use similar type or a mix of engine types. Some missiles may have additional propulsion from another source at launch such as a catapult, cannon or tank gun.

===Warhead===
Missiles have one or more explosive warheads, although other weapon types may also be used. The warheads of a missile provide its primary destructive power which might cause secondary destruction due to the kinetic energy of the weapon and unused fuel. Warheads are most commonly of the high explosive type, often employing shaped charges to exploit the accuracy of a guided weapon to destroy hardened targets. Warhead might carry conventional, incendiary, nuclear, chemical, biological or radiological weapons.

==Classification==

Missiles can be classified into categories by various parameters such as type, launch platform and target, range, propulsion and guidance system. Missiles are generally categorized into strategic or tactical missile systems. Tactical missile systems are short-range systems used to carry out a limited strike in a smaller area and might carry conventional or nuclear warheads. Strategic missiles are long-range weapons used to target beyond the immediate vicinity and are mostly designed to carry nuclear warheads though other warheads can also be fitted.
===Strategic===
Strategic weapons are often classified into cruise and ballistic missiles. Ballistic missiles are powered by rockets during launch and follow a trajectory that arches upwards before descending to reach its intended target while cruise missiles are continuously powered by jet engines and travel at a flatter trajectory.

====Ballistic====
A ballistic missile is powered by single or multiple rockets in stages initially before following an unpowered trajectory that arches upwards before descending to reach its intended target. It can carry both nuclear and conventional warheads. A ballistic missile might reach supersonic or hypersonic speed and often travel out of the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere before re-entry. It usually has three stages of flight:
*Boost phase: First phase at launch when one or more stages of rocket engine(s) fire propelling the missile
*Mid-course phase: Second phase when the rocket engines stop firing and the missile continues ascending upwards on the given trajectory
*Terminal phase: Final phase when the warhead(s) detach and descend towards the target

Ballistic missiles are categorized based on range as:
*Short-range : less than 
*Medium-range : to 
*Intermediate-range : to 
*Inter-continental : greater than 

====Cruise====
A cruise missile is a guided missile that remains in the atmosphere and flies the major portion of its flight at a constant speed. It is designed to deliver a large warhead over long distances with high precision and are propelled by jet engines. A cruise missile can be launched from multiple platforms and is often self-guided. It flies at lower speeds (often subsonic or supersonic) and close to the surface of the Earth, which expends more fuel but makes it difficult to detect.

===Tactical===
Missiles might be also be classified basis launch platform and target into surface-to-air, surface-to-surface, air-to-air, air-to-surface, anti-ship and anti-tank.

====Anti-ship====

An anti-ship missile (AShM) is designed for use against large boats and ships such as destroyers and aircraft carriers. Most anti-ship missiles are of the sea skimming variety, and many use a combination of inertial guidance and active radar homing. A large number of other anti-ship missiles use infrared homing to follow the heat that is emitted by a ship; it is also possible for anti-ship missiles to be guided by radio command all the way. Many anti-ship missiles can be launched from a variety of weapons systems including surface warships, submarines, fighter aircraft, maritime patrol aircraft, helicopters, shore batteries, land vehicles and by infantry.

Anti-submarine missile is a standoff anti-submarine weapon variant of anti-ship missiles used to deliver an explosive warhead aimed directly at a submarine, a depth charge, or a homing torpedo.

====Anti-tank====

An anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) is a guided missile primarily designed to hit and destroy heavily armored military vehicles. ATGMs range in size from shoulder-launched weapons, which can be transported by a single soldier, to larger tripod-mounted or vehicle and aircraft mounted missile systems. Earlier man-portable anti-tank weapons like anti-tank rifles and magnetic anti-tank mines had a short range but sophisticated antitank missiles can be directed to a longer target by several different guidance systems, including laser guiding, television camera, or wire guiding.

====Air-to-air====

An air-to-air missile (AAM) is a missile fired from a fighter aircraft for the purpose of destroying another aircraft. AAMs are typically powered by one or more rocket motors, usually solid fueled but sometimes liquid fueled. A radar or heat emission based homing system is generally used and sometimes can use a combination. Short range missiles used to engage opposing aircraft at ranges of less than 16 km often use infrared guidance while long range missiles mostly rely upon radar guidance.

====Air-to-surface====

An air-to-surface missile (ASM) is a missile fired from an attack aircraft, strike fighter or an attack helicopter for the purpose of destroying land based targets. Missiles are typically guided and unguided glide bombs not considered missiles. The most common propulsion systems are rocket motor for short range and jet engines for long-range but ramjets are also used. Missile guidance is typically via laser, infrared homing, optical or satellite. Air-to-surface missiles for ground attack by aircraft provide a higher standoff distance engaging targets from far away and out of range of low range air defenses.

====Surface-to-air====

A surface-to-air missile (SAM) is a missile designed to be launched from the ground to destroy aircraft, other missiles or flying objects. It is a type of anti-aircraft system and missiles have replaced most other forms of anti-aircraft weapons due to the increased range and accuracy. Anti-aircraft guns are being used only for specialized close-in firing roles. Missiles can be mounted in clusters on vehicles or towed on trailers and can be hand operated by infantry. SAMs frequently use solid-propellants and may be guided by radar or infrared sensors or by a human operator using optical tracking.

====Surface-to-surface====

A surface-to-surface missile (SSM) is a missile designed to be launched from the ground or the sea and strike targets on land. They may be fired from hand-held or vehicle mounted devices, from fixed installations or from a ship. They are often powered by a rocket engine or sometimes fired by an explosive charge, since the launching platform is typically stationary or moving slowly. They usually have fins and/or wings for lift and stability, although hyper-velocity or short-ranged missiles may use body lift or fly a ballistic trajectory. Most anti-tank and anti-ship missiles are part of surface-to-surface missile systems.

====Anti-satellite====

An anti-satellite weapon (ASAT) is a space weapon designed to incapacitate or destroy satellites for strategic or tactical purposes. Although no ASAT system has been utilized in warfare, a few countries have successfully shot down their own satellites to demonstrate their ASAT capabilities in a show of force. ASATs have also been used to remove decommissioned satellites. ASAT roles include defensive measures against an adversary&#x27;s space-based and nuclear weapons, a force multiplier for a nuclear first strike, a countermeasure against an adversary&#x27;s anti-ballistic missile defense (ABM), an asymmetric counter to a technologically superior adversary, and a counter-value weapon.

==See also==
* Vertical launching system

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="2" end="9" title="Missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583685" start="50" end="64" title="Propulsion" label="self-propelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="91" end="101" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="103" end="113" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="117" end="129" title="rocket motor" label="rocket motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="182" end="192" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="356" end="372" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054261" start="383" end="399" title="explosive device" label="explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="439" end="445" title="shell (projectile)" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="461" end="476" title="artillery piece" label="artillery piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137468" start="481" end="486" title="Aerial bomb" label="bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335090" start="543" end="549" title="missile guidance" label="guided"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="585" end="600" title="guided missiles" label="guided missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037215" start="611" end="618" title="Rocket (weapon)" label="rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685924" start="673" end="682" title="targeting (warfare)" label="targeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707071" start="684" end="699" title="guidance system" label="guidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="716" end="722" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="728" end="735" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143706" start="834" end="852" title="surface-to-surface missile" label="surface-to-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049158" start="854" end="868" title="air-to-surface missile" label="air-to-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="870" end="884" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="889" end="907" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037215" start="926" end="933" title="Rocket (weapon)" label="Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="1030" end="1035" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="1069" end="1074" title="Imperial China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="1152" end="1157" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="1159" end="1164" title="Indian subcontinent" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1169" end="1175" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948727" start="1198" end="1216" title="Mysorean rockets" label="iron-cased rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="1243" end="1260" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Kingdom of Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="1265" end="1279" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1292" end="1299" title="British East India Company" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344031" start="1325" end="1340" title="Congreve rocket" label="Congreve rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1357" end="1372" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="1402" end="1410" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q182546" start="1411" end="1425" title="Robert Goddard (scientist)" label="Robert Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="1430" end="1436" title="German people" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q78503" start="1437" end="1451" title="Hermann Oberth" label="Hermann Oberth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1516" end="1528" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214453" start="1565" end="1588" title="Gas Dynamics Laboratory" label="Gas Dynamics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571836" start="1671" end="1679" title="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany" label="missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1693" end="1705" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1713" end="1725" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="1740" end="1755" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="1760" end="1770" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="1793" end="1802" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="1889" end="1898" title="Anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="1903" end="1916" title="Surface-to-air missile" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="1955" end="1968" title="radio control" label="radio control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052449" start="1970" end="1986" title="command guidance" label="command guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2138" end="2146" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2166" end="2181" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="2454" end="2481" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072120" start="2495" end="2528" title="Missile Technology Control Regime" label="Missile Technology Control Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566329" start="2544" end="2613" title="International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation" label="International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="2651" end="2673" title="international treaties" label="international treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q115734744" start="2889" end="2914" title="hypersonic glide vehicles" label="hypersonic glide vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="2927" end="2950" title="anti-satellite missiles" label="anti-satellite missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335090" start="3906" end="3912" title="Homing (missile guidance)" label="homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="3959" end="3965" title="Active radar homing" label="active"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187984" start="3967" end="3978" title="Semi-active radar homing" label="semi-active"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="3983" end="3990" title="Passive radar homing" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q868511" start="4193" end="4214" title="fire-and-forget" label="directs independently"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4705" end="4710" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="4719" end="4727" title="infrared homing" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072206" start="4729" end="4734" title="laser guidance" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="4738" end="4751" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261893" start="4753" end="4763" title="radar guidance" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="4774" end="4799" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="4975" end="4978" title="Inertial navigation system" label="INS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="4999" end="5008" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="5013" end="5026" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494477" start="5040" end="5058" title="satellite guidance" label="satellite guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="5068" end="5071" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052449" start="5237" end="5253" title="command guidance" label="command guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="5365" end="5376" title="optic fiber" label="optic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="5380" end="5385" title="radio-control" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q743135" start="5546" end="5561" title="thrust vectoring" label="vectored thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="5606" end="5628" title="flight control surface" label="flight control surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="5638" end="5643" title="airplane wing" label="wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q826939" start="5654" end="5661" title="canard (aeronautics)" label="canards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="5701" end="5712" title="propellants" label="propellants"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="5766" end="5772" title="rocket engine" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="5776" end="5786" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="5816" end="5832" title="solid-propellant rocket" label="solid-propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="5936" end="5940" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="5945" end="5953" title="oxidizer" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="6084" end="6108" title="liquid-propellant rocket" label="liquid-propellant rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="6280" end="6294" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="6318" end="6326" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="6397" end="6405" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60602" start="6411" end="6417" title="ramjet" label="ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="6637" end="6645" title="catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="6647" end="6653" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="6657" end="6665" title="tank gun" label="tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="6708" end="6717" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="6718" end="6725" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q113427895" start="6889" end="6903" title="kinetic energy weapon" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="6969" end="6983" title="high explosive" label="high explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="7006" end="7019" title="shaped charge" label="shaped charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717447" start="7113" end="7125" title="conventional weapons" label="conventional"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="7127" end="7137" title="incendiary device" label="incendiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="7139" end="7146" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="7148" end="7156" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="7158" end="7168" title="biological weapon" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512464" start="7172" end="7191" title="radiological weapon" label="radiological weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="7831" end="7837" title="cruise missile" label="cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="7842" end="7859" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="8401" end="8411" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="8415" end="8425" title="hypersonic" label="hypersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170332" start="8449" end="8455" title="exoatmospheric" label="out of"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="8460" end="8483" title="atmosphere of earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q400704" start="8927" end="8938" title="short range missile" label="Short-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q369330" start="8953" end="8965" title="medium range ballistic missile" label="Medium-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q392893" start="8973" end="8991" title="intermediate range ballistic missile" label="Intermediate-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="8999" end="9016" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="Inter-continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="9051" end="9065" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="9411" end="9419" title="Subsonic flight" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="9423" end="9433" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="9623" end="9637" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143706" start="9639" end="9657" title="surface-to-surface missile" label="surface-to-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="9659" end="9669" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049158" start="9671" end="9685" title="air-to-surface missile" label="air-to-surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="9687" end="9696" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="9701" end="9710" title="anti tank missile" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q35872" start="9794" end="9799" title="boats" label="boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="9804" end="9809" title="ships" label="ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="9818" end="9827" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="9833" end="9849" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272142" start="9887" end="9899" title="sea skimming" label="sea skimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="9939" end="9956" title="inertial navigation system" label="inertial guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133809" start="9961" end="9980" title="active radar homing" label="active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="10029" end="10044" title="infrared homing" label="infrared homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914532" start="10261" end="10276" title="Surface combatant" label="surface warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="10279" end="10288" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="10291" end="10307" title="fighter plane" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="10309" end="10333" title="maritime patrol aircraft" label="maritime patrol aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543102" start="10335" end="10346" title="Military helicopter" label="helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="10348" end="10363" title="shore battery" label="shore batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="10386" end="10394" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995808" start="10397" end="10419" title="Anti-submarine missile" label="Anti-submarine missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598659" start="10425" end="10433" title="standoff missile" label="standoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490799" start="10434" end="10455" title="anti-submarine weapon" label="anti-submarine weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="10505" end="10514" title="explosive material" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="10543" end="10552" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="10556" end="10568" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="10575" end="10589" title="homing torpedo" label="homing torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="10704" end="10719" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="heavily armored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184840" start="10720" end="10736" title="military vehicle" label="military vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918770" start="10764" end="10781" title="Shoulder-fired missile" label="shoulder-launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="10932" end="10949" title="anti-tank warfare" label="anti-tank weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131614" start="10955" end="10970" title="anti-tank rifle" label="anti-tank rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q828414" start="10985" end="10999" title="anti-tank mine" label="anti-tank mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273310" start="11176" end="11188" title="Wire-guided missile" label="wire guiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="11265" end="11281" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="11372" end="11384" title="rocket motor" label="rocket motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="11395" end="11407" title="solid-fuel rocket" label="solid fueled"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="11422" end="11435" title="liquid-fuel rocket" label="liquid fueled"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="11439" end="11444" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="11448" end="11461" title="Infrared homing" label="heat emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="11566" end="11590" title="dogfight" label="engage opposing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q853311" start="11654" end="11664" title="beyond-visual-range missile" label="long range"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="11791" end="11806" title="attack aircraft" label="attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623805" start="11808" end="11822" title="strike fighter" label="strike fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q753058" start="11829" end="11846" title="attack helicopter" label="attack helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="11940" end="11950" title="glide bomb" label="glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q60602" start="12080" end="12086" title="ramjet" label="ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072206" start="12137" end="12142" title="laser guidance" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707071" start="12161" end="12168" title="optical guidance" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494477" start="12172" end="12181" title="satellite guidance" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598660" start="12254" end="12271" title="standoff distance" label="standoff distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="12467" end="12475" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="12527" end="12547" title="antiaircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft system"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="12658" end="12675" title="Anti-aircraft gun" label="Anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="13429" end="13433" title="lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q392212" start="13695" end="13707" title="space weapon" label="space weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="13744" end="13753" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="13759" end="13768" title="strategic military" label="strategic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="13772" end="13780" title="Military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="13836" end="13843" title="warfare" label="warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280140" start="13954" end="13967" title="show of force" label="show of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467476" start="14133" end="14149" title="force multiplier" label="force multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208337" start="14164" end="14176" title="Pre-emptive nuclear strike" label="first strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774325" start="14223" end="14253" title="Anti-ballistic missile defense countermeasure" label="anti-ballistic missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="14264" end="14274" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177048" start="14330" end="14343" title="countervalue" label="counter-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140509" start="14368" end="14393" title="Vertical launching system" label="Vertical launching system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19595" wikidata="Q185055" url="?curid=19595" title="Mendelian inheritance">
<text>Mendelian inheritance (also known as Mendelism) is a type of biological inheritance following the principles originally proposed by Gregor Mendel in 1865 and 1866, re-discovered in 1900 by Hugo de Vries and Carl Correns, and later popularized by William Bateson. These principles were initially controversial. When Mendel&#x27;s theories were integrated with the Boveri–Sutton chromosome theory of inheritance by Thomas Hunt Morgan in 1915, they became the core of classical genetics. Ronald Fisher combined these ideas with the theory of natural selection in his 1930 book &quot;The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection&quot;, putting evolution onto a mathematical footing and forming the basis for population genetics within the modern evolutionary synthesis.

==History==
The principles of Mendelian inheritance were named for and first derived by Gregor Johann Mendel, a nineteenth-century Moravian monk who formulated his ideas after conducting simple hybridization experiments with pea plants &quot;(Pisum sativum)&quot; he had planted in the garden of his monastery. Between 1856 and 1863, Mendel cultivated and tested some 5,000 pea plants. From these experiments, he induced two generalizations which later became known as &quot;Mendel&#x27;s Principles of Heredity&quot; or &quot;Mendelian inheritance&quot;. He described his experiments in a two-part paper, &quot;Versuche über Pflanzen-Hybriden&quot; (&quot;Experiments on Plant Hybridization&quot;), that he presented to the Natural History Society of Brno on 8 February and 8 March 1865, and which was published in 1866.

Mendel&#x27;s results were at first largely ignored. Although they were not completely unknown to biologists of the time, they were not seen as generally applicable, even by Mendel himself, who thought they only applied to certain categories of species or traits. A major roadblock to understanding their significance was the importance attached by 19th-century biologists to the apparent blending of many inherited traits in the overall appearance of the progeny, now known to be due to multi-gene interactions, in contrast to the organ-specific binary characters studied by Mendel. In 1900, however, his work was &quot;re-discovered&quot; by three European scientists, Hugo de Vries, Carl Correns, and Erich von Tschermak. The exact nature of the &quot;re-discovery&quot; has been debated: De Vries published first on the subject, mentioning Mendel in a footnote, while Correns pointed out Mendel&#x27;s priority after having read De Vries&#x27; paper and realizing that he himself did not have priority. De Vries may not have acknowledged truthfully how much of his knowledge of the laws came from his own work and how much came only after reading Mendel&#x27;s paper. Later scholars have accused Von Tschermak of not truly understanding the results at all.

Regardless, the &quot;re-discovery&quot; made Mendelism an important but controversial theory. Its most vigorous promoter in Europe was William Bateson, who coined the terms &quot;genetics&quot; and &quot;allele&quot; to describe many of its tenets. The model of heredity was contested by other biologists because it implied that heredity was discontinuous, in opposition to the apparently continuous variation observable for many traits. Many biologists also dismissed the theory because they were not sure it would apply to all species. However, later work by biologists and statisticians such as Ronald Fisher showed that if multiple Mendelian factors were involved in the expression of an individual trait, they could produce the diverse results observed, thus demonstrating that Mendelian genetics is compatible with natural selection. Thomas Hunt Morgan and his assistants later integrated Mendel&#x27;s theoretical model with the chromosome theory of inheritance, in which the chromosomes of cells were thought to hold the actual hereditary material, and created what is now known as classical genetics, a highly successful foundation which eventually cemented Mendel&#x27;s place in history.

Mendel&#x27;s findings allowed scientists such as Fisher and J.B.S. Haldane to predict the expression of traits on the basis of mathematical probabilities. An important aspect of Mendel&#x27;s success can be traced to his decision to start his crosses only with plants he demonstrated were true-breeding. He only measured discrete (binary) characteristics, such as color, shape, and position of the seeds, rather than quantitatively variable characteristics. He expressed his results numerically and subjected them to statistical analysis. His method of data analysis and his large sample size gave credibility to his data. He had the foresight to follow several successive generations (P, F1, F2, F3) of pea plants and record their variations. Finally, he performed &quot;test crosses&quot; (backcrossing descendants of the initial hybridization to the initial true-breeding lines) to reveal the presence and proportions of recessive characters.

== Inheritance tools ==

=== Punnett Squares ===
Punnett Squares are a well known genetics tool that was created by an English geneticist, Reginald Punnett, which can visually demonstrate all the possible genotypes that an offspring can receive, given the genotypes of their parents. Each parent carries two alleles, which can be shown on the top and the side of the chart, and each contribute one of them towards reproduction at a time. Each of the squares in the middle demonstrates the number of times each pairing of parental alleles could combine to make potential offspring. Using probabilities, one can then determine which genotypes the parents can create, and at what frequencies they can be created.

For example, if two parents both have a heterozygous genotype, then there would be a 50% chance for their offspring to have the same genotype, and a 50% chance they would have a homozygous genotype. Since they could possibly contribute two identical alleles, the 50% would be halved to 25% to account for each type of homozygote, whether this was a homozygous dominant genotype, or a homozygous recessive genotype.

=== Pedigrees ===
Pedigrees are visual tree like representations that demonstrate exactly how alleles are being passed from past generations to future ones. They also provide a diagram displaying each individual that carries a desired allele, and exactly which side of inheritance it was received from, whether it was from their mother&#x27;s side or their father&#x27;s side. Pedigrees can also be used to aid researchers in determining the inheritance pattern for the desired allele, because they share information such as the gender of all individuals, the phenotype, a predicted genotype, the potential sources for the alleles, and also based its history, how it could continue to spread in the future generations to come. By using pedigrees, scientists have been able to find ways to control the flow of alleles over time, so that alleles that act problematic can be resolved upon discovery.

==Mendel&#x27;s genetic discoveries==
Five parts of Mendel&#x27;s discoveries were an important divergence from the common theories at the time and were the prerequisite for the establishment of his rules.

# Characters are unitary, that is, they are discrete e.g.: purple &quot;vs&quot;. white, tall &quot;vs&quot;. dwarf. There is no medium-sized plant or light purple flower.
# Genetic characteristics have alternate forms, each inherited from one of two parents. Today these are called alleles.
# One allele is dominant over the other. The phenotype reflects the dominant allele.
# Gametes are created by random segregation. Heterozygotic individuals produce gametes with an equal frequency of the two alleles.
# Different traits have independent assortment. In modern terms, genes are unlinked.

According to customary terminology, the principles of inheritance discovered by Gregor Mendel are here referred to as Mendelian laws, although today&#x27;s geneticists also speak of &quot;Mendelian rules&quot; or &quot;Mendelian principles&quot;, as there are many exceptions summarized under the collective term Non-Mendelian inheritance. The laws were initially formulated by the geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan in 1916.


Mendel selected for the experiment the following characters of pea plants:
* Form of the ripe seeds (round or roundish, surface shallow or wrinkled)
* Colour of the seed–coat (white, gray, or brown, with or without violet spotting)
* Colour of the seeds and cotyledons (yellow or green)
* Flower colour (white or violet-red)
* Form of the ripe pods (simply inflated, not contracted, or constricted between the seeds and wrinkled)
* Colour of the unripe pods (yellow or green)
* Position of the flowers (axial or terminal)
* Length of the stem 

When he crossed purebred white flower and purple flower pea plants (the parental or P generation) by artificial pollination, the resulting flower colour was not a blend. Rather than being a mix of the two, the offspring in the first generation (F1-generation) were all purple-flowered. Therefore, he called this biological trait dominant. When he allowed self-fertilization in the uniform looking F1-generation, he obtained both colours in the F2 generation with a purple flower to white flower ratio of 3 : 1. In some of the other characters also one of the traits was dominant.

He then conceived the idea of heredity units, which he called hereditary &quot;factors&quot;. Mendel found that there are alternative forms of factors—now called genes—that account for variations in inherited characteristics. For example, the gene for flower color in pea plants exists in two forms, one for purple and the other for white. The alternative &quot;forms&quot; are now called alleles. For each trait, an organism inherits two alleles, one from each parent. These alleles may be the same or different. An organism that has two identical alleles for a gene is said to be homozygous for that gene (and is called a homozygote). An organism that has two different alleles for a gene is said to be heterozygous for that gene (and is called a heterozygote).

Mendel hypothesized that allele pairs separate randomly, or segregate, from each other during the production of the gametes in the seed plant (egg cell) and the pollen plant (sperm). Because allele pairs separate during gamete production, a sperm or egg carries only one allele for each inherited trait. When sperm and egg unite at fertilization, each contributes its allele, restoring the paired condition in the offspring. Mendel also found that each pair of alleles segregates independently of the other pairs of alleles during gamete formation.

The genotype of an individual is made up of the many alleles it possesses. The phenotype is the result of the expression of all characteristics that are genetically determined by its alleles as well as by its environment. The presence of an allele does not mean that the trait will be expressed in the individual that possesses it. If the two alleles of an inherited pair differ (the heterozygous condition), then one determines the organism&#x27;s appearance and is called the dominant allele; the other has no noticeable effect on the organism&#x27;s appearance and is called the recessive allele.

==Mendel&#x27;s laws of inheritance==
===Law of Dominance and Uniformity===
If two parents are mated with each other who differ in one genetic characteristic for which they are both homozygous (each pure-bred), all offspring in the first generation (F1) are equal to the examined characteristic in genotype and phenotype showing the dominant trait. This &quot;uniformity rule&quot; or &quot;reciprocity rule&quot; applies to all individuals of the F1-generation.

The principle of dominant inheritance discovered by Mendel states that in a heterozygote the dominant allele will cause the recessive allele to be &quot;masked&quot;: that is, not expressed in the phenotype. Only if an individual is homozygous with respect to the recessive allele will the recessive trait be expressed. Therefore, a cross between a homozygous dominant and a homozygous recessive organism yields a heterozygous organism whose phenotype displays only the dominant trait.

The F1 offspring of Mendel&#x27;s pea crosses always looked like one of the two parental varieties. In this situation of &quot;complete dominance&quot;, the dominant allele had the same phenotypic effect whether present in one or two copies.

But for some characteristics, the F1 hybrids have an appearance &quot;in between&quot; the phenotypes of the two parental varieties. A cross between two four o&#x27;clock (&quot;Mirabilis jalapa&quot;) plants shows an exception to Mendel&#x27;s principle, called &quot;incomplete dominance&quot;. Flowers of heterozygous plants have a phenotype somewhere between the two homozygous genotypes. In cases of intermediate inheritance (incomplete dominance) in the F1-generation Mendel&#x27;s principle of uniformity in genotype and phenotype applies as well. Research about intermediate inheritance was done by other scientists. The first was Carl Correns with his studies about Mirabilis jalapa.

===Law of Segregation of genes===
The Law of Segregation of genes applies when two individuals, both heterozygous for a certain trait are crossed, for example, hybrids of the F1-generation. The offspring in the F2-generation differ in genotype and phenotype so that the characteristics of the grandparents (P-generation) regularly occur again. In a dominant-recessive inheritance, an average of 25% are homozygous with the dominant trait, 50% are heterozygous showing the dominant trait in the phenotype (genetic carriers), 25% are homozygous with the recessive trait and therefore express the recessive trait in the phenotype. The genotypic ratio is 1: 2 : 1, and the phenotypic ratio is 3: 1.

In the pea plant example, the capital &quot;B&quot; represents the dominant allele for purple blossom and lowercase &quot;b&quot; represents the recessive allele for white blossom. The pistil plant and the pollen plant are both F1-hybrids with genotype &quot;B b&quot;. Each has one allele for purple and one allele for white. In the offspring, in the F2-plants in the Punnett-square, three combinations are possible. The genotypic ratio is 1 &quot;BB&quot; : 2 &quot;Bb&quot; : 1 &quot;bb&quot;. But the phenotypic ratio of plants with purple blossoms to those with white blossoms is 3 : 1 due to the dominance of the allele for purple. Plants with homozygous &quot;b b&quot; are white flowered like one of the grandparents in the P-generation.

In cases of incomplete dominance the same segregation of alleles takes place in the F2-generation, but here also the phenotypes show a ratio of 1 : 2 : 1, as the heterozygous are different in phenotype from the homozygous because the genetic expression of one allele compensates the missing expression of the other allele only partially. This results in an intermediate inheritance which was later described by other scientists.

In some literature sources, the principle of segregation is cited as the &quot;first law&quot;. Nevertheless, Mendel did his crossing experiments with heterozygous plants after obtaining these hybrids by crossing two purebred plants, discovering the principle of dominance and uniformity first.

Molecular proof of segregation of genes was subsequently found through observation of meiosis by two scientists independently, the German botanist Oscar Hertwig in 1876, and the Belgian zoologist Edouard Van Beneden in 1883. Most alleles are located in chromosomes in the cell nucleus. Paternal and maternal chromosomes get separated in meiosis because during spermatogenesis the chromosomes are segregated on the four sperm cells that arise from one mother sperm cell, and during oogenesis the chromosomes are distributed between the polar bodies and the egg cell. Every individual organism contains two alleles for each trait. They segregate (separate) during meiosis such that each gamete contains only one of the alleles. When the gametes unite in the zygote the alleles—one from the mother one from the father—get passed on to the offspring. An offspring thus receives a pair of alleles for a trait by inheriting homologous chromosomes from the parent organisms: one allele for each trait from each parent. Heterozygous individuals with the dominant trait in the phenotype are genetic carriers of the recessive trait.

===Law of Independent Assortment===


The Law of Independent Assortment proposes alleles for separate traits are passed independently of one another. That is, the biological selection of an allele for one trait has nothing to do with the selection of an allele for any other trait. Mendel found support for this law in his dihybrid cross experiments. In his monohybrid crosses, an idealized 3:1 ratio between dominant and recessive phenotypes resulted. In dihybrid crosses, however, he found a 9:3:3:1 ratios. This shows that each of the two alleles is inherited independently from the other, with a 3:1 phenotypic ratio for each.

Independent assortment occurs in eukaryotic organisms during meiotic metaphase I, and produces a gamete with a mixture of the organism&#x27;s chromosomes. The physical basis of the independent assortment of chromosomes is the random orientation of each bivalent chromosome along the metaphase plate with respect to the other bivalent chromosomes. Along with crossing over, independent assortment increases genetic diversity by producing novel genetic combinations.

There are many deviations from the principle of independent assortment due to genetic linkage.

Of the 46 chromosomes in a normal diploid human cell, half are maternally derived (from the mother&#x27;s egg) and half are paternally derived (from the father&#x27;s sperm). This occurs as sexual reproduction involves the fusion of two haploid gametes (the egg and sperm) to produce a zygote and a new organism, in which every cell has two sets of chromosomes (diploid). During gametogenesis the normal complement of 46 chromosomes needs to be halved to 23 to ensure that the resulting haploid gamete can join with another haploid gamete to produce a diploid organism.

In independent assortment, the chromosomes that result are randomly sorted from all possible maternal and paternal chromosomes. Because zygotes end up with a mix instead of a pre-defined &quot;set&quot; from either parent, chromosomes are therefore considered assorted independently. As such, the zygote can end up with any combination of paternal or maternal chromosomes. For human gametes, with 23 chromosomes, the number of possibilities is 223 or 8,388,608 possible combinations. This contributes to the genetic variability of progeny. Generally, the recombination of genes has important implications for many evolutionary processes.

==Mendelian trait==
A Mendelian trait is one whose inheritance follows Mendel&#x27;s principles—namely, the trait depends only on a single locus, whose alleles are either dominant or recessive. 

Many traits are inherited in a non-Mendelian fashion.

==Non-Mendelian inheritance==

Mendel himself warned that care was needed in extrapolating his patterns to other organisms or traits. Indeed, many organisms have traits whose inheritance works differently from the principles he described; these traits are called non-Mendelian.

For example, Mendel focused on traits whose genes have only two alleles, such as &quot;A&quot; and &quot;a&quot;. However, many genes have more than two alleles. He also focused on traits determined by a single gene. But some traits, such as height, depend on many genes rather than just one. Traits dependent on multiple genes are called polygenic traits.
==See also==

* List of Mendelian traits in humans
* Simple Mendelian genetics in humans
* Mendelian diseases (monogenic disease)
* Mendelian error
* Particulate inheritance
* Punnett square

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Khan Academy, video lecture
* Probability of Inheritance
* Mendel&#x27;s principles of Inheritance
* Mendelian genetics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="0" end="21" title="Mendelian inheritance" label="Mendelian inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="37" end="46" title="Mendelian inheritance" label="Mendelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="61" end="71" title="biology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="72" end="83" title="Heredity" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="132" end="145" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160192" start="189" end="202" title="Hugo de Vries" label="Hugo de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096" start="207" end="219" title="Carl Correns" label="Carl Correns"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="246" end="261" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984080" start="363" end="394" title="Boveri–Sutton chromosome theory" label="Boveri–Sutton chromosome theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="413" end="431" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54881" start="465" end="483" title="classical genetics" label="classical genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="485" end="498" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Ronald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="539" end="556" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736096" start="580" end="621" title="The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection" label="The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="637" end="646" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="654" end="666" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="701" end="720" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="732" end="761" title="Modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern evolutionary synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="852" end="872" title="Gregor Johann Mendel" label="Gregor Johann Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q756716" start="895" end="903" title="Moravians" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="904" end="908" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="1007" end="1020" title="Pisum sativum" label="Pisum sativum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421194" start="1421" end="1455" title="Experiments on Plant Hybridization" label="Experiments on Plant Hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="1516" end="1520" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q883807" start="1967" end="1984" title="Blending inheritance" label="apparent blending"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608248" start="1988" end="2009" title="Complex traits" label="many inherited traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q853421" start="2075" end="2098" title="Quantitative trait locus" label="multi-gene interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q160192" start="2258" end="2271" title="Hugo de Vries" label="Hugo de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096" start="2273" end="2285" title="Carl Correns" label="Carl Correns"/>
<link wikidata="Q93385" start="2291" end="2310" title="Erich von Tschermak" label="Erich von Tschermak"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="2985" end="3000" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="3029" end="3037" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="3054" end="3060" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="3112" end="3120" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="3448" end="3461" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Ronald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="3671" end="3688" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="3690" end="3708" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="3786" end="3796" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="3848" end="3853" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q54881" start="3940" end="3958" title="classical genetics" label="classical genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="4111" end="4125" title="J.B.S. Haldane" label="J.B.S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320143" start="4340" end="4353" title="True-breeding organism" label="true-breeding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4568" end="4588" title="Statistics#Statistical methods" label="statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564360" start="4632" end="4643" title="sample size" label="sample size"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004691" start="4843" end="4855" title="backcrossing" label="backcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="4883" end="4896" title="Hybridization (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="4975" end="4984" title="recessive" label="recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="7513" end="7519" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q579704" start="8137" end="8162" title="Non-Mendelian inheritance" label="Non-Mendelian inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="8217" end="8235" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="8412" end="8421" title="Seed coat" label="seed–coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="8495" end="8499" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193026" start="8505" end="8514" title="cotyledon" label="cotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623823" start="8893" end="8903" title="Artificiality" label="artificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293576" start="9037" end="9050" title="F1 generation" label="F1-generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="9104" end="9120" title="trait (biology)" label="biological trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271738" start="9147" end="9165" title="self-fertilization" label="self-fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="9535" end="9539" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="9762" end="9768" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="9955" end="9965" title="homozygous" label="homozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="10078" end="10090" title="heterozygous" label="heterozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="10254" end="10261" title="gametes" label="gametes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="10281" end="10289" title="egg cell" label="egg cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="10313" end="10318" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="10379" end="10384" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="10388" end="10391" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="10470" end="10483" title="fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="10692" end="10700" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="10767" end="10776" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="10798" end="10808" title="Genetic expression" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11166" end="11181" title="Dominance (genetics)" label="dominant allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11270" end="11286" title="Dominance (genetics)" label="recessive allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="11424" end="11446" title="genetic trait" label="genetic characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="11471" end="11481" title="homozygous" label="homozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="11587" end="11595" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="11600" end="11609" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q13710" start="12661" end="12677" title="Mirabilis jalapa" label="Mirabilis jalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62096" start="13122" end="13134" title="Carl Correns" label="Carl Correns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425030" start="13682" end="13697" title="genetic carrier" label="genetic carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="13759" end="13766" title="Gene expression" label="express"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="14058" end="14064" title="Gynoecium" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="14079" end="14085" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="14632" end="14652" title="incomplete dominance" label="incomplete dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="14854" end="14872" title="Expression of genes" label="genetic expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="15432" end="15439" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68753" start="15493" end="15506" title="Oscar Hertwig" label="Oscar Hertwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q55015815" start="15542" end="15561" title="Edouard Van Beneden" label="Edouard Van Beneden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="15599" end="15610" title="chromosomes" label="chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="15618" end="15630" title="cell nucleus" label="cell nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36961" start="15706" end="15721" title="spermatogenesis" label="spermatogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q507032" start="15827" end="15836" title="oogenesis" label="oogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890716" start="15881" end="15893" title="Polar body" label="polar bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="15902" end="15910" title="egg cell" label="egg cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="16031" end="16037" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="16102" end="16108" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="16264" end="16285" title="homologous chromosome" label="homologous chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425030" start="16428" end="16443" title="genetic carrier" label="genetic carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="17135" end="17145" title="eukaryotic" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="17460" end="17473" title="chromosomal crossover" label="crossing over"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="17646" end="17661" title="genetic linkage" label="genetic linkage"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="17698" end="17705" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="17770" end="17773" title="ovum" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="17831" end="17836" title="spermatozoon" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="17854" end="17873" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="17901" end="17908" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410510" start="18043" end="18056" title="gametogenesis" label="gametogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="19013" end="19018" title="locus (genetics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="19026" end="19032" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="19045" end="19053" title="Dominance (genetics)" label="dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q579704" start="19101" end="19114" title="non-Mendelian inheritance" label="non-Mendelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="19543" end="19565" title="multiple alleles" label="more than two alleles."/>
<link wikidata="Q426365" start="19743" end="19759" title="polygene" label="polygenic traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q635743" start="19777" end="19811" title="List of Mendelian traits in humans" label="List of Mendelian traits in humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111256" start="19814" end="19849" title="Simple Mendelian genetics in humans" label="Simple Mendelian genetics in humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="19852" end="19869" title="Mendelian disease" label="Mendelian disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816582" start="19893" end="19908" title="Mendelian error" label="Mendelian error"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140514" start="19911" end="19934" title="Particulate inheritance" label="Particulate inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q912644" start="19937" end="19951" title="Punnett square" label="Punnett square"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19597" wikidata="Q863402" url="?curid=19597" title="Machinima">
<text>Machinima () is the use of real-time computer graphics engines to create a cinematic production. The word &quot;Machinima&quot; is a portmanteau of the words &quot;machine&quot; and &quot;cinema&quot;. According to Guinness World Records, machinima is the art of making animated narrative films from computer graphics, most commonly using the same engines used by video games.

Machinima-based artists, sometimes called Machinimists or Machinimators, are often fan laborers, by virtue of their re-use of copyrighted materials (see below). Machinima offers to provide an archive of gaming performance and access to the look and feel of software and hardware that may already have become obsolete or even unavailable. For game studies, &quot;Machinima&#x27;s gestures grant access to gaming&#x27;s historical conditions of possibility and how machinima offers links to a comparative horizon that informs, changes, and fully participates in videogame culture.&quot;

The practice of using graphics engines from video games arose from the animated software introductions of the 1980s demoscene, Disney Interactive Studios&#x27; 1992 video game &quot;Stunt Island&quot;, and 1990s recordings of gameplay in first-person shooter (FPS) video games, such as id Software&#x27;s &quot;Doom&quot; and &quot;Quake&quot;. Originally, these recordings documented speed runs—attempts to complete a level as quickly as possible—and multiplayer matches. The addition of storylines to these films created &quot;&quot;Quake&quot; movies&quot;. The more general term &quot;machinima&quot;, a blend of &quot;machine&quot; and &quot;cinema&quot;, arose when the concept spread beyond the &quot;Quake&quot; series to other games and software. After this generalization, machinima appeared in mainstream media, including television series and advertisements.

Machinima has advantages and disadvantages when compared to other styles of filmmaking. Its relative simplicity over traditional frame-based animation limits control and range of expression. Its real-time nature favors speed, cost saving, and flexibility over the higher quality of pre-rendered computer animation. Virtual acting is less expensive, dangerous, and physically restricted than live action. Machinima can be filmed by relying on in-game artificial intelligence (AI) or by controlling characters and cameras through digital puppetry. Scenes can be precisely scripted, and can be manipulated during post-production using video editing techniques. Editing, custom software, and creative cinematography may address technical limitations. Game companies have provided software for and have encouraged machinima, but the widespread use of digital assets from copyrighted games has resulted in complex, unresolved legal issues.

Machinima productions can remain close to their gaming roots and feature stunts or other portrayals of gameplay. Popular genres include dance videos, comedy, and drama. Alternatively, some filmmakers attempt to stretch the boundaries of the rendering engines or to mask the original 3-D context. The Academy of Machinima Arts &amp; Sciences (AMAS), a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting machinima, recognizes exemplary productions through Mackie awards given at its annual Machinima Film Festival. Some general film festivals accept machinima, and game companies, such as Epic Games, Valve, Blizzard Entertainment and Jagex, have sponsored contests involving it.

==History==

===Precedent===
1980s software crackers added custom introductory credits sequences (intros) to programs whose copy protection they had removed. Increasing computing power allowed for more complex intros, and the demoscene formed when focus shifted to the intros instead of the cracks. The goal became to create the best 3-D demos in real-time with the least amount of software code. Disk storage was too slow for this, so graphics had to be calculated on the fly and without a pre-existing game engine.

In Disney Interactive Studios&#x27; 1992 computer game &quot;Stunt Island&quot;, users could stage, record, and play back stunts. As Nitsche stated, the game&#x27;s goal was &quot;not ... a high score but a spectacle.&quot; Released the following year, id Software&#x27;s &quot;Doom&quot; included the ability to record gameplay as sequences of events that the game engine could later replay in real-time. Because events and not video frames were saved, the resulting game demo files were small and easily shared among players. A culture of recording gameplay developed, as Henry Lowood of Stanford University said, &quot;a context for spectatorship... The result was nothing less than a metamorphosis of the player into a performer.&quot; Another important feature of &quot;Doom&quot; was that it allowed players to create their own modifications, maps, and software for the game, thus expanding the concept of game authorship. In machinima, there is a dual register of gestures: the trained motions of the player determine the in-game images of expressive motion.

In parallel of the video game approach, in the media art field, Maurice Benayoun&#x27;s Virtual Reality artwork &quot;The Tunnel under the Atlantic&quot; (1995), often compared to video games, introduced a virtual film director, fully autonomous intelligent agent, to shoot and edit in real time a full video from the digging performance in the Pompidou Center in Paris and the Museum of Contemporary art in Montreal. The full movie, &quot;Inside the Tunnel under the Atlantic&quot;, 21h long, was followed in 1997 by &quot;Inside the Paris New-Delhi Tunnel&quot; (13h long). Only short excerpts were presented to the public. The complex behavior of the Tunnel&#x27;s virtual director makes it a significant precursor of later application to video games based machinimas.

&quot;Doom&quot;″s 1996 successor, &quot;Quake&quot;, offered new opportunities for both gameplay and customization, while retaining the ability to record demos. Multiplayer video games became popular, and demos of matches between teams of players (clans) were recorded and studied. Paul Marino, executive director of the AMAS, stated that deathmatches, a type of multiplayer game, became more &quot;cinematic&quot;. At this point, however, they still documented gameplay without a narrative.

===&quot;Quake&quot; movies===
On October 26, 1996, a well-known gaming clan, the Rangers, surprised the &quot;Quake&quot; community with &quot;Diary of a Camper&quot;, the first widely known machinima film. This short, 100-second demo file contained the action and gore of many others, but in the context of a brief story, rather than the usual deathmatch. An example of transformative or emergent gameplay, this shift from competition to theater required both expertise in and subversion of the game&#x27;s mechanics. The Ranger demo emphasized this transformation by retaining specific gameplay references in its story.

&quot;Diary of a Camper&quot; inspired many other &quot;&quot;Quake&quot; movies,&quot; as these films were then called. A community of game modifiers (modders), artists, expert players, and film fans began to form around them. The works were distributed and reviewed on websites such as The Cineplex, Psyk&#x27;s Popcorn Jungle, and the Quake Movie Library (QML). Production was supported by dedicated demo-processing software, such as Uwe Girlich&#x27;s Little Movie Processing Center (LMPC) and David &quot;crt&quot; Wright&#x27;s non-linear editor Keygrip, which later became known as &quot;Adobe Premiere for Quake demo files&quot;. Among the notable films were Clan Phantasm&#x27;s &quot;Devil&#x27;s Covenant&quot;, the first feature-length &quot;Quake&quot; movie; Avatar and Wendigo&#x27;s &quot;Blahbalicious&quot;, which the QML awarded seven Quake Movie Oscars; and Clan Undead&#x27;s &quot;Operation Bayshield&quot;, which introduced simulated lip synchronization and featured customized digital assets.

Released in December 1997, id Software&#x27;s &quot;Quake II&quot; improved support for user-created 3-D models. However, without compatible editing software, filmmakers continued to create works based on the original &quot;Quake&quot;. These included the ILL Clan&#x27;s &quot;Apartment Huntin&#x27;&quot; and the Quake done Quick group&#x27;s &quot;Scourge Done Slick&quot;. &quot;Quake II&quot; demo editors became available in 1998. In particular, Keygrip 2.0 introduced &quot;recamming&quot;, the ability to adjust camera locations after recording. Paul Marino called the addition of this feature &quot;a defining moment for [m]achinima&quot;. With &quot;Quake II&quot; filming now feasible, Strange Company&#x27;s 1999 production &quot;Eschaton: Nightfall&quot; was the first work to feature entirely custom-made character models.

The December 1999 release of id&#x27;s &quot;Quake III Arena&quot; posed a problem to the &quot;Quake&quot; movie community. The game&#x27;s demo file included information needed for computer networking; however, to prevent cheating, id warned of legal action for dissemination of the file format. Thus, it was impractical to enhance software to work with &quot;Quake III&quot;. Concurrently, the novelty of &quot;Quake&quot; movies was waning. New productions appeared less frequently, and, according to Marino, the community needed to &quot;reinvent itself&quot; to offset this development.

&quot;Borg War&quot;, a 90-minute animated Star Trek fan film, was produced using Elite Force 2 (a &quot;Quake III&quot; variant) and Starfleet Command 3, repurposing the games&#x27; voiceover clips to create a new plot. &quot;Borg War&quot; was nominated for two &quot;Mackie&quot; awards by the Academy of Machinima Arts &amp; Sciences. An August 2007 screening at a &quot;Star Trek&quot; convention in Las Vegas was the first time that CBS/Paramount had approved the screening of a non-parody fan film at a licensed convention.

===Generalization===
In January 2000, Hugh Hancock, the founder of Strange Company, launched a new website, machinima.com. Coined by Anthony Bailey in a May 1998 email to Hancock, the term is a misspelled portmanteau of &quot;machine cinema&quot; (&quot;machinema&quot;) which was intended to dissociate in-game filming from a specific engine. The new site featured tutorials, interviews, articles, and the exclusive release of Tritin Films&#x27; &quot;Quad God&quot;. The first film made with &quot;Quake III Arena&quot;, &quot;Quad God&quot; was also the first to be distributed as recorded video frames, not game-specific instructions. This change was initially controversial among machinima producers who preferred the smaller size of demo files. However, demo files required a copy of the game to view. The more accessible traditional video format broadened &quot;Quad God&quot;″s viewership, and the work was distributed on CDs bundled with magazines. Thus, id&#x27;s decision to protect &quot;Quake III&quot;″s code inadvertently caused machinima creators to use more general solutions and thus widen their audience. Within a few years, machinima films were almost exclusively distributed in common video file formats.

Machinima began to receive mainstream notice. Roger Ebert discussed it in a June 2000 article and praised Strange Company&#x27;s machinima setting of Percy Bysshe Shelley&#x27;s sonnet &quot;Ozymandias&quot;. At Showtime Network&#x27;s 2001 Alternative Media Festival, the ILL Clan&#x27;s 2000 machinima film &quot;Hardly Workin&#x27;&quot; won the Best Experimental and Best in SHO awards. Steven Spielberg used &quot;Unreal Tournament&quot; to test special effects while working on his 2001 film &quot;Artificial Intelligence: A.I.&quot; Eventually, interest spread to game developers. In July 2001, Epic Games announced that its upcoming game &quot;Unreal Tournament 2003&quot; would include Matinee, a machinima production software utility. As involvement increased, filmmakers released fewer new productions to focus on quality.

At the March 2002 Game Developers Conference, five machinima makers—Anthony Bailey, Hugh Hancock, Katherine Anna Kang, Paul Marino, and Matthew Ross—founded the AMAS, a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting machinima. At QuakeCon in August, the new organization held the first Machinima Film Festival, which received mainstream media coverage. &quot;&quot;, by Jake Hughes and Tom Hall, won three awards, including Best Picture. The next year, &quot;In the Waiting Line&quot;, produced by Ghost Robot, directed by Tommy Pallotta and animated by Randy Cole, utilizing Fountainhead Entertainment&#x27;s Machinimation tools, it became the first machinima music video to air on MTV. As graphics technology improved, machinima filmmakers used other video games and consumer-grade video editing software. Using Bungie&#x27;s 2001 game &quot;&quot;, Rooster Teeth Productions created a popular comedy series &quot;Red vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles&quot;. The series&#x27; second season premiered at the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in 2004.

=== Recent history ===

In January 2019, Machinima, Inc., which had shifted its focus away from machinima-based content into general video game-related fare in its later years, abruptly discontinued their YouTube channels, with all their videos set to private. This came shortly after then-parent company Warner Bros. (via its owner, Time Warner) was acquired by AT&amp;T; leading to the subsequent formation of WarnerMedia. On February 1, 2019, Machinima officially announced that it had laid off its 81 employees and ceased remaining operations. The company stated that certain employees were being retained to work for AT&amp;T&#x27;s Otter Media holding company, and that Russell Arons was &quot;assisting with transitional activities as she explores new opportunities&quot;. The closure resulted in 81 layoffs from the company. 

An opinion piece from &quot;Wired&quot; UK blamed the company&#x27;s collapse on an &quot;obvious misunderstanding of what Machinima actually was, or what traditional media companies were even buying when they purchased a [content network]&quot;, with the possibility of future machinima distribution networks of that size emerging being slim.

On March 6, 2024, Rooster Teeth general manager Jordan Levin notified employees that the company would close over the next several months. In an email, he cited reasons for the shutdown including &quot;fundamental shifts in consumer behavior and monetization across platforms, advertising, and patronage&quot;, with it being reported that the number of subscribers to Rooster Teeth&#x27;s &quot;First&quot; service had dropped to around one-quarter of their peak and that Rooster Teeth as a whole had been unprofitable for a decade. Then-parent Warner Bros. Discovery (formed from the sale of WarnerMedia from AT&amp;T into a Reverse Morris Trust merger with Discovery, Inc. in 2021.) would gauge interest in &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot;, and the studio&#x27;s other intellectual property (including &quot;RWBY&quot;, and &quot;&quot;).

Within the timeframe between Machinima Inc., and Rooster Teeth&#x27;s respective closures, Australian animator Luke Lerdwichagul would gain prominence from his &quot;Super Mario 64&quot; and &quot;Garry&#x27;s Mod&quot;-based comedy series, &quot;SMG4&quot;. He would eventually form the independent animation studio Glitch Productions with his brother, Kevin, while continuing to work on the series.

==Production==

===Comparison to film techniques===
The AMAS defines machinima as &quot;animated filmmaking within a real-time virtual 3-D environment&quot;. In other 3-D animation methods, creators can control every frame and nuance of their characters but, in turn, must consider issues such as key frames and inbetweening. Machinima creators leave many rendering details to their host environments, but may thus inherit those environments&#x27; limitations. Second Life Machinima film maker Ozymandius King provided a detailed account of the process by which the artists at MAGE Magazine produce their videos. &quot;Organizing for a photo shoot is similar to organizing for a film production. Once you find the actors / models, you have to scout locations, find clothes and props for the models and type up a shooting script. The more organized you are the less time it takes to shoot the scene.&quot; Because game animations focus on dramatic rather than casual actions, the range of character emotions is often limited. However, Kelland, Morris, and Lloyd state that a small range of emotions is often sufficient, as in successful Japanese anime television series.

Another difference is that machinima is created in real time, but other animation is pre-rendered. Real-time engines need to trade quality for speed and use simpler algorithms and models. In the 2001 animated film &quot;Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within&quot;, every strand of hair on a character&#x27;s head was independent; real-time needs would likely force them to be treated as a single unit. Kelland, Morris, and Lloyd argue that improvement in consumer-grade graphics technology will allow more realism. Similarly, Paul Marino connects machinima to the increasing computing power predicted by Moore&#x27;s law. For cut scenes in video games, issues other than visual fidelity arise. Pre-rendered scenes can require more digital storage space, weaken suspension of disbelief through contrast with real-time animation of normal gameplay, and limit interaction.

Like live action, machinima is recorded in real-time, and real people can act and control the camera. Filmmakers are often encouraged to follow traditional cinematic conventions, such as avoiding wide fields of view, the overuse of slow motion, and errors in visual continuity. Unlike live action, machinima involves less expensive, digital special effects and sets, possibly with a science-fiction or historical theme. Explosions and stunts can be tried and repeated without monetary cost and risk of injury, and the host environment may allow unrealistic physical constraints. University of Cambridge experiments in 2002 and 2003 attempted to use machinima to re-create a scene from the 1942 live-action film &quot;Casablanca&quot;. Machinima filming differed from traditional cinematography in that character expression was limited, but camera movements were more flexible and improvised. Nitsche compared this experiment to an unpredictable Dogme 95 production.

Berkeley sees machinima as &quot;a strangely hybrid form, looking forwards and backwards, cutting edge and conservative at the same time&quot;. Machinima is a digital medium based on 3-D computer games, but most works have a linear narrative structure. Some, such as &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot; and &quot;The Strangerhood&quot;, follow narrative conventions of television situational comedy. Nitsche agrees that pre-recorded (&quot;reel&quot;) machinima tends to be linear and offers limited interactive storytelling while machinima has more opportunities performed live and with audience interaction. In creating their improvisational comedy series &quot;On the Campaign Trail with Larry &amp; Lenny Lumberjack&quot; and talk show &quot;Tra5hTa1k with ILL Will&quot;, the ILL Clan blended real and virtual performance by creating the works on-stage and interacting with a live audience. In another combination of real and virtual worlds, Chris Burke&#x27;s talk show &quot;This Spartan Life&quot; takes place in &quot;Halo 2&quot;″s open multiplayer environment. There, others playing in earnest may attack the host or his interviewee. Although other virtual theatrical performances have taken place in chat rooms and multi-user dungeons, machinima adds &quot;cinematic camera work&quot;. Previously, such virtual cinematic performances with live audience interaction were confined to research labs equipped with powerful computers.

Machinima can be less expensive than other forms of filmmaking. Strange Company produced its feature-length machinima film &quot;BloodSpell&quot; for less than £10,000. Before using machinima, Burnie Burns and Matt Hullum of Rooster Teeth Productions spent US$9,000 to produce a live-action independent film. In contrast, the four Xbox game consoles used to make &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot; in 2005 cost $600. The low cost caused a product manager for Electronic Arts to compare machinima to the low-budget independent film &quot;The Blair Witch Project&quot;, without the need for cameras and actors. Because these are seen as low barriers to entry, machinima has been called a &quot;democratization of filmmaking&quot;. Berkeley weighs increased participation and a blurred line between producer and consumer against concerns that game copyrights limit commercialization and growth of machinima.

Comparatively, machinimists using pre-made virtual platforms like &quot;Second Life&quot; have indicated that their productions can be made quite successfully with no cost at all. Creators like Dutch director Chantal Harvey, producer of the 48 Hour Film Project Machinima sector, have created upwards of 200 films using the platform. Harvey&#x27;s advocacy of the genre has resulted in the involvement of film director Peter Greenaway who served as a juror for the Machinima category and gave a keynote speech during the event.

===Character and camera control===
Kelland, Morris, and Lloyd list four main methods of creating machinima. From simple to advanced, these are: relying on the game&#x27;s AI to control most actions, digital puppetry, recamming, and precise scripting of actions. Although simple to produce, AI-dependent results are unpredictable, thus complicating the realization of a preconceived film script. For example, when Rooster Teeth produced &quot;The Strangerhood&quot; using &quot;The Sims 2&quot;, a game that encourages the use of its AI, the group had to create multiple instances of each character to accommodate different moods. Individual instances were selected at different times to produce appropriate actions.

In digital puppetry, machinima creators become virtual actors. Each crew member controls a character in real-time, as in a multiplayer game. The director can use built-in camera controls, if available. Otherwise, video is captured from the perspectives of one or more puppeteers who serve as camera operators. Puppetry allows for improvisation and offers controls familiar to gamers, but requires more personnel than the other methods and is less precise than scripted recordings. However, some games, such as the &quot;Halo&quot; series, (except for Halo PC and Custom Edition, which allow AI and custom objects and characters), allow filming only through puppetry. According to Marino, other disadvantages are the possibility of disruption when filming in an open multi-user environment and the temptation for puppeteers to play the game in earnest, littering the set with blood and dead bodies. However, Chris Burke intentionally hosts &quot;This Spartan Life&quot; in these unpredictable conditions, which are fundamental to the show. Other works filmed using puppetry are the ILL Clan&#x27;s improvisational comedy series &quot;On the Campaign Trail with Larry &amp; Lenny Lumberjack&quot; and Rooster Teeth Productions&#x27; &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot;. In recamming, which builds on puppetry, actions are first recorded to a game engine&#x27;s demo file format, not directly as video frames. Without re-enacting scenes, artists can then manipulate the demo files to add cameras, tweak timing and lighting, and change the surroundings. This technique is limited to the few engines and software tools that support it.

A technique common in cutscenes of video games, scripting consists of giving precise directions to the game engine. A filmmaker can work alone this way, as J. Thaddeus &quot;Mindcrime&quot; Skubis did in creating the nearly four-hour &quot;The Seal of Nehahra&quot; (2000), the longest work of machinima at the time. However, perfecting scripts can be time-consuming. Unless what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) editing is available, as in &quot;&quot;, changes may need to be verified in additional runs, and non-linear editing may be difficult. In this respect, Kelland, Morris, and Lloyd compare scripting to stop-motion animation. Another disadvantage is that, depending on the game, scripting capabilities may be limited or unavailable. Matinee, a machinima software tool included with &quot;Unreal Tournament 2004&quot;, popularized scripting in machinima.

===Limitations and solutions===
When &quot;Diary of a Camper&quot; was created, no software tools existed to edit demo files into films. Rangers clan member Eric &quot;ArchV&quot; Fowler wrote his own programs to reposition the camera and to splice footage from the &quot;Quake&quot; demo file. &quot;Quake&quot; movie editing software later appeared, but the use of conventional non-linear video editing software is now common. For example, Phil South inserted single, completely white frames into his work &quot;No Licence&quot; to enhance the visual impact of explosions. In the post-production of &quot;Red vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles&quot;, Rooster Teeth Productions added letterboxing with Adobe Premiere Pro to hide the camera player&#x27;s heads-up display.

Machinima creators have used different methods to handle limited character expression. The most typical ways that amateur-style machinima gets around limitations of expression include taking advantage of speech bubbles seen above players&#x27; heads when speaking, relying on the visual matching between a character&#x27;s voice and appearance, and finding methods available within the game itself. &quot;Garry&#x27;s Mod&quot; and Source Filmmaker include the ability to manipulate characters and objects in real-time, though the former relies on community addons to take advantage of certain engine features, and the latter renders scenes using non-real-time effects. In the &quot;Halo&quot; video game series, helmets completely cover the characters&#x27; faces. To prevent confusion, Rooster Teeth&#x27;s characters move slightly when speaking, a convention shared with anime. Some machinima creators use custom software. For example, Strange Company uses Take Over GL Face Skins to add more facial expressions to their characters filmed in BioWare&#x27;s 2002 role-playing video game &quot;Neverwinter Nights&quot;. Similarly, Atussa Simon used a &quot;library of faces&quot; for characters in &quot;The Battle of Xerxes&quot;. Some software, such as Epic Games&#x27; Impersonator for &quot;Unreal Tournament 2004&quot; and Valve&#x27;s Faceposer for Source games, have been provided by the developer. Another solution is to blend in non-machinima elements, as nGame did by inserting painted characters with more expressive faces into its 1999 film &quot;Berlin Assassins&quot;. It may be possible to point the camera elsewhere or employ other creative cinematography or acting. For example, Tristan Pope combined creative character and camera positioning with video editing to suggest sexual actions in his controversial film &quot;Not Just Another Love Story&quot;.

==Legal issues==

New machinima filmmakers often want to use game-provided digital assets, but doing so raises legal issues. As derivative works, their films could violate copyright or be controlled by the assets&#x27; copyright holder, an arrangement that can be complicated by separate publishing and licensing rights. The software license agreement for &quot;The Movies&quot; stipulates that Activision, the game&#x27;s publisher, owns &quot;any and all content within... Game Movies that was either supplied with the Program or otherwise made available... by Activision or its licensors...&quot; Some game companies provide software to modify their own games, and machinima makers often cite fair use as a defense, but the issue has never been tested in court. A potential problem with this defense is that many works, such as &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot;, focus more on satire, which is not as explicitly protected by fair use as parody. Berkeley adds that, even if machinima artists use their own assets, their works could be ruled derivative if filmed in a proprietary engine. The risk inherent in a fair-use defense would cause most machinima artists simply to yield to a cease-and-desist order. The AMAS has attempted to negotiate solutions with video game companies, arguing that an open-source or reasonably priced alternative would emerge from an unfavorable situation. Unlike &quot;The Movies&quot;, some dedicated machinima software programs, such as Reallusion&#x27;s iClone, have licenses that avoid claiming ownership of users&#x27; films featuring bundled assets.

Generally, companies want to retain creative control over their intellectual properties and are wary of fan-created works, like fan fiction. However, because machinima provides free marketing, they have avoided a response demanding strict copyright enforcement. In 2003, Linden Lab was praised for changing license terms to allow users to retain ownership of works created in its virtual world &quot;Second Life&quot;. Rooster Teeth initially tried to release &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot; unnoticed by &quot;Halo&quot;″s owners because they feared that any communication would force them to end the project. However, Microsoft, Bungie&#x27;s parent company at the time, contacted the group shortly after episode 2, and allowed them to continue without paying licensing fees.

A case in which developer control was asserted involved Blizzard Entertainment&#x27;s action against Tristan Pope&#x27;s &quot;Not Just Another Love Story&quot;. Blizzard&#x27;s community managers encouraged users to post game movies and screenshots, but viewers complained that Pope&#x27;s suggestion of sexual actions through creative camera and character positioning was pornographic. Citing the user license agreement, Blizzard closed discussion threads about the film and prohibited links to it. Although Pope accepted Blizzard&#x27;s right to some control, he remained concerned about censorship of material that already existed in-game in some form. Discussion ensued about boundaries between MMORPG player and developer control. Lowood asserted that this controversy demonstrated that machinima could be a medium of negotiation for players.

===Microsoft and Blizzard===
In August 2007, Microsoft issued its Game Content Usage Rules, a license intended to address the legal status of machinima based on its games, including the &quot;Halo&quot; series. Microsoft intended the rules to be &quot;flexible&quot;, and, because it was unilateral, the license was legally unable to reduce rights. However, machinima artists, such as Edgeworks Entertainment, protested the prohibitions on extending Microsoft&#x27;s fictional universes (a common component of fan fiction) and on selling anything from sites hosting derivative works. Compounding the reaction was the license&#x27;s statement, &quot;If you do any of these things, you can expect to hear from Microsoft&#x27;s lawyers who will tell you that you have to stop distributing your items right away.&quot;

Surprised by the negative feedback, Microsoft revised and reissued the license after discussion with Hugh Hancock and an attorney for the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The rules allow noncommercial use and distribution of works derived from Microsoft-owned game content, except audio effects and soundtracks. The license prohibits reverse engineering and material that is pornographic or otherwise &quot;objectionable&quot;. On distribution, derivative works that elaborate on a game&#x27;s fictional universe or story are automatically licensed to Microsoft and its business partners. This prevents legal problems if a fan and Microsoft independently conceive similar plots.

A few weeks later, Blizzard Entertainment posted on WorldofWarcraft.com their &quot;Letter to the Machinimators of the World&quot;, a license for noncommercial use of game content. It differs from Microsoft&#x27;s declaration in that it addresses machinima specifically instead of general game-derived content, allows use of game audio if Blizzard can legally license it, requires derivative material to meet the Entertainment Software Rating Board&#x27;s Teen content rating guideline, defines noncommercial use differently, and does not address extensions of fictional universes.

Hayes states that, although licensees&#x27; benefits are limited, the licenses reduce reliance on fair use regarding machinima. In turn, this recognition may reduce film festivals&#x27; concerns about copyright clearance. In an earlier analogous situation, festivals were concerned about documentary films until best practices for them were developed. According to Hayes, Microsoft and Blizzard helped themselves through their licenses because fan creations provide free publicity and are unlikely to harm sales. If the companies had instead sued for copyright infringement, defendants could have claimed estoppel or implied license because machinima had been unaddressed for a long time. Thus, these licenses secured their issuers&#x27; legal rights. Even though other companies, such as Electronic Arts, have encouraged machinima, they have avoided licensing it. Because of the involved legal complexity, they may prefer to under-enforce copyrights. Hayes believes that this legal uncertainty is a suboptimal solution and that, though limited and &quot;idiosyncratic&quot;, the Microsoft and Blizzard licenses move towards an ideal video gaming industry standard for handling derivative works.

==Semiotic mode==
Just as machinima can be the cause of legal dispute in copyright ownership and illegal use, it makes heavy use of intertextuality and raises the question of authorship. Machinima takes copyrighted property (such as characters in a game engine) and repurposes it to tell a story, but another common practice in machinima-making is to retell an existing story from a different medium in that engine.

This re-appropriation of established texts, resources, and artistic properties to tell a story or make a statement is an example of a semiotic phenomenon known as intertextuality or resemiosis. A more common term for this phenomenon is &quot;parody&quot;, but not all of these intertextual productions are intended for humor or satire, as demonstrated by the &quot;Few Good G-Men&quot; video. Furthermore, the argument of how well-protected machinima is under the guise of parody or satire is still highly debated. A piece of machinima may be reliant upon a protected property, but may not necessarily be making a statement about that property. Therefore, it is more accurate to refer to it simply as resemiosis, because it takes an artistic work and presents it in a new way, form, or medium. This resemiosis can be manifested in a number of ways. The machinima-maker can be considered an author who restructures the story and/or the world that the chosen game engine is built around. In the popular web series &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot;, most of the storyline takes place within the game engine of &quot;&quot; and its subsequent sequels. &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot; has an extensive storyline already, but &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot; only ever makes mention of this storyline once in the first episode. Even after over 200 episodes of the show being broadcast onto the Internet since 2003, the only real similarities that can be drawn between &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot; and the game-world it takes place in are the character models, props, vehicles, and settings. Yet Burnie Burns and the machinima team at Rooster Teeth created an extensive storyline of their own using these game resources.

The ability to re-appropriate a game engine to film a video demonstrates intertextuality because it is an obvious example of art being a product of creation-through-manipulation rather than creation per se. The art historian Ernst Gombrich likened art to the &quot;manipulation of a vocabulary&quot; and this can be demonstrated in the creation of machinima. When using a game world to create a story, the author is influenced by the engine. For example, since so many video games are built around the concept of war, a significant portion of machinima films also take place in war-like environments.

Intertextuality is further demonstrated in machinima not only in the re-appropriation of content but in artistic and communicatory techniques. Machinima by definition is a form of puppetry, and thus this new form of digital puppetry employs age-old techniques from the traditional artform. It is also, however, a form of filmmaking, and must employ filmmaking techniques such as camera angles and proper lighting. Some machinima takes place in online environments with participants, actors, and &quot;puppeteers&quot; working together from thousands of miles apart. This means other techniques born from long-distance communication must also be employed. Thus, techniques and practices that would normally never be used in conjunction with one another in the creation of an artistic work end up being used intertextually in the creation of machinima.

Another way that machinima demonstrates intertextuality is in its tendency to make frequent references to texts, works, and other media just like TV ads or humorous cartoons such as &quot;The Simpsons&quot; might do. For example, the machinima series &quot;Freeman&#x27;s Mind&quot;, created by Ross Scott, is filmed by taking a recording of Scott playing through the game &quot;Half Life&quot; as a player normally would and combining it with a voiceover (also recorded by Scott) to emulate an inner monologue of the normally voiceless protagonist Gordon Freeman. Scott portrays Freeman as a snarky, sociopathic character who makes frequent references to works and texts including science fiction, horror films, action movies, American history, and renowned novels such as Moby Dick. These references to works outside the game, often triggered by events within the game, are prime examples of the densely intertextual nature of machinima.

==Common genres==

Nitsche and Lowood describe two methods of approaching machinima: starting from a video game and seeking a medium for expression or for documenting gameplay (&quot;inside-out&quot;), and starting outside a game and using it merely as animation tool (&quot;outside-in&quot;). Kelland, Morris, and Lloyd similarly distinguish between works that retain noticeable connections to games, and those closer to traditional animation. Belonging to the former category, gameplay and stunt machinima began in 1997 with &quot;Quake done Quick&quot;. Although not the first speedrunners, its creators used external software to manipulate camera positions after recording, which, according to Lowood, elevated speedrunning &quot;from cyberathleticism to making movies&quot;. Stunt machinima remains popular. Kelland, Morris, and Lloyd state that &quot;&quot; stunt videos offer a new way to look at the game, and compare &quot;Battlefield 1942&quot; machinima creators to the Harlem Globetrotters. Built-in features for video editing and post-recording camera positioning in &quot;Halo 3&quot; were expected to facilitate gameplay-based machinima. MMORPGs and other virtual worlds have been captured in documentary films, such as &quot;Miss Galaxies 2004&quot;, a beauty pageant that took place in the virtual world of &quot;Star Wars Galaxies&quot;. Footage was distributed in the cover disc of the August 2004 issue of &quot;PC Gamer&quot;. Douglas Gayeton&#x27;s &quot;Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator&quot; documents the title character&#x27;s interactions in &quot;Second Life&quot;.

Gaming-related comedy offers another possible entry point for new machinima producers. Presented as five-minute sketches, many machinima comedies are analogous to Internet Flash animations. After Clan Undead&#x27;s 1997 work &quot;Operation Bayshield&quot; built on the earliest &quot;Quake&quot; movies by introducing narrative conventions of linear media and sketch comedy reminiscent of the television show &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, the New-York-based ILL Clan further developed the genre in machinima through works including &quot;Apartment Huntin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Hardly Workin&#x27;&quot;. &quot;Red vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles&quot; chronicles a futile civil war over five seasons and 100 episodes. Marino wrote that although the series&#x27; humor was rooted in video games, strong writing and characters caused the series to &quot;transcend the typical gamer&quot;. An example of a comedy film that targets a more general audience is Strange Company&#x27;s &quot;Tum Raider&quot;, produced for the BBC in 2004.

Machinima has been used in music videos, of which the first documented example is Ken Thain&#x27;s 2002 &quot;Rebel vs. Thug&quot;, made in collaboration with Chuck D. For this, Thain used Quake2Max, a modification of &quot;Quake II&quot; that provided cel-shaded animation. The following year, Tommy Pallotta directed &quot;In the Waiting Line&quot; for the British group Zero 7. He told &quot;Computer Graphics World&quot;, &quot;It probably would have been quicker to do the film in a 3D animated program. But now, we can reuse the assets in an improvisational way.&quot; Scenes of the game &quot;Postal 2&quot; can be seen in the music video of the Black Eyed Peas single &quot;Where Is the Love?&quot;. In television, MTV features video game characters on its show &quot;Video Mods&quot;. Among &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; players, dance and music videos became popular after dancing animations were discovered in the game.

Others use machinima in drama. These works may or may not retain signs of their video game provenance. &quot;Unreal Tournament&quot; is often used for science fiction and &quot;Battlefield 1942&quot; for war, but some artists subvert their chosen game&#x27;s setting or completely detach their work from it. In 1999, Strange Company used &quot;Quake II&quot; in &quot;Eschaton: Nightfall&quot;, a horror film based on the work of H. P. Lovecraft (although Quake I was also based on the Lovecraft lore). A later example is Damien Valentine&#x27;s series &quot;Consanguinity&quot;, made using BioWare&#x27;s 2002 computer game &quot;Neverwinter Nights&quot; and based on the television series &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;. Another genre consists of experimental works that attempt to push the boundaries of game engines. One example, Fountainhead&#x27;s &quot;Anna&quot;, is a short film that focuses on the cycle of life and is reminiscent of &quot;Fantasia&quot;. Other productions go farther and completely eschew a 3-D appearance. Friedrich Kirschner&#x27;s &quot;The Tournament&quot; and &quot;The Journey&quot; deliberately appear hand-drawn, and Dead on Que&#x27;s &quot;Fake Science&quot; resembles two-dimensional Eastern European modernist animation from the 1970s.

Another derivative genre termed &quot;machinima verite&quot;, from cinéma vérité, seeks to add a documentary and additional realism to the machinima piece. L.M. Sabo&#x27;s &quot;CATACLYSM&quot; achieves a machinima verite style through displaying and recapturing the machinima video with a low resolution black and white hand-held video camera to produce a shaky camera effect. Other element of cinéma vérité, such as longer takes, sweeping camera transitions, and jump cuts may be included to complete the effect.

Some have used machinima to make political statements, often from left-wing perspectives. Alex Chan&#x27;s take on the 2005 civil unrest in France, &quot;The French Democracy&quot;, attained mainstream attention and inspired other machinima commentaries on American and British society. Horwatt deemed Thuyen Nguyen&#x27;s 2006 &quot;An Unfair War&quot;, a criticism of the Iraq War, similar in its attempt &quot;to speak for those who cannot&quot;. Joshua Garrison mimicked Chan&#x27;s &quot;political pseudo-documentary style&quot; in his &quot;Virginia Tech Massacre&quot;, a controversial &quot;Halo 3&quot;–based re-enactment and explanation of the eponymous real-life events. More recently, &quot;War of Internet Addiction&quot; addressed internet censorship in China using &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;.

==Competitions==

After the QML&#x27;s Quake Movie Oscars, dedicated machinima awards did not reappear until the AMAS created the Mackies for its first Machinima Film Festival in 2002. The annual festival has become an important one for machinima creators. Ho Chee Yue, a founder of the marketing company AKQA, helped to organize the first festival for the Asia chapter of the AMAS in 2006. In 2007, the AMAS supported the first machinima festival held in Europe. In addition to these smaller ceremonies, Hugh Hancock of Strange Company worked to add an award for machinima to the more general Bitfilm Festival in 2003. Other general festivals that allow machinima include the Sundance Film Festival, the Florida Film Festival, and the New Media Film Festival. The Ottawa International Animation Festival opened a machinima category in 2004, but, citing the need for &quot;a certain level of excellence&quot;, declined to award anything to the category&#x27;s four entries that year.

Machinima has been showcased in contests sponsored by game companies. Epic Games&#x27; popular Make Something Unreal contest included machinima that impressed event organizer Jeff Morris because of &quot;the quality of entries that really push the technology, that accomplish things that Epic never envisioned&quot;. In December 2005, Blizzard Entertainment and Xfire, a gaming-focused instant messaging service, jointly sponsored a &quot;World of Warcraft&quot; machinima contest.

== Mainstream appearances ==
Machinima has appeared on television, starting with G4&#x27;s series &quot;Portal&quot;. MTV2&#x27;s &quot;Video Mods&quot; re-creates music videos using characters from video games such as &quot;The Sims 2&quot;, &quot;BloodRayne&quot;, and &quot;Tribes&quot;. Blizzard Entertainment helped to set part of &quot;Make Love, Not Warcraft&quot;, an Emmy Award–winning 2006 episode of the comedy series &quot;South Park&quot;, in its massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) &quot;World of Warcraft&quot;. By purchasing broadcast rights to Douglas Gayeton&#x27;s machinima documentary &quot;Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator&quot; in September 2007, HBO became the first television network to buy a work created completely in a virtual world. In December 2008, machinima.com signed fifteen experienced television comedy writers—including Patric Verrone, Bill Oakley, and Mike Rowe—to produce episodes for the site.

Commercial use of machinima has increased. Rooster Teeth sells DVDs of their Red vs. Blue series and, under sponsorship from Electronic Arts, helped to promote &quot;The Sims 2&quot; by using the game to make a machinima series, &quot;The Strangerhood&quot;. Volvo Cars sponsored the creation of a 2004 advertisement, &quot;&quot;, the first film to combine machinima and live action. Later, Electronic Arts commissioned Rooster Teeth to promote their &quot;Madden NFL 07&quot; video game. Blockhouse TV uses Moviestorm&#x27;s machinima software to produce its pre-school educational DVD series &quot;Jack and Holly&quot;

Game developers have continued to increase support for machinima. Products such as Lionhead Studios&#x27; 2005 business simulation game &quot;The Movies&quot;, Linden Research&#x27;s virtual world &quot;Second Life&quot;, and Bungie&#x27;s 2007 first-person shooter &quot;Halo 3&quot; encourage the creation of user content by including machinima software tools. Using &quot;The Movies&quot;, Alex Chan, a French resident with no previous filmmaking experience, took four days to create &quot;The French Democracy&quot;, a short political film about the 2005 civil unrest in France. Third-party mods like &quot;Garry&#x27;s Mod&quot; usually offer the ability to manipulate characters and take advantage of custom or migrated content, allowing for the creation of works like &quot;Counter-Strike For Kids&quot; that can be filmed using assets from multiple games.

In a 2010 interview with PC Magazine, Valve CEO and co-founder Gabe Newell said that they wanted to make a &quot;Half-Life&quot; feature film themselves, rather than hand it off to a big-name director like Sam Raimi, and that their recent &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot; &quot;Meet The Team&quot; machinima shorts were experiments in doing just that. Two years later, Valve released their proprietary non-linear machinima software, Source Filmmaker.

Machinima has also been used for music video clips. The first machinima music video to air on MTV is that of Zero 7&#x27;s &quot;In the Waiting Line&quot; in 2003, animated in the id Tech 3 engine by Tommy Pallotta. &quot;Second Life&quot; virtual artist Bryn Oh created a work for Australian performer Megan Bernard&#x27;s song &quot;Clean Up Your Life&quot;, released in 2016. The first music video for 2018&#x27;s &quot;Old Town Road&quot;, by Lil Nas X, was composed entirely of footage from the 2018 Western action-adventure game &quot;Red Dead Redemption 2&quot;.

==See also==

* 3D Movie Maker
* Computer animation
* Computer-generated imagery
* &quot;The Flying Luna Clipper&quot;
* 1996 in machinima
* 2003 in machinima
* 2004 in machinima
* 2005 in machinima
* 2006 in machinima
* 2007 in machinima
* &quot;Overwatch&quot; and pornography

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* —Also as:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="0" end="9" title="Machinima" label="Machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="27" end="36" title="Real-time computing" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="37" end="54" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="133" end="144" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="164" end="171" title="machine" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="188" end="194" title="Film" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="215" end="237" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="270" end="294" title="Animation" label="animated narrative films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="300" end="317" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="348" end="355" title="Game engine" label="engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="364" end="375" title="Video game" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="420" end="432" title="Machinima" label="Machinimists"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="436" end="449" title="Machinima" label="Machinimators"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433601" start="461" end="470" title="fan labor" label="fan labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q675281" start="720" end="732" title="game studies" label="game studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="1008" end="1019" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q824340" start="1080" end="1089" title="demoscene" label="demoscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229035" start="1091" end="1117" title="Disney Interactive Studios" label="Disney Interactive Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059591" start="1124" end="1139" title="1992 in video gaming" label="1992 video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628779" start="1146" end="1158" title="Stunt Island" label="Stunt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="1202" end="1222" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="1250" end="1261" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q189784" start="1275" end="1279" title="Doom (1993 video game)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="1296" end="1301" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500337" start="1349" end="1358" title="speedrun" label="speed run"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="1416" end="1433" title="multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer match"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="1572" end="1577" title="Blend word" label="blend"/>
<link wikidata="Q902784" start="1666" end="1690" title="Quake (series)" label="&amp;quot;Quake&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="1912" end="1922" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="1953" end="1986" title="traditional animation" label="traditional frame-based animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239264" start="2118" end="2130" title="Pre-rendering" label="pre-rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="2227" end="2238" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="2286" end="2309" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276142" start="2364" end="2380" title="digital puppetry" label="digital puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="2446" end="2461" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154312" start="2468" end="2481" title="video editing" label="video editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="2533" end="2547" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275997" start="2682" end="2695" title="digital asset" label="digital asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626817" start="3071" end="3111" title="Academy of Machinima Arts &amp;amp; Sciences" label="Academy of Machinima Arts &amp;amp; Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="3122" end="3145" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q739711" start="3354" end="3364" title="Epic Games" label="Epic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="3366" end="3371" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="3373" end="3395" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q958101" start="3400" end="3405" title="Jagex" label="Jagex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138423" start="3481" end="3498" title="software cracking" label="software crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q824340" start="3672" end="3681" title="demoscene" label="demoscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="3950" end="3961" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229035" start="3967" end="3993" title="Disney Interactive Studios" label="Disney Interactive Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059591" start="4000" end="4018" title="1992 in video gaming" label="1992 computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628779" start="4025" end="4037" title="Stunt Island" label="Stunt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="4217" end="4228" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q189784" start="4242" end="4246" title="Doom (1993 video game)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="4554" end="4573" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="4798" end="4811" title="mod (computer gaming)" label="modifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="4813" end="4816" title="Level (computer and video games)" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300395" start="5095" end="5111" title="Maurice Benayoun" label="Maurice Benayoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="5845" end="5850" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="5966" end="5988" title="Multiplayer video game" label="Multiplayer video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q989470" start="6053" end="6058" title="Clan (computer gaming)" label="clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152200" start="6087" end="6098" title="Paul Marino" label="Paul Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q48510" start="6144" end="6154" title="deathmatch (gaming)" label="deathmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054061" start="6380" end="6387" title="United Ranger Films" label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="6409" end="6414" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054061" start="6442" end="6459" title="Diary of a Camper" label="Diary of a Camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370763" start="6688" end="6705" title="emergent gameplay" label="emergent gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054061" start="6928" end="6945" title="Diary of a Camper" label="Diary of a Camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330119" start="7456" end="7473" title="non-linear editing system" label="non-linear editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="7517" end="7531" title="Adobe Premiere Pro" label="Adobe Premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="7655" end="7669" title="feature length" label="feature-length"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096795" start="7825" end="7844" title="Operation Bayshield" label="Operation Bayshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="7879" end="7887" title="lip sync" label="lip sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275997" start="7923" end="7936" title="digital asset" label="digital asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q737103" start="7992" end="8000" title="Quake II" label="Quake II"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="8196" end="8204" title="ILL Clan" label="ILL Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="8218" end="8240" title="Apartment Huntin&amp;#x27;" label="Apartment Huntin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268529" start="8255" end="8271" title="Quake done Quick" label="Quake done Quick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268529" start="8291" end="8309" title="Quake done Quick" label="Scourge Done Slick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621359" start="8637" end="8652" title="Strange Company" label="Strange Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q726545" start="8823" end="8838" title="Quake III Arena" label="Quake III Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="8961" end="8977" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626817" start="9669" end="9709" title="Academy of Machinima Arts &amp;amp; Sciences" label="Academy of Machinima Arts &amp;amp; Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621359" start="9942" end="9954" title="Hugh Hancock" label="Hugh Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043544" start="10012" end="10025" title="machinima.com" label="machinima.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="10240" end="10246" title="game engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126985" start="10357" end="10365" title="Quad God" label="Quad God"/>
<link wikidata="Q726545" start="10404" end="10419" title="Quake III Arena" label="Quake III Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="11177" end="11188" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="11281" end="11301" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q662166" start="11322" end="11332" title="Ozymandias" label="Ozymandias"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="11343" end="11359" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="11404" end="11412" title="ILL Clan" label="ILL Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="11446" end="11465" title="Hardly Workin&amp;#x27;" label="Hardly Workin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="11522" end="11538" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q627877" start="11550" end="11567" title="Unreal Tournament" label="Unreal Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q753352" start="11619" end="11628" title="2001 in film" label="2001 film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11635" end="11664" title="Artificial Intelligence: A.I." label="Artificial Intelligence: A.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q739711" start="11733" end="11743" title="Epic Games" label="Epic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501405" start="11783" end="11805" title="Unreal Tournament 2003" label="Unreal Tournament 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154933" start="11984" end="12010" title="Game Developers Conference" label="Game Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105482" start="12064" end="12083" title="Katherine Anna Kang" label="Katherine Anna Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122065" start="12196" end="12204" title="QuakeCon" label="QuakeCon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626817" start="12246" end="12275" title="2002 Machinima Film Festival" label="first Machinima Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q640148" start="12425" end="12444" title="In the Waiting Line" label="In the Waiting Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082241" start="12464" end="12475" title="Ghost Robot" label="Ghost Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q778241" start="12489" end="12503" title="Tommy Pallotta" label="Tommy Pallotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="12649" end="12652" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373429" start="12750" end="12772" title="video editing software" label="video editing software"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="12780" end="12786" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="12818" end="12843" title="Rooster Teeth Productions" label="Rooster Teeth Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="12882" end="12922" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967781" start="12934" end="12960" title="Red vs. Blue (season 2)" label="series&amp;#x27; second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="12978" end="13016" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072494" start="13095" end="13122" title="Channel drift" label="shifted its focus away from"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927912" start="13160" end="13178" title="Video game culture" label="video game-related"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="13232" end="13239" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="13332" end="13344" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="13361" end="13372" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="13390" end="13398" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="13439" end="13450" title="WarnerMedia" label="WarnerMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403171" start="13665" end="13676" title="Otter Media" label="Otter Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="13890" end="13895" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="14225" end="14238" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074885" start="14752" end="14774" title="Warner Bros. Discovery" label="Warner Bros. Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318197" start="14833" end="14853" title="Reverse Morris Trust" label="Reverse Morris Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q621592" start="14866" end="14881" title="Discovery, Inc." label="Discovery, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="14922" end="14934" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="14970" end="14991" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479326" start="15009" end="15013" title="RWBY" label="RWBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q216995" start="15207" end="15221" title="Super Mario 64" label="Super Mario 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107679" start="15341" end="15357" title="animation studio" label="animation studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951084" start="15358" end="15376" title="Glitch Productions" label="Glitch Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493902" start="15740" end="15749" title="key frame" label="key frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002674" start="15755" end="15767" title="inbetweening" label="inbetweening"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16834" end="16867" title="Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within" label="Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152200" start="17136" end="17147" title="Paul Marino" label="Paul Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="17214" end="17230" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q245056" start="17236" end="17245" title="cut scene" label="cut scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q951982" start="17371" end="17394" title="suspension of disbelief" label="suspension of disbelief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="17682" end="17696" title="field of view" label="fields of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="17713" end="17724" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="17740" end="17757" title="continuity (fiction)" label="visual continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="17822" end="17837" title="special effects" label="special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030906" start="17842" end="17845" title="set construction" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="18060" end="18083" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="18198" end="18208" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q211481" start="18426" end="18434" title="Dogme 95" label="Dogme 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="18680" end="18699" title="narrative structure" label="narrative structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="18721" end="18733" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809731" start="18750" end="18766" title="The Strangerhood" label="The Strangerhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="18817" end="18835" title="situational comedy" label="situational comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="19101" end="19156" title="On the Campaign Trail with Larry &amp;amp; Lenny Lumberjack" label="On the Campaign Trail with Larry &amp;amp; Lenny Lumberjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="19218" end="19226" title="ILL Clan" label="ILL Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786268" start="19419" end="19436" title="This Spartan Life" label="This Spartan Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q252804" start="19464" end="19470" title="Halo 2" label="Halo 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="19649" end="19658" title="chat room" label="chat room"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="19664" end="19682" title="multi-user dungeon" label="multi-user dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927537" start="20009" end="20019" title="BloodSpell" label="BloodSpell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="20040" end="20041" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999775" start="20073" end="20085" title="Burnie Burns" label="Burnie Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788826" start="20090" end="20101" title="Matt Hullum" label="Matt Hullum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="20137" end="20140" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="20211" end="20215" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="20384" end="20400" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q644554" start="20407" end="20430" title="The Blair Witch Project" label="The Blair Witch Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="20509" end="20526" title="barriers to entry" label="barriers to entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="20848" end="20859" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180721" start="21017" end="21037" title="48 Hour Film Project" label="48 Hour Film Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q55282" start="21195" end="21210" title="Peter Greenaway" label="Peter Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276142" start="21504" end="21520" title="digital puppetry" label="digital puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809731" start="21747" end="21763" title="The Strangerhood" label="The Strangerhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q182771" start="21782" end="21792" title="The Sims 2" label="The Sims 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="22536" end="22559" title="Halo (series)" label="&amp;quot;Halo&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786268" start="22967" end="22984" title="This Spartan Life" label="This Spartan Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="23119" end="23141" title="improvisational comedy" label="improvisational comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245056" start="23665" end="23673" title="cutscene" label="cutscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="23746" end="23757" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762810" start="23883" end="23902" title="The Seal of Nehahra" label="The Seal of Nehahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="24048" end="24055" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="24257" end="24268" title="stop motion" label="stop-motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q913536" start="24442" end="24464" title="Unreal Tournament 2004" label="Unreal Tournament 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="25091" end="25106" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25116" end="25156" title="Red vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles" label="Red vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="25164" end="25189" title="Rooster Teeth Productions" label="Rooster Teeth Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539855" start="25196" end="25208" title="letterboxing (filming)" label="letterboxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q360424" start="25214" end="25232" title="Adobe Premiere Pro" label="Adobe Premiere Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464529" start="25266" end="25282" title="HUD (video games)" label="heads-up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q837923" start="25690" end="25706" title="Garry&amp;#x27;s Mod" label="Garry&amp;#x27;s Mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049816" start="25717" end="25733" title="Source Filmmaker" label="Source Filmmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="26350" end="26373" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q549217" start="26380" end="26398" title="Neverwinter Nights (2002 video game)" label="Neverwinter Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="26614" end="26619" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q643572" start="26641" end="26647" title="Source (game engine)" label="Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275997" start="27234" end="27247" title="digital asset" label="digital asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q836950" start="27287" end="27302" title="derivative work" label="derivative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q725920" start="27484" end="27510" title="software license agreement" label="software license agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331617" start="27521" end="27531" title="The Movies (video game)" label="The Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="27554" end="27564" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q131562" start="27855" end="27863" title="fair use" label="fair use"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="28030" end="28036" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="28090" end="28096" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="28219" end="28230" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="28335" end="28351" title="cease and desist" label="cease-and-desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="28448" end="28459" title="open source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q291782" start="28638" end="28644" title="iClone" label="iClone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="28802" end="28825" title="Intellectual property" label="intellectual properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433601" start="28842" end="28853" title="fan-made" label="fan-created"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="28866" end="28877" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="29204" end="29216" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="30648" end="30658" title="unilateral contract" label="unilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337930" start="30745" end="30768" title="Edgeworks Entertainment" label="Edgeworks Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="30827" end="30845" title="fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="31314" end="31344" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="31509" end="31528" title="reverse engineering" label="reverse engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="31669" end="31687" title="fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191458" start="32268" end="32303" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board" label="Entertainment Software Rating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="32726" end="32742" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142833" start="33043" end="33051" title="estoppel" label="estoppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092329" start="33055" end="33070" title="implied license" label="implied license"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="33227" end="33242" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q667404" start="33767" end="33782" title="intertextuality" label="intertextuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="33810" end="33820" title="authorship" label="authorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q667404" start="34215" end="34230" title="intertextuality" label="intertextuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="34294" end="34300" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="35070" end="35082" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999775" start="35621" end="35633" title="Burnie Burns" label="Burnie Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="35660" end="35673" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q78504" start="35972" end="35986" title="Ernst Gombrich" label="Ernst Gombrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="36529" end="36537" title="puppetry" label="puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276142" start="36565" end="36581" title="digital puppetry" label="digital puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="36670" end="36680" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q450539" start="36728" end="36741" title="camera angles" label="camera angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629392" start="36850" end="36860" title="puppeteers" label="puppeteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="37389" end="37401" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16519038" start="37458" end="37477" title="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Mind" label="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q279744" start="37580" end="37589" title="Half-Life (video game)" label="Half Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="37647" end="37656" title="voiceover" label="voiceover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436149" start="37696" end="37711" title="inner monologue" label="inner monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q907" start="37750" end="37764" title="Gordon Freeman" label="Gordon Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="37802" end="37813" title="Antisocial personality disorder" label="sociopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="37883" end="37898" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="37900" end="37912" title="horror films" label="horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="37914" end="37927" title="action movies" label="action movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="37929" end="37945" title="American history" label="American history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="37960" end="37966" title="novels" label="novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="37975" end="37984" title="Moby Dick" label="Moby Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500337" start="38722" end="38730" title="speedrun" label="speedrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q791439" start="39074" end="39090" title="Battlefield 1942" label="Battlefield 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q506754" start="39123" end="39143" title="Harlem Globetrotters" label="Harlem Globetrotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q137802" start="39228" end="39234" title="Halo 3" label="Halo 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="39350" end="39366" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55272" start="39472" end="39490" title="Star Wars Galaxies" label="Star Wars Galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="39574" end="39582" title="PC Gamer" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301509" start="39590" end="39605" title="Douglas Gayeton" label="Douglas Gayeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896815" start="39619" end="39662" title="Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator" label="Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369644" start="39920" end="39935" title="Flash animation" label="Flash animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096795" start="39979" end="39998" title="Operation Bayshield" label="Operation Bayshield"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="40109" end="40122" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="40164" end="40183" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="40210" end="40218" title="ILL Clan" label="ILL Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="40290" end="40312" title="Apartment Huntin&amp;#x27;" label="Apartment Huntin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="40329" end="40348" title="Hardly Workin&amp;#x27;" label="Hardly Workin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="40776" end="40779" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q733373" start="40949" end="40956" title="Chuck D" label="Chuck D"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="40992" end="41004" title="mod (computer gaming)" label="modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q737103" start="41014" end="41022" title="Quake II" label="Quake II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049253" start="41043" end="41063" title="cel-shaded animation" label="cel-shaded animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q778241" start="41085" end="41099" title="Tommy Pallotta" label="Tommy Pallotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191915" start="41163" end="41169" title="Zero 7" label="Zero 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974968" start="41390" end="41398" title="Postal 2" label="Postal 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="41439" end="41458" title="the Black Eyed Peas" label="the Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460758" start="41472" end="41490" title="Where Is the Love?" label="Where Is the Love?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927852" start="41566" end="41576" title="Video Mods" label="Video Mods"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="41596" end="41613" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q627877" start="41831" end="41848" title="Unreal Tournament" label="Unreal Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621359" start="42039" end="42054" title="Strange Company" label="Strange Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q737103" start="42066" end="42074" title="Quake II" label="Quake II"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="42152" end="42167" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922530" start="42281" end="42294" title="Consanguinity (Buffyverse)" label="Consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219758" start="42313" end="42320" title="BioWare" label="BioWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q549217" start="42353" end="42371" title="Neverwinter Nights (2002 video game)" label="Neverwinter Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="42419" end="42443" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (TV series)" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42588" end="42592" title="Anna (2003 film)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q943192" start="42678" end="42686" title="Fantasia (1940 film)" label="Fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092621" start="43072" end="43085" title="cinéma vérité" label="cinéma vérité"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487110" start="43363" end="43375" title="shaky camera" label="shaky camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q744083" start="43471" end="43480" title="jump cuts" label="jump cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="43588" end="43610" title="left-wing politics" label="left-wing perspectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q265873" start="43641" end="43668" title="2005 civil unrest in France" label="2005 civil unrest in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735251" start="43676" end="43696" title="The French Democracy" label="The French Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="43896" end="43904" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q137802" start="44121" end="44127" title="Halo 3" label="Halo 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q188799" start="44172" end="44202" title="Virginia Tech shooting" label="the eponymous real-life events"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968655" start="44225" end="44250" title="War of Internet Addiction" label="War of Internet Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q836854" start="44267" end="44295" title="internet censorship in China" label="internet censorship in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="44308" end="44325" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652189" start="44639" end="44643" title="AKQA" label="AKQA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621359" start="44855" end="44870" title="Strange Company" label="Strange Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44928" end="44944" title="Bitfilm Festival" label="Bitfilm Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="45011" end="45033" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452047" start="45039" end="45060" title="Florida Film Festival" label="Florida Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139044" start="45070" end="45093" title="New Media Film Festival" label="New Media Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131786" start="45099" end="45138" title="Ottawa International Animation Festival" label="Ottawa International Animation Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q739711" start="45389" end="45399" title="Epic Games" label="Epic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042524" start="45414" end="45435" title="Make Something Unreal (contest)" label="Make Something Unreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="45654" end="45676" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q71681" start="45681" end="45686" title="Xfire" label="Xfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="45705" end="45722" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="45758" end="45775" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006978" start="45883" end="45885" title="G4 (U.S. TV channel)" label="G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635221" start="45906" end="45912" title="Portal (TV series)" label="Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241928" start="45920" end="45924" title="MTV2" label="MTV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927852" start="45938" end="45948" title="Video Mods" label="Video Mods"/>
<link wikidata="Q182771" start="46027" end="46037" title="The Sims 2" label="The Sims 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q885055" start="46051" end="46061" title="BloodRayne" label="BloodRayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538751" start="46079" end="46085" title="Tribes (video game series)" label="Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="46093" end="46115" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q174856" start="46144" end="46167" title="Make Love, Not Warcraft" label="Make Love, Not Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="46178" end="46188" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="46237" end="46247" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="46262" end="46308" title="massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="massively multiplayer online role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="46324" end="46341" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301509" start="46383" end="46398" title="Douglas Gayeton" label="Douglas Gayeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896815" start="46434" end="46477" title="Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator" label="Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="46503" end="46506" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q444835" start="46581" end="46594" title="virtual world" label="virtual world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145363" start="46691" end="46705" title="Patric Verrone" label="Patric Verrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q862352" start="46707" end="46718" title="Bill Oakley" label="Bill Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q455808" start="46724" end="46733" title="Mike Rowe" label="Mike Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="46812" end="46825" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="46832" end="46835" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="46846" end="46858" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="46894" end="46909" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q182771" start="46935" end="46945" title="The Sims 2" label="The Sims 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809731" start="47004" end="47020" title="The Strangerhood" label="The Strangerhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q215293" start="47028" end="47038" title="Volvo Cars" label="Volvo Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="47141" end="47152" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290200" start="47227" end="47240" title="Madden NFL 07" label="Madden NFL 07"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326931" start="47278" end="47288" title="Moviestorm" label="Moviestorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115940" start="47370" end="47384" title="Jack and Holly" label="Jack and Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q765389" start="47475" end="47491" title="Lionhead Studios" label="Lionhead Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198141" start="47503" end="47527" title="business simulation game" label="business simulation game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331617" start="47534" end="47544" title="The Movies (video game)" label="The Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q86853" start="47552" end="47567" title="Linden Research" label="Linden Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="47595" end="47606" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q137802" start="47664" end="47670" title="Halo 3" label="Halo 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735251" start="47885" end="47905" title="The French Democracy" label="The French Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265873" start="47946" end="47973" title="2005 civil unrest in France" label="2005 civil unrest in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q837923" start="48003" end="48019" title="Garry&amp;#x27;s Mod" label="Garry&amp;#x27;s Mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="48282" end="48293" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="48295" end="48300" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q347418" start="48320" end="48331" title="Gabe Newell" label="Gabe Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q752241" start="48370" end="48379" title="Half-Life (series)" label="Half-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q275402" start="48463" end="48472" title="Sam Raimi" label="Sam Raimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q382108" start="48502" end="48517" title="Team Fortress 2" label="Team Fortress 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330119" start="48654" end="48664" title="non-linear editing system" label="non-linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049816" start="48685" end="48701" title="Source Filmmaker" label="Source Filmmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="48798" end="48801" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q191915" start="48813" end="48819" title="Zero 7" label="Zero 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q640148" start="48833" end="48852" title="Simple Things (Zero 7 album)" label="In the Waiting Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q263952" start="48884" end="48893" title="id Tech 3" label="id Tech 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="48926" end="48937" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q123670729" start="48959" end="48966" title="Bryn Oh" label="Bryn Oh"/>
<link wikidata="Q62587323" start="49127" end="49140" title="Old Town Road" label="Old Town Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q62591281" start="49151" end="49160" title="Lil Nas X" label="Lil Nas X"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="49209" end="49216" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q343568" start="49217" end="49238" title="action-adventure game" label="action-adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q27438121" start="49245" end="49266" title="Red Dead Redemption 2" label="Red Dead Redemption 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604644" start="49291" end="49305" title="3D Movie Maker" label="3D Movie Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="49308" end="49326" title="Computer animation" label="Computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="49329" end="49355" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="Computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q108369211" start="49364" end="49387" title="The Flying Luna Clipper" label="The Flying Luna Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591893" start="49396" end="49413" title="1996 in machinima" label="1996 in machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602129" start="49416" end="49433" title="2003 in machinima" label="2003 in machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603556" start="49436" end="49453" title="2004 in machinima" label="2004 in machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605233" start="49456" end="49473" title="2005 in machinima" label="2005 in machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607285" start="49476" end="49493" title="2006 in machinima" label="2006 in machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609807" start="49496" end="49513" title="2007 in machinima" label="2007 in machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887478" start="49516" end="49553" title="Overwatch and pornography" label="&amp;quot;Overwatch&amp;quot; and pornography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19599" wikidata="Q149299" url="?curid=19599" title="Mutagenesis">
<text>Mutagenesis () is a process by which the genetic information of an organism is changed by the production of a mutation. It may occur spontaneously in nature, or as a result of exposure to mutagens. It can also be achieved experimentally using laboratory procedures. A mutagen is a mutation-causing agent, be it chemical or physical, which results in an increased rate of mutations in an organism&#x27;s genetic code. In nature mutagenesis can lead to cancer and various heritable diseases, and it is also a driving force of evolution. Mutagenesis as a science was developed based on work done by Hermann Muller, Charlotte Auerbach and J. M. Robson in the first half of the 20th century.

==History==
DNA may be modified, either naturally or artificially, by a number of physical, chemical and biological agents, resulting in mutations. Hermann Muller found that &quot;high temperatures&quot; have the ability to mutate genes in the early 1920s, and in 1927, demonstrated a causal link to mutation upon experimenting with an x-ray machine, noting phylogenetic changes when irradiating fruit flies with relatively high dose of X-rays. Muller observed a number of chromosome rearrangements in his experiments, and suggested mutation as a cause of cancer. The association of exposure to radiation and cancer had been observed as early as 1902, six years after the discovery of X-ray by Wilhelm Röntgen, and the discovery of radioactivity by Henri Becquerel. Lewis Stadler, Muller&#x27;s contemporary, also showed the effect of X-rays on mutations in barley in 1928, and of ultraviolet (UV) radiation on maize in 1936. In 1940s, Charlotte Auerbach and J. M. Robson found that mustard gas can also cause mutations in fruit flies.

While changes to the chromosome caused by X-ray and mustard gas were readily observable to early researchers, other changes to the DNA induced by other mutagens were not so easily observable; the mechanism by which they occur may be complex, and take longer to unravel. For example, soot was suggested to be a cause of cancer as early as 1775, and coal tar was demonstrated to cause cancer in 1915. The chemicals involved in both were later shown to be polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). PAHs by themselves are not carcinogenic, and it was proposed in 1950 that the carcinogenic forms of PAHs are the oxides produced as metabolites from cellular processes. The metabolic process was identified in 1960s as catalysis by cytochrome P450, which produces reactive species that can interact with the DNA to form adducts, or product molecules resulting from the reaction of DNA and, in this case, cytochrome P450; the mechanism by which the PAH adducts give rise to mutation, however, is still under investigation.

==Distinction between a mutation and DNA damage==
DNA damage is an abnormal alteration in the structure of DNA that cannot, itself, be replicated when DNA replicates. In contrast, a mutation is a change in the nucleic acid sequence that can be replicated; hence, a mutation can be inherited from one generation to the next. Damage can occur from chemical addition (adduct), or structural disruption to a base of DNA (creating an abnormal nucleotide or nucleotide fragment), or a break in one or both DNA strands. Such DNA damage may result in mutation. When DNA containing damage is replicated, an incorrect base may be inserted in the new complementary strand as it is being synthesized (see DNA repair § Translesion synthesis). The incorrect insertion in the new strand will occur opposite the damaged site in the template strand, and this incorrect insertion can become a mutation (i.e. a changed base pair) in the next round of replication. Furthermore, double-strand breaks in DNA may be repaired by an inaccurate repair process, non-homologous end joining, which produces mutations. Mutations can ordinarily be avoided if accurate DNA repair systems recognize DNA damage and repair it prior to completion of the next round of replication. At least 169 enzymes are either directly employed in DNA repair or influence DNA repair processes. Of these, 83 are directly employed in the 5 types of DNA repair processes indicated in the chart shown in the article DNA repair.

Mammalian nuclear DNA may sustain more than 60,000 damage episodes per cell per day, as listed with references in DNA damage (naturally occurring). If left uncorrected, these adducts, after misreplication past the damaged sites, can give rise to mutations. In nature, the mutations that arise may be beneficial or deleterious—this is the driving force of evolution. An organism may acquire new traits through genetic mutation, but mutation may also result in impaired function of the genes and, in severe cases, causes the death of the organism. Mutation is also a major source for acquisition of resistance to antibiotics in bacteria, and to antifungal agents in yeasts and molds. In a laboratory setting, mutagenesis is a useful technique for generating mutations that allows the functions of genes and gene products to be examined in detail, producing proteins with improved characteristics or novel functions, as well as mutant strains with useful properties. Initially, the ability of radiation and chemical mutagens to cause mutation was exploited to generate random mutations, but later techniques were developed to introduce specific mutations.

In humans, an average of 60 new mutations are transmitted from parent to offspring. Human males, however, tend to pass on more mutations depending on their age, transmitting an average of two new mutations to their progeny with every additional year of their age.

==Mechanisms==
Mutagenesis may occur endogenously (e.g. spontaneous hydrolysis), through normal cellular processes that can generate reactive oxygen species and DNA adducts, or through error in DNA replication and repair. Mutagenesis may also occur as a result of the presence of environmental mutagens that induce changes to an organism&#x27;s DNA. The mechanism by which mutation occurs varies according to the mutagen, or the causative agent, involved. Most mutagens act either directly, or indirectly via mutagenic metabolites, on an organism&#x27;s DNA, producing lesions. Some mutagens, however, may affect the replication or chromosomal partition mechanism, and other cellular processes.

Mutagenesis may also be self-induced by unicellular organisms when environmental conditions are restrictive to the organism&#x27;s growth, such as bacteria growing in the presence of antibiotics, yeast growing in the presence of an antifungal agent, or other unicellular organisms growing in an environment lacking in an essential nutrient 

Many chemical mutagens require biological activation to become mutagenic. An important group of enzymes involved in the generation of mutagenic metabolites is cytochrome P450. Other enzymes that may also produce mutagenic metabolites include glutathione S-transferase and microsomal epoxide hydrolase. Mutagens that are not mutagenic by themselves but require biological activation are called promutagens.

While most mutagens produce effects that ultimately result in errors in replication, for example creating adducts that interfere with replication, some mutagens may directly affect the replication process or reduce its fidelity. Base analog such as 5-bromouracil may substitute for thymine in replication. Metals such as cadmium, chromium, and nickel can increase mutagenesis in a number of ways in addition to direct DNA damage, for example reducing the ability to repair errors, as well as producing epigenetic changes.

Mutations often arise as a result of problems caused by DNA lesions during replication, resulting in errors in replication. In bacteria, extensive damage to DNA due to mutagens results in single-stranded DNA gaps during replication. This induces the SOS response, an emergency repair process that is also error-prone, thereby generating mutations. In mammalian cells, stalling of replication at damaged sites induces a number of rescue mechanisms that help bypass DNA lesions, however, this may also result in errors. The Y family of DNA polymerases specializes in DNA lesion bypass in a process termed translesion synthesis (TLS) whereby these lesion-bypass polymerases replace the stalled high-fidelity replicative DNA polymerase, transit the lesion and extend the DNA until the lesion has been passed so that normal replication can resume; these processes may be error-prone or error-free.

=== DNA damage and spontaneous mutation ===
The number of DNA damage episodes occurring in a mammalian cell per day is high (more than 60,000 per day). Frequent occurrence of DNA damage is likely a problem for all DNA- containing organisms, and the need to cope with DNA damage and minimize their deleterious effects is likely a fundamental problem for life.

Most spontaneous mutations likely arise from error-prone trans-lesion synthesis past a DNA damage site in the template strand during DNA replication. This process can overcome potentially lethal blockages, but at the cost of introducing inaccuracies in daughter DNA. The causal relationship of DNA damage to spontaneous mutation is illustrated by aerobically growing &quot;E. coli&quot; bacteria, in which 89% of spontaneously occurring base substitution mutations are caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced DNA damage. In yeast, more than 60% of spontaneous single-base pair substitutions and deletions are likely caused by trans-lesion synthesis.

An additional significant source of mutations in eukaryotes is the inaccurate DNA repair process non-homologous end joining, that is often employed in repair of double strand breaks.

In general, it appears that the main underlying cause of spontaneous mutation is error-prone trans-lesion synthesis during DNA replication and that the error-prone non-homologous end-joining repair pathway may also be an important contributor in eukaryotes.

=== Spontaneous hydrolysis ===
DNA is not entirely stable in aqueous solution, and depurination of the DNA can occur. Under physiological conditions the glycosidic bond may be hydrolyzed spontaneously and 10,000 purine sites in DNA are estimated to be depurinated each day in a cell. Numerous DNA repair pathways exist for DNA; however, if the apurinic site is not repaired, misincorporation of nucleotides may occur during replication. Adenine is preferentially incorporated by DNA polymerases in an apurinic site.

Cytidine may also become deaminated to uridine at one five-hundredth of the rate of depurination and can result in G to A transition. Eukaryotic cells also contain 5-methylcytosine, thought to be involved in the control of gene transcription, which can become deaminated into thymine.

===Tautomerism===
Tautomerization is the process by which compounds spontaneously rearrange themselves to assume their structural isomer forms. For example, the keto (C=O) forms of guanine and thymine can rearrange into their rare enol (-OH) forms, while the amino (-NH2 ) forms of adenine and cytosine can result in the rarer imino (=NH) forms. In DNA replication, tautomerization alters the base-pairing sites and can cause the improper pairing of nucleic acid bases.

===Modification of bases===
Bases may be modified endogenously by normal cellular molecules. For example, DNA may be methylated by S-adenosylmethionine, thus altering the expression of the marked gene without incurring a mutation to the DNA sequence itself. Histone modification is a related process in which the histone proteins around which DNA coils can be similarly modified via methylation, phosphorylation, or acetylation; these modifications may act to alter gene expression of the local DNA, and may also act to denote locations of damaged DNA in need of repair. DNA may also be glycosylated by reducing sugars.

Many compounds, such as PAHs, aromatic amines, aflatoxin and pyrrolizidine alkaloids, may form reactive oxygen species catalyzed by cytochrome P450. These metabolites form adducts with the DNA, which can cause errors in replication, and the bulky aromatic adducts may form stable intercalation between bases and block replication. The adducts may also induce conformational changes in the DNA. Some adducts may also result in the depurination of the DNA; it is, however, uncertain how significant such depurination as caused by the adducts is in generating mutation.

Alkylation and arylation of bases can cause errors in replication. Some alkylating agents such as N-Nitrosamines may require the catalytic reaction of cytochrome-P450 for the formation of a reactive alkyl cation. N7 and O6 of guanine and the N3 and N7 of adenine are most susceptible to attack. N7-guanine adducts form the bulk of DNA adducts, but they appear to be non-mutagenic. Alkylation at O6 of guanine, however, is harmful because excision repair of O6-adduct of guanine may be poor in some tissues such as the brain. The O6 methylation of guanine can result in G to A transition, while O4-methylthymine can be mispaired with guanine. The type of the mutation generated, however, may be dependent on the size and type of the adduct as well as the DNA sequence.

Ionizing radiation and reactive oxygen species often oxidize guanine to produce 8-oxoguanine.

===Backbone damage===
Ionizing radiation may produce highly reactive free radicals that can break the bonds in the DNA. Double-stranded breakages are especially damaging and hard to repair, producing translocation and deletion of part of a chromosome. Alkylating agents like mustard gas may also cause breakages in the DNA backbone. Oxidative stress may also generate highly reactive oxygen species that can damage DNA. Incorrect repair of other damage induced by the highly reactive species can also lead to mutations.

=== Crosslinking ===
Covalent bonds between the bases of nucleotides in DNA, be they in the same strand or opposing strands, is referred to as crosslinking of DNA; crosslinking of DNA may affect both the replication and the transcription of DNA, and it may be caused by exposure to a variety of agents. Some naturally occurring chemicals may also promote crosslinking, such as psoralens after activation by UV radiation, and nitrous acid. Interstrand cross-linking (between two strands) causes more damage, as it blocks replication and transcription and can cause chromosomal breakages and rearrangements. Some crosslinkers such as cyclophosphamide, mitomycin C and cisplatin are used as anticancer chemotherapeutic because of their high degree of toxicity to proliferating cells.

=== Dimerization ===
Dimerization consists of the bonding of two monomers to form an oligomer, such as the formation of pyrimidine dimers as a result of exposure to UV radiation, which promotes the formation of a cyclobutyl ring between adjacent thymines in DNA. In human skin cells, thousands of dimers may be formed in a day due to normal exposure to sunlight. DNA polymerase η may help bypass these lesions in an error-free manner; however, individuals with defective DNA repair function, such as those with xeroderma pigmentosum, are sensitive to sunlight and may be prone to skin cancer. Clinically, whether a tumor has formed as a direct consequence of UV radiation is discernible via DNA sequencing analysis for the characteristic context-specific dimerization pattern that occurs due to excessive exposure to sunlight.

===Intercalation between bases===
The planar structure of chemicals such as ethidium bromide and proflavine allows them to insert between bases in DNA. This insert causes the DNA&#x27;s backbone to stretch and makes slippage in DNA during replication more likely to occur since the bonding between the strands is made less stable by the stretching. Forward slippage will result in deletion mutation, while reverse slippage will result in an insertion mutation. Also, the intercalation into DNA of anthracyclines such as daunorubicin and doxorubicin interferes with the functioning of the enzyme topoisomerase II, blocking replication as well as causing mitotic homologous recombination.

=== Insertional mutagenesis ===
Transposons and viruses or retrotransposons may insert DNA sequences into coding regions or functional elements of a gene and result in inactivation of the gene.

===Adaptive mutagenesis mechanisms===
Adaptive mutagenesis has been defined as mutagenesis mechanisms that enable an organism to adapt to an environmental stress. Since the variety of environmental stresses is very broad, the mechanisms that enable it are also quite broad, as far as research on the field has shown. For instance, in bacteria, while modulation of the SOS response and endogenous prophage DNA synthesis has been shown to increase &quot;Acinetobacter baumannii&quot; resistance to ciprofloxacin. Resistance mechanisms are presumed to be linked to chromosomal mutation untransferable via horizontal gene transfer in some members of family Enterobacteriaceae, such as &quot;E. coli, Salmonella&quot; spp., &quot;Klebsiella&quot; spp., and &quot;Enterobacter&quot; spp. Chromosomal events, specially gene amplification, seem also to be relevant to this adaptive mutagenesis in bacteria.

Research in eukaryotic cells is much scarcer, but chromosomal events seem also to be rather relevant: while an ectopic intrachromosomal recombination has been reported to be involved in acquisition of resistance to 5-fluorocytosine in &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot;, genome duplications have been found to confer resistance in &quot;S. cerevisiae&quot; to nutrient-poor environments.

== Laboratory applications ==
In the laboratory, mutagenesis is a technique by which DNA mutations are deliberately engineered to produce mutant genes, proteins, or strains of organisms. Various constituents of a gene, such as its control elements and its gene product, may be mutated so that the function of a gene or protein can be examined in detail. The mutation may also produce mutant proteins with altered properties, or enhanced or novel functions that may prove to be of use commercially. Mutant strains of organisms that have practical applications, or allow the molecular basis of particular cell function to be investigated, may also be produced.

Early methods of mutagenesis produced entirely random mutations; however, modern methods of mutagenesis are capable of producing site-specific mutations. Modern laboratory techniques used to generate these mutations include:

* Directed mutagenesis
* Site-directed mutagenesis/ PCR mutagenesis
* Insertional mutagenesis
* Signature tagged mutagenesis
* Transposon mutagenesis
* Sequence saturation mutagenesis

==See also==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149299" start="0" end="11" title="Mutagenesis" label="Mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="67" end="75" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="110" end="118" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221696" start="188" end="195" title="mutagen" label="mutagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="470" end="487" title="heritable disease" label="heritable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="524" end="533" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="596" end="610" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q72787" start="612" end="630" title="Charlotte Auerbach" label="Charlotte Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173735" start="635" end="647" title="J. M. Robson" label="J. M. Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="825" end="833" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="836" end="850" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715253" start="1024" end="1037" title="x-ray machine" label="x-ray machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="1046" end="1058" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="1084" end="1095" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="fruit flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042357" start="1112" end="1121" title="dose rate" label="high dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1125" end="1130" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q35149" start="1382" end="1397" title="Wilhelm Röntgen" label="Wilhelm Röntgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41269" start="1437" end="1452" title="Henri Becquerel" label="Henri Becquerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537070" start="1454" end="1467" title="Lewis Stadler" label="Lewis Stadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1569" end="1580" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q72787" start="1624" end="1642" title="Charlotte Auerbach" label="Charlotte Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173735" start="1647" end="1659" title="J. M. Robson" label="J. M. Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="1671" end="1682" title="mustard gas" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="2178" end="2209" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="2449" end="2464" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q353392" start="2537" end="2543" title="adduct" label="adduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="2847" end="2850" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="2891" end="2905" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="2922" end="2930" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="2950" end="2971" title="nucleic acid sequence" label="nucleic acid sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="3021" end="3030" title="Heredity" label="inherited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3433" end="3467" title="DNA repair#Translesion synthesis" label="DNA repair § Translesion synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065945" start="3775" end="3801" title="non-homologous end joining" label="non-homologous end joining"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="3877" end="3887" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4190" end="4212" title="DNA repair#Frequencies of epimutations in DNA repair genes" label="the article DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="4329" end="4361" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage (naturally occurring)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="4812" end="4837" title="Antimicrobial resistance" label="resistance to antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="5767" end="5790" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153410" start="5795" end="5805" title="DNA adduct" label="DNA adduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q221696" start="6047" end="6054" title="mutagen" label="mutagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="6831" end="6846" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q307302" start="6914" end="6939" title="glutathione S-transferase" label="glutathione S-transferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q87444516" start="6955" end="6972" title="epoxide hydrolase" label="epoxide hydrolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q238477" start="7328" end="7341" title="5-bromouracil" label="5-bromouracil"/>
<link wikidata="Q143584" start="7852" end="7864" title="SOS response" label="SOS response"/>
<link wikidata="Q206286" start="8136" end="8150" title="DNA polymerase" label="DNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8205" end="8226" title="DNA repair#Translesion synthesis" label="translesion synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="8554" end="8564" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8901" end="8935" title="DNA repair#Translesion synthesis" label="error-prone trans-lesion synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065945" start="9612" end="9638" title="non-homologous end joining" label="non-homologous end joining"/>
<link wikidata="Q903582" start="10041" end="10053" title="depurination" label="depurination"/>
<link wikidata="Q422553" start="10111" end="10126" title="glycosidic bond" label="glycosidic bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q188261" start="10170" end="10176" title="purine" label="purine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176783" start="10459" end="10472" title="apurinic site" label="apurinic site"/>
<link wikidata="Q628025" start="10500" end="10510" title="Deamination" label="deaminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q238563" start="10639" end="10655" title="5-methylcytosine" label="5-methylcytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361732" start="10880" end="10897" title="structural isomer" label="structural isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q874745" start="11338" end="11359" title="DNA methylation" label="DNA may be methylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q27135598" start="11363" end="11383" title="S-adenosylmethionine" label="S-adenosylmethionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36293" start="11490" end="11510" title="Histone" label="Histone modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q898365" start="11819" end="11831" title="Glycosylation" label="glycosylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q421982" start="11835" end="11849" title="reducing sugar" label="reducing sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q584276" start="11883" end="11898" title="aromatic amines" label="aromatic amines"/>
<link wikidata="Q212936" start="11900" end="11909" title="aflatoxin" label="aflatoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q75005794" start="11914" end="11936" title="pyrrolizidine alkaloid" label="pyrrolizidine alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="11948" end="11971" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q903582" start="12283" end="12295" title="depurination" label="depurination"/>
<link wikidata="Q177604" start="12421" end="12431" title="Alkylation" label="Alkylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127709" start="12436" end="12445" title="arylation" label="arylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q413779" start="12521" end="12532" title="Nitrosamine" label="Nitrosamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153410" start="12752" end="12763" title="DNA adducts" label="DNA adducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="12859" end="12874" title="excision repair" label="excision repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606712" start="12997" end="13007" title="Transition (genetics)" label="transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644284" start="13270" end="13282" title="8-oxoguanine" label="8-oxoguanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="13307" end="13325" title="Ionizing radiation" label="Ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q916504" start="13485" end="13498" title="Chromosomal translocation" label="translocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898814" start="13618" end="13634" title="Oxidative stress" label="Oxidative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="13660" end="13683" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q417788" start="14183" end="14192" title="psoralens" label="psoralens"/>
<link wikidata="Q408524" start="14438" end="14454" title="cyclophosphamide" label="cyclophosphamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19856779" start="14456" end="14467" title="mitomycin C" label="mitomycin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q412415" start="14472" end="14481" title="cisplatin" label="cisplatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="14505" end="14521" title="Chemotherapy" label="chemotherapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018722" start="14708" end="14724" title="pyrimidine dimer" label="pyrimidine dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="14753" end="14765" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030647" start="14951" end="14967" title="DNA polymerase eta" label="DNA polymerase η"/>
<link wikidata="Q612693" start="15099" end="15120" title="xeroderma pigmentosum" label="xeroderma pigmentosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q408634" start="15492" end="15508" title="ethidium bromide" label="ethidium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q420454" start="15513" end="15523" title="proflavine" label="proflavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540885" start="15632" end="15640" title="Replication slippage" label="slippage"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="15797" end="15814" title="deletion mutation" label="deletion mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650834" start="15857" end="15875" title="insertion mutation" label="insertion mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q417589" start="15913" end="15926" title="anthracycline" label="anthracycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q411659" start="15936" end="15948" title="daunorubicin" label="daunorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="15953" end="15964" title="doxorubicin" label="doxorubicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q411991" start="16011" end="16027" title="topoisomerase II" label="topoisomerase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="16136" end="16146" title="Transposon" label="Transposon"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="16152" end="16157" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="16901" end="16925" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642668" start="18379" end="18402" title="Site-directed mutagenesis" label="site-specific mutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680754" start="18478" end="18498" title="Directed mutagenesis" label="Directed mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642668" start="18501" end="18526" title="Site-directed mutagenesis" label="Site-directed mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642668" start="18528" end="18543" title="PCR mutagenesis" label="PCR mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967554" start="18546" end="18569" title="Insertional mutagenesis" label="Insertional mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512802" start="18572" end="18600" title="Signature tagged mutagenesis" label="Signature tagged mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835335" start="18603" end="18625" title="Transposon mutagenesis" label="Transposon mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692777" start="18628" end="18659" title="Sequence saturation mutagenesis" label="Sequence saturation mutagenesis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19602" wikidata="Q128677" url="?curid=19602" title="Mackenzie Bowell">
<text>Sir Mackenzie Bowell (; December 27, 1823 – December 10, 1917) was a Canadian newspaper publisher and politician, who served as the fifth prime minister of Canada, in office from 1894 to 1896.

Bowell was born in Rickinghall, Suffolk, England. He and his family moved to Belleville, Upper Canada in 1832. When in his early teens, Bowell was apprenticed to the printing shop of the local newspaper, the &quot;Belleville Intelligencer&quot;, and some 15 years later, became its owner and proprietor.

In 1867, following Confederation, he was elected to the House of Commons for the Conservative Party. Bowell entered cabinet in 1878, and would serve under three prime ministers: John A. Macdonald, John Abbott, and John Thompson. He served variously as Minister of Customs (1878–1892), Minister of Militia and Defence (1892), and Minister of Trade and Commerce (1892–1894). Bowell kept his Commons seat continuously for 25 years, through a period of Liberal Party rule in the 1870s. In 1892, Bowell was appointed to the Senate. He became Leader of the Government in the Senate the following year.

In December 1894, Prime Minister Thompson unexpectedly died in office. The Earl of Aberdeen, Canada&#x27;s governor general, appointed Bowell to replace Thompson as prime minister, due to his status as the most senior cabinet member. The main problem of Bowell&#x27;s tenure as prime minister was the Manitoba Schools Question. His attempts at compromise alienated members of his own party, and following a Cabinet revolt in early 1896 he was forced to resign in favour of Charles Tupper. Bowell stayed on as a senator until his death at the age of 93, but never again held ministerial office; he served continuously as a Canadian parliamentarian for 50 years.

==Early life, career, and family==
Bowell was born in Rickinghall, England, to John Bowell and Elizabeth Marshall. In 1832 his family emigrated to Belleville, Upper Canada, where he apprenticed with the printer at the town newspaper, &quot;The Belleville Intelligencer&quot;. He became a successful printer and editor with that newspaper, and later its owner. He was a Freemason and an Orangeman, serving as grandmaster of the Orange Order of British North America, 1870–1878. 
In 1847 he married Harriet Moore, with whom he had five sons and four daughters.

==Military service==

A keen supporter of the militia in Hastings County, he was appointed an Ensign in the 1st Belleville Militia on July 24, 1856. He helped organize the Belleville Volunteer Militia Rifle Company in 1857 with whom he served on active duty at Amherstburg, Upper Canada, during the Trent Affair. He joined the 15th Belleville Battalion (The Argyll Light Infantry) in 1863, and served on active duty as an Ensign in No. 6 Company, 1st (Western) Administrative Battalion, on the Niagara Frontier from December 1864 to July 1865.

On March 23, 1866, he was promoted to Captain in command of No. 1 Company, 15th Battalion and fought in the Fenian Raids of 1866, serving at Prescott and being awarded the Canada General Service Medal. He was promoted to Major in the 49th (Hastings) Battalion of Rifles on February 22, 1867, and qualified for the First Class Certificate at the Military School of Instruction on March 1. He was promoted to Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel on February 22, 1872, and retired from the militia on March 24, 1874, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel in that regiment.


==Elected to Parliament==

Bowell was first elected to the House of Commons in 1867 as a Conservative for the riding of Hastings North, Ontario. He held his seat for the Conservatives when they lost the election of January 1874, in the wake of the Pacific Scandal. Later that year he was instrumental in having Louis Riel expelled from the House.

==Appointed to Cabinet, Senator==
In 1878, with the Conservatives again governing, he joined the Cabinet as minister of customs. In 1892 he became minister of militia and defence, having held his Commons seat continuously for 25 years. A competent, hardworking administrator, Bowell remained in Cabinet as minister of trade and commerce, a newly created portfolio, after he became a senator that same year. His visit to Australia in 1893 led to the first leaders&#x27; conference of British colonies and territories, held in Ottawa in 1894. He became leader of the government in the Senate on October 31, 1893.

==Prime minister (1894–1896)==
In December 1894, Prime Minister John Sparrow David Thompson died suddenly, and Bowell, as the most senior Cabinet minister, was appointed in Thompson&#x27;s stead by the Governor General. Bowell thus became the second of just two Canadian prime ministers (after John Abbott) to hold that office while serving in the Senate rather than the House of Commons.

===Manitoba Schools Question===
As Prime Minister, Bowell faced the Manitoba Schools Question. In 1890, Manitoba had abolished public funding for denominational schools, both Catholic and Protestant, which many thought was contrary to the provisions made for denominational schools in the &quot;Manitoba Act&quot; of 1870. However, in a court challenge, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council held that Manitoba&#x27;s abolition of public funding for denominational schools was consistent with the &quot;Manitoba Act&quot; provision. In a second court case, the Judicial Committee held that the federal Parliament had the authority to enact remedial legislation to force Manitoba to re-establish the funding.

===Leadership crisis===
Bowell and his predecessors struggled to solve this problem, which divided the country and even Bowell&#x27;s own Cabinet. He was further hampered in his handling of the issue by his own indecisiveness on it and by his inability, as a senator, to take part in debates in the House of Commons. Bowell backed legislation, already drafted, that would have forced Manitoba to restore its Catholic schools, but then postponed it due to opposition within his Cabinet. With the ordinary business of government at a standstill, several members of Cabinet decided that Bowell was incompetent to lead. To force him to step down, seven ministers resigned and then foiled the appointment of successors. Bowell denounced them as &quot;a nest of traitors&quot;.

===Resignation===
Bowell was forced to resign as prime minister. After ten days, following an intervention on Bowell&#x27;s behalf by the Governor General, the government crisis was resolved and matters seemingly returned to normal when six of the ministers were reinstated, but leadership was then effectively held by Charles Tupper, who had joined Cabinet at the same time, filling the seventh place. Tupper, who had been Canadian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom, had been recalled by the plotters to replace Bowell. Bowell formally resigned in favour of Tupper at the end of the parliamentary session.

==Later life and death==
Bowell stayed in the Senate, serving as his party&#x27;s leader there until 1906, and afterward as a regular Senator until his death in 1917, having served continuously for more than 50 years as a federal parliamentarian.

He died of pneumonia in Belleville, seventeen days short of his 94th birthday. He was buried in the Belleville cemetery. His funeral was attended by a full complement of the Orange Order, but not by any currently or formerly elected member of the government.

==Legacy==
Bowell was designated a National Historic Person in 1945, on the advice of the national Historic Sites and Monuments Board.

The Post Office Department honored Bowell with a commemorative stamp in 1954, part of a series on prime ministers.

In their 1998 study of the Canadian prime ministers up through Jean Chrétien, J. L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer found that a survey of Canadian historians ranked Bowell #19 out of the 20 Prime Ministers up until then.

Until 2017, Bowell remained the only Canadian prime minister without a full-length biography of his life and career. This shortfall was solved when the Belleville historian Betsy Dewar Boyce&#x27;s book &quot;The Accidental Prime Minister&quot; was published by Bancroft, Ontario publisher Kirby Books. The book was published on the centennial of Bowell&#x27;s death. Boyce had died in 2007, having unsuccessfully sought a publisher for her work for a decade.

==Supreme Court appointments==
The following jurist was appointed to the Supreme Court of Canada by the Governor General during Bowell&#x27;s tenure:
* Désiré Girouard (September 28, 1895 – March 22, 1911)

==See also==

* List of prime ministers of Canada

== Archives ==
There is a Sir Mackenzie Bowell fonds at Library and Archives Canada. It includes 6.1 m of textual records.

==Notes==
==Further reading==
&quot;The Accidental Prime Minister&quot;, by Betsy Dewar Boyce, 2017, Kirby Publishing, Bancroft, Ontario, .

==External links==
* 
* J. L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer, &quot;Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada&#x27;s Leaders&quot;, Toronto: HarperCollins Publishers Ltd., a Phyllis Bruce Book, 1999. pp. 42–44. .
*Photograph:Hon. Mackenzie Bowell, 1881 - McCord Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128677" start="0" end="20" title="Mackenzie Bowell" label="Sir Mackenzie Bowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="138" end="162" title="prime minister of Canada" label="prime minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331981" start="213" end="224" title="Rickinghall" label="Rickinghall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34227" start="271" end="281" title="Belleville, Ontario" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="283" end="295" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883859" start="408" end="432" title="Belleville Intelligencer" label="Belleville Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q909849" start="499" end="506" title="1867 Canadian federal election" label="In 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="518" end="531" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="555" end="571" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="580" end="598" title="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="615" end="622" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="677" end="694" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q128696" start="696" end="707" title="John Abbott" label="John Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q128686" start="713" end="726" title="John Sparrow David Thompson" label="John Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866087" start="751" end="770" title="Minister of Customs" label="Minister of Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866245" start="784" end="815" title="Minister of Militia and Defence (Canada)" label="Minister of Militia and Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="1018" end="1024" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506575" start="1036" end="1074" title="Leader of the Government in the Senate (Canada)" label="Leader of the Government in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335981" start="1171" end="1187" title="John Hamilton-Gordon, 1st Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair" label="Earl of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="1203" end="1219" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538672" start="1397" end="1422" title="Manitoba Schools Question" label="Manitoba Schools Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q128672" start="1569" end="1583" title="Charles Tupper" label="Charles Tupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="1718" end="1726" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331981" start="1812" end="1823" title="Rickinghall" label="Rickinghall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34227" start="1905" end="1915" title="Belleville, Ontario" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="1917" end="1929" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883859" start="2002" end="2026" title="Belleville Intelligencer" label="Belleville Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2127" end="2136" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="2144" end="2153" title="Orange Institution" label="Orangeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314135" start="2364" end="2371" title="Canadian Militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595679" start="2412" end="2418" title="Ensign (rank)" label="Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2426" end="2448" title="1st Belleville Militia" label="1st Belleville Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110236351" start="2490" end="2532" title="Belleville Volunteer Militia Rifle Company" label="Belleville Volunteer Militia Rifle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q385335" start="2579" end="2590" title="Amherstburg" label="Amherstburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166330" start="2617" end="2629" title="Trent Affair" label="Trent Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q110236351" start="2672" end="2697" title="The Argyll Light Infantry" label="The Argyll Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2923" end="2952" title="Argyll Light Infantry#15th Belleville Battalion Volunteer Militia (16 January 1863)" label="No. 1 Company, 15th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="2971" end="2983" title="Fenian Raids" label="Fenian Raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654818" start="3035" end="3063" title="Canada General Service Medal" label="Canada General Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521212" start="3097" end="3132" title="49th (Hastings) Battalion of Rifles" label="49th (Hastings) Battalion of Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="3481" end="3497" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="3511" end="3523" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128251" start="3542" end="3556" title="Hastings North" label="Hastings North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729323" start="3670" end="3685" title="Pacific Scandal" label="Pacific Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313691" start="3733" end="3743" title="Louis Riel" label="Louis Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4190" end="4199" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="4253" end="4269" title="British colonies" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="4295" end="4301" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506575" start="4321" end="4359" title="Leader of the Government in the Senate (Canada)" label="leader of the government in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128686" start="4446" end="4473" title="John Sparrow David Thompson" label="John Sparrow David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128696" start="4676" end="4687" title="John Abbott" label="John Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538672" start="4840" end="4865" title="Manitoba Schools Question" label="Manitoba Schools Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="4876" end="4884" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4947" end="4955" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4960" end="4970" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890465" start="5067" end="5079" title="Manitoba Act" label="Manitoba Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="5130" end="5169" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q128672" start="6579" end="6593" title="Charles Tupper" label="Charles Tupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="6693" end="6710" title="High Commissioner" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6718" end="6732" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="7133" end="7142" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883852" start="7222" end="7241" title="Belleville cemetery" label="Belleville cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032001" start="7522" end="7544" title="Canada Post" label="Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="7697" end="7710" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157186" start="7712" end="7729" title="Jack Granatstein" label="J. L. Granatstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052344" start="7734" end="7748" title="Norman Hillmer" label="Norman Hillmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47006076" start="8029" end="8046" title="Betsy Dewar Boyce" label="Betsy Dewar Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850051" start="8118" end="8135" title="Bancroft, Ontario" label="Bancroft, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="8390" end="8413" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="8421" end="8437" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045176" start="8469" end="8484" title="Désiré Girouard" label="Désiré Girouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q927338" start="8540" end="8573" title="List of prime ministers of Canada" label="List of prime ministers of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052382" start="8622" end="8627" title="fonds" label="fonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="8631" end="8658" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q47006076" start="8775" end="8792" title="Betsy Dewar Boyce" label="Betsy Dewar Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850051" start="8818" end="8835" title="Bancroft, Ontario" label="Bancroft, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157186" start="8864" end="8881" title="Jack Granatstein" label="J. L. Granatstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052344" start="8886" end="8900" title="Norman Hillmer" label="Norman Hillmer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19603" wikidata="Q127050" url="?curid=19603" title="Manhattan Project">
<text>The Manhattan Project was a research and development program undertaken during World War II to produce the first nuclear weapons. It was led by the United States in collaboration with the United Kingdom and Canada. 

From 1942 to 1946, the project was directed by Major General Leslie Groves of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Nuclear physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer was the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory that designed the bombs. The Army program was designated the Manhattan District, as its first headquarters were in Manhattan; the name gradually superseded the official codename, Development of Substitute Materials, for the entire project. The project absorbed its earlier British counterpart, Tube Alloys, and subsumed the program from the American civilian Office of Scientific Research and Development. 

The Manhattan Project employed nearly 130,000 people at its peak and cost nearly US$2 billion (equivalent to about $ billion in ), over 80 percent of which was for building and operating the plants that produced the fissile material which acted as fuel for the bombs. Enriched uranium was produced at Clinton Engineer Works in Tennessee. Plutonium was produced in the world&#x27;s first industrial-scale nuclear reactors, built at Hanford Site in Washington. Each of these sites were supported by dozens of other facilities across the US, the UK, and Canada. Initially, it was assumed that both fuels could be used in a relatively simple atomic bomb design known as the gun-type design. When it was discovered that this design was incompatible for use with plutonium, an intense development program led to the invention of the implosion design. The work on weapons design was performed at the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico, and resulted in two weapons designs that were used during the war: Little Boy (enriched uranium gun-type) and Fat Man (plutonium implosion).

The first nuclear device ever detonated was an implosion-type bomb during the Trinity test, conducted at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico on 16 July 1945. The project also was responsible for developing the specific means of delivering the weapons onto military targets, and were responsible for the use of the Little Boy and Fat Man bombs in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. 

The project was also charged with gathering intelligence on the German nuclear weapon project. Through Operation Alsos, Manhattan Project personnel served in Europe, sometimes behind enemy lines, where they gathered nuclear materials and documents and rounded up German scientists. Despite the Manhattan Project&#x27;s own emphasis on security, Soviet atomic spies penetrated the program.

In the immediate postwar years, the Manhattan Project conducted weapons testing at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Crossroads, developed new weapons, promoted the development of the network of national laboratories, supported medical research into radiology, and laid the foundations for the nuclear navy. It maintained control over American atomic weapons research and production until the formation of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) in January 1947.

== Origins ==

The discovery of nuclear fission by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938, and its theoretical explanation by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch, made an atomic bomb theoretically possible. There were fears that a German atomic bomb project would develop one first, especially among scientists who were refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries. In August 1939, Hungarian-born physicists Leo Szilard and Eugene Wigner drafted the Einstein–Szilard letter, which warned of the potential development of &quot;extremely powerful bombs of a new type&quot;. It urged the United States to acquire stockpiles of uranium ore and accelerate the research of Enrico Fermi and others into nuclear chain reactions. They had it signed by Albert Einstein and delivered to President Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

Roosevelt called on Lyman Briggs of the National Bureau of Standards to head an Advisory Committee on Uranium; Briggs met with Szilard, Wigner and Edward Teller in October 1939. The committee reported back to Roosevelt in November that uranium &quot;would provide a possible source of bombs with a destructiveness vastly greater than anything now known.&quot;
In February 1940, the U.S. Navy awarded Columbia University $6,000, most of which Fermi and Szilard spent on graphite. A team of Columbia professors including Fermi, Szilard, Eugene T. Booth and John Dunning created the first nuclear fission reaction in the Americas, verifying the work of Hahn and Strassmann. The same team subsequently built a series of prototype nuclear reactors (or &quot;piles&quot; as Fermi called them) in Pupin Hall at Columbia but were not yet able to achieve a chain reaction. The Advisory Committee on Uranium became the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) on Uranium when that organization was formed on 27 June 1940.

On 28 June 1941, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8807, which created the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD), under director Vannevar Bush. The office was empowered to engage in research and large engineering projects. The NDRC Committee on Uranium became the S-1 Section of the OSRD; the word &quot;uranium&quot; was dropped for security reasons. In July 1941, Briggs proposed spending $167,000 on researching uranium, particularly the uranium-235 isotope, and plutonium, which had been isolated for the first time at the University of California in February 1941.

In Britain, Frisch and Rudolf Peierls at the University of Birmingham had made a breakthrough investigating the critical mass of uranium-235 in June 1939. Their calculations indicated that it was within an order of magnitude of , small enough to be carried by contemporary bombers. Their March 1940 Frisch–Peierls memorandum initiated the British atomic bomb project and its MAUD Committee, which unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb. In July 1940, Britain had offered to give the United States access to its research, and the Tizard Mission&#x27;s John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments. He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British, and not as advanced.

As part of the scientific exchange, the MAUD Committee&#x27;s findings were conveyed to the United States. One of its members, the Australian physicist Mark Oliphant, flew to the US in late August 1941 and discovered that data provided by the MAUD Committee had not reached key American physicists. Oliphant set out to find out why the committee&#x27;s findings were apparently being ignored. He met with the Uranium Committee and visited Berkeley, California, where he spoke persuasively to Ernest O. Lawrence. Lawrence was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research into uranium. He in turn spoke to James B. Conant, Arthur H. Compton and George B. Pegram. Oliphant&#x27;s mission was therefore a success; key American physicists were now aware of the potential power of an atomic bomb.

On 9 October 1941, President Roosevelt approved the atomic program after he convened a meeting with Vannevar Bush and Vice President Henry A. Wallace. He created a Top Policy Group consisting of himself—although he never attended a meeting—Wallace, Bush, Conant, Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, and the Chief of Staff of the Army, General George C. Marshall. Roosevelt chose the Army to run the project rather than the Navy, because the Army had more experience with managing large-scale construction. He agreed to coordinate the effort with the British and on 11 October sent a message to Prime Minister Winston Churchill, suggesting that they correspond on atomic matters.

== Feasibility ==
=== Proposals ===

The S-1 Committee meeting on 18 December 1941 was &quot;pervaded by an atmosphere of enthusiasm and urgency&quot; in the wake of the attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States declaration of war on Japan and on Germany. Work was proceeding on three techniques for isotope separation: Lawrence and his team at the University of California investigated electromagnetic separation, Eger Murphree and Jesse Wakefield Beams&#x27;s team looked into gaseous diffusion at Columbia University, and Philip Abelson directed research into thermal diffusion at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and later the Naval Research Laboratory. Murphree also headed an unsuccessful separation project using gas centrifuges.

Meanwhile, there were two lines of investigation into nuclear reactor technology: Harold Urey researched heavy water at Columbia, while Arthur Compton organized the Metallurgical Laboratory in early 1942 to study plutonium and reactors using graphite as a neutron moderator. The S-1 Committee recommended pursuing all five technologies. This was approved by Bush, Conant, and Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer, who had been designated the Army&#x27;s representative on nuclear matters.

Bush and Conant then took the recommendation to the Top Policy Group with a budget proposal for $54 million for construction by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, $31 million for research and development by OSRD and $5 million for contingencies in fiscal year 1943. They sent it on 17 June 1942, to the President, who approved it by writing &quot;OK FDR&quot; on the document.

=== Bomb design concepts ===

Arthur Compton asked theoretical physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer of the University of California to take over research into fast neutron calculations—key to calculations of critical mass and weapon detonation—from Gregory Breit, who had quit on 18 May 1942 because of concerns over lax operational security. John H. Manley, a physicist at the Metallurgical Laboratory, was assigned to assist Oppenheimer by coordinating experimental physics groups scattered across the country. Oppenheimer and Robert Serber of the University of Illinois examined the problems of neutron diffusion—how neutrons moved in a nuclear chain reaction—and hydrodynamics—how the explosion produced by a chain reaction might behave.

To review this work and the general theory of fission reactions, Oppenheimer and Fermi convened meetings at the University of Chicago in June and at the University of California in July 1942 with theoretical physicists Hans Bethe, John Van Vleck, Edward Teller, Emil Konopinski, Robert Serber, Stan Frankel, and Eldred C. (Carlyle) Nelson, and experimental physicists Emilio Segrè, Felix Bloch, Franco Rasetti, Manley, and Edwin McMillan. They tentatively confirmed that a fission bomb was theoretically possible.

The properties of pure uranium-235 were relatively unknown, as were those of plutonium, which had only been isolated by Glenn Seaborg and his team in February 1941. The scientists at the July 1942 conference envisioned creating plutonium in nuclear reactors where uranium-238 atoms absorbed neutrons that had been emitted from fissioning uranium-235. At this point no reactor had been built, and only tiny quantities of plutonium were available from cyclotrons. Even by December 1943, only two milligrams had been produced. There were many ways of arranging the fissile material into a critical mass. The simplest was shooting a &quot;cylindrical plug&quot; into a sphere of &quot;active material&quot; with a &quot;tamper&quot;—dense material to focus neutrons inward and keep the reacting mass together to increase its efficiency. They also explored designs involving spheroids, a primitive form of &quot;implosion&quot; suggested by Richard C. Tolman, and the possibility of autocatalytic methods to increase the efficiency of the bomb as it exploded.

As the idea of the fission bomb was theoretically settled—at least until more experimental data was available—Edward Teller pushed for discussion of a more powerful bomb: the &quot;super&quot;, now usually referred to as a &quot;hydrogen bomb&quot;, which would use the force of a detonating fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and tritium. Teller proposed scheme after scheme, but Bethe refused each one. The fusion idea was put aside to concentrate on producing fission bombs. Teller raised the speculative possibility that an atomic bomb might &quot;ignite&quot; the atmosphere because of a hypothetical fusion reaction of nitrogen nuclei. Bethe calculated that it was &quot;extremely unlikely&quot;. A postwar report co-authored by Teller concluded that &quot;whatever the temperature to which a section of the atmosphere may be heated, no self-propagating chain of nuclear reactions is likely to be started.&quot; In Serber&#x27;s account, Oppenheimer mentioned the possibility of this scenario to Arthur Compton, who &quot;didn&#x27;t have enough sense to shut up about it. It somehow got into a document that went to Washington&quot; and was &quot;never laid to rest&quot;.

== Organization ==

=== Manhattan District ===
The Chief of Engineers, Major General Eugene Reybold, selected Colonel James C. Marshall to head the Army&#x27;s part of the project in June 1942. Marshall created a liaison office in Washington, D.C., but established his temporary headquarters at 270 Broadway in New York, where he could draw on administrative support from the Corps of Engineers&#x27; North Atlantic Division. It was close to the Manhattan office of Stone &amp; Webster, the principal project contractor, and to Columbia University. He had permission to draw on his former command, the Syracuse District, for staff, and he started with Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Nichols, who became his deputy.
Because most of his task involved construction, Marshall worked in cooperation with the head of the Corps of Engineers Construction Division, Major General Thomas M. Robins, and his deputy, Colonel Leslie Groves. Reybold, Somervell, and Styer decided to call the project &quot;Development of Substitute Materials&quot;, but Groves felt that this would draw attention. Since engineer districts normally carried the name of the city where they were located, Marshall and Groves agreed to name the Army&#x27;s component the Manhattan District; Reybold officially created this district on 13 August. Informally, it was known as the Manhattan Engineer District, or MED. Unlike other districts, it had no geographic boundaries, and Marshall had the authority of a division engineer. Development of Substitute Materials remained as the official codename of the project as a whole but was supplanted over time by &quot;Manhattan&quot;.

Marshall later conceded that, &quot;I had never heard of atomic fission but I did know that you could not build much of a plant, much less four of them for $90 million.&quot; A single TNT plant that Nichols had recently built in Pennsylvania had cost $128 million. Nor were they impressed with estimates to the nearest order of magnitude, which Groves compared with telling a caterer to prepare for between ten and a thousand guests. A survey team from Stone &amp; Webster had already scouted a site for the production plants. The War Production Board recommended sites around Knoxville, Tennessee, an isolated area where the Tennessee Valley Authority could supply ample electric power and the rivers could provide cooling water for the reactors. After examining several sites, the survey team selected one near Elza, Tennessee. Conant advised that it be acquired at once, Styer agreed, but Marshall temporized, awaiting the results of Conant&#x27;s reactor experiments. Of the prospective processes, only Lawrence&#x27;s electromagnetic separation appeared sufficiently advanced for construction to commence.

Marshall and Nichols began assembling the necessary resources. The first step was to obtain a high priority rating for the project. The top ratings were AA-1 through AA-4 in descending order, although there was a special AAA rating reserved for emergencies. Ratings AA-1 and AA-2 were for essential weapons and equipment, so Colonel Lucius D. Clay, the deputy chief of staff at Services and Supply for requirements and resources, felt that the highest rating he could assign was AA-3, although he was willing to provide a AAA rating on request for critical materials if the need arose. Nichols and Marshall were disappointed; AA-3 was the same priority as Nichols&#x27; TNT plant in Pennsylvania.

=== Military Policy Committee ===

Vannevar Bush became dissatisfied with Colonel Marshall&#x27;s failure to get the project moving forward expeditiously and felt that more aggressive leadership was required. He spoke to Harvey Bundy and Generals Marshall, Somervell, and Styer about his concerns, advocating that the project be placed under a senior policy committee, with a prestigious officer, preferably Styer, as director.

Somervell and Styer selected Groves for the post; General Marshall ordered that he be promoted to brigadier general, as it was felt that the title &quot;general&quot; would hold more sway with the academic scientists working on the project. Groves&#x27; orders placed him directly under Somervell rather than Reybold, with Colonel Marshall now answerable to Groves. Groves established his headquarters in Washington, D.C., in the New War Department Building, where Colonel Marshall had his liaison office. He assumed command of the Manhattan Project on 23 September 1942. Later that day, he attended a meeting called by Stimson, which established a Military Policy Committee, responsible to the Top Policy Group, consisting of Bush (with Conant as an alternate), Styer and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell. Tolman and Conant were later appointed as Groves&#x27; scientific advisers.

On 19 September, Groves went to Donald Nelson, the chairman of the War Production Board, and asked for broad authority to issue a AAA rating whenever it was required. Nelson initially balked but quickly caved in when Groves threatened to go to the President. Groves promised not to use the AAA rating unless it was necessary. It soon transpired that for the routine requirements of the project the AAA rating was too high but the AA-3 rating was too low. After a long campaign, Groves finally received AA-1 authority on 1 July 1944. According to Groves, &quot;In Washington you became aware of the importance of top priority. Most everything proposed in the Roosevelt administration would have top priority. That would last for about a week or two and then something else would get top priority&quot;.

One of Groves&#x27; early problems was to find a director for Project Y, the group that would design and build the bomb. The obvious choice was one of the three laboratory heads, Urey, Lawrence, or Arthur Compton, but they could not be spared. Compton recommended Oppenheimer, who was already intimately familiar with the bomb design concepts. However, Oppenheimer had little administrative experience, and, unlike Urey, Lawrence, and Compton, had not won a Nobel Prize, which many scientists felt that the head of such an important laboratory should have. There were also concerns about Oppenheimer&#x27;s security status, as many of his associates were communists, including his wife, Kitty; his girlfriend, Jean Tatlock; and his brother, Frank. A long conversation in October 1942 convinced Groves and Nichols that Oppenheimer thoroughly understood the issues involved in setting up a laboratory in a remote area and should be appointed as its director. Groves personally waived the security requirements and issued Oppenheimer&#x27;s clearance on 20 July 1943.

=== Collaboration with the United Kingdom ===

The British and Americans exchanged nuclear information but did not initially combine their efforts; in 1940–41 the British project (Tube Alloys) was larger and more advanced. British leadership initially opposed an offer by Bush and Conant in August 1941 to pool the nations&#x27; atomic efforts, but the British, who had made significant advances in research early in the war, did not have the resources to carry it into development while devoting a large portion of their economy to the war; Tube Alloys soon fell behind its American counterpart. The roles of the two countries were reversed, and in January 1943 Conant notified the British that they would no longer receive atomic information except in certain areas. The British investigated the possibility of an independent nuclear program but determined that it could not be ready in time to impact the war in Europe.
By March 1943 Conant decided that James Chadwick and one or two other British scientists were important enough that the bomb design team at Los Alamos needed them, despite the risk of revealing weapon design secrets. In August 1943 Churchill and Roosevelt negotiated the Quebec Agreement, which established the Combined Policy Committee to coordinate the efforts of the US and UK; Canada was not a signatory, but the Agreement provided for a Canadian representative on the Combined Policy Committee in view of Canada&#x27;s contribution to the effort. An agreement between Roosevelt and Churchill known as the Hyde Park Aide-Mémoire, signed in late September 1944, extended the Quebec Agreement to the postwar period and suggested that &quot;when a &#x27;bomb&#x27; is finally available, it might perhaps, after mature consideration, be used against the Japanese, who should be warned that this bombardment will be repeated until they surrender&quot;.

When cooperation resumed after the Quebec Agreement, the Americans&#x27; progress and expenditures amazed the British. Chadwick pressed for British involvement in the Manhattan Project to the fullest extent and abandoned hopes of an independent British project during the war. With Churchill&#x27;s backing, he attempted to ensure that every request from Groves for assistance was honored. The British Mission that arrived in the United States in December 1943 included Niels Bohr, Otto Frisch, Klaus Fuchs, Rudolf Peierls, and Ernest Titterton. More scientists arrived in early 1944. While those assigned to gaseous diffusion left by the fall of 1944, the thirty-five working under Oliphant with Lawrence at Berkeley were assigned to existing laboratory groups and most stayed until the end of the war. The nineteen sent to Los Alamos also joined existing groups, primarily related to implosion and bomb assembly, but not the plutonium-related ones. The Quebec Agreement specified that nuclear weapons would not be used against another country without the mutual consent of the US and UK. In June 1945, Wilson agreed that the nuclear bombing of Japan would be recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee.

The Combined Policy Committee created the Combined Development Trust in June 1944, with Groves as its chairman, to procure uranium and thorium ores on international markets. The Belgian Congo and Canada held much of the world&#x27;s uranium outside Eastern Europe, and the Belgian Government in Exile was in London. Britain agreed to give the United States most of the Belgian ore, as it could not use most of the supply without restricted American research. In 1944, the Trust purchased of uranium oxide ore from companies operating mines in the Belgian Congo. To avoid briefing US Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr., a special account not subject to the usual auditing and controls was used to hold Trust monies. Between 1944 and his resignation from the Trust in 1947, Groves deposited a total of $37.5 million.

Groves later said that the British scientists&#x27; direct contributions to the Manhattan Project were &quot;helpful but not vital,&quot; but &quot;there probably would have been no atomic bomb to drop on Hiroshima&quot; without Britain&#x27;s (particularly Churchill&#x27;s) impetus. The British wartime participation was crucial to the success of their independent nuclear weapons program when the McMahon Act of 1946 temporarily ended American nuclear cooperation.

== Project sites ==
=== Oak Ridge ===
The day after he took over the project, Groves went to Tennessee with Colonel Marshall to inspect the proposed site there, and Groves was impressed. On 29 September 1942, United States Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson authorized the Corps of Engineers to acquire of land by eminent domain at a cost of $3.5 million. An additional was subsequently acquired. About 1,000 families were affected by the order, which came into effect on 7 October. Protests, legal appeals, and a 1943 Congressional inquiry were to no avail. By mid-November U.S. Marshals were posting notices to vacate on farmhouse doors, and construction contractors were moving in. Some families were given two weeks&#x27; notice to vacate farms that had been their homes for generations. The ultimate cost of the land acquisition, which was not completed until March 1945, was only about $2.6 million—around $47 an acre. When presented with a proclamation declaring Oak Ridge a total exclusion area that no one could enter without military permission, the Governor of Tennessee, Prentice Cooper, angrily tore it up.

Initially known as the Kingston Demolition Range, the site was officially renamed the Clinton Engineer Works (CEW) in early 1943. While Stone &amp; Webster concentrated on the production facilities, the architectural and engineering firm Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill developed a residential community for 13,000. The community was located on the slopes of Black Oak Ridge, from which the new town of Oak Ridge got its name. The Army presence at Oak Ridge increased in August 1943 when Nichols replaced Marshall as head of the Manhattan Engineer District. One of his first tasks was to move the district headquarters to Oak Ridge, although the name of the district did not change. In September 1943 the administration of community facilities was outsourced to Turner Construction Company through a subsidiary, the Roane-Anderson Company. Chemical engineers were part of &quot;frantic efforts&quot; to make 10% to 12% enriched uranium 235, with tight security and fast approvals for supplies and materials. The population of Oak Ridge soon expanded well beyond the initial plans, and peaked at 75,000 in May 1945, by which time 82,000 people were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works, and 10,000 by Roane-Anderson.

=== Los Alamos ===
The idea of locating Project Y at Oak Ridge was considered, but it was decided that it should be in a remote location. On Oppenheimer&#x27;s recommendation, the search for a suitable site was narrowed to the vicinity of Albuquerque, New Mexico, where Oppenheimer owned a ranch. On 16 November 1942, Oppenheimer, Groves, Dudley and others toured the vicinity of the Los Alamos Ranch School. Oppenheimer expressed a strong preference for the site, citing its natural beauty, which, it was hoped, would inspire those working on the project. The engineers were concerned about the poor access road, and whether the water supply would be adequate, but otherwise felt that it was ideal.

Patterson approved the acquisition of the site on 25 November 1942, authorizing $440,000 for the purchase of pre-calculated , all but of which were already owned by the Federal Government. Secretary of Agriculture Claude R. Wickard granted about of United States Forest Service land to the War Department &quot;for so long as the military necessity continues&quot;. Wartime land purchases eventually came to , but only $414,971 was spent. Work commenced in December 1942. Groves initially allocated $300,000 for construction, three times Oppenheimer&#x27;s estimate, but by the time Sundt finished on 30 November 1943, over $7 million had been spent.

During the war, Los Alamos was referred to as &quot;Site Y&quot; or &quot;the Hill&quot;. Initially it was to have been a military laboratory with Oppenheimer and other researchers commissioned into the Army, but Robert Bacher and Isidor Rabi balked at the idea and convinced Oppenheimer that other scientists would object. Conant, Groves, and Oppenheimer then devised a compromise whereby the laboratory was operated by the University of California under contract to the War Department. Dorothy McKibbin ran the branch office in Santa Fe, where she met new arrivals and issue them with passes.

=== Chicago ===
An Army-OSRD council on 25 June 1942 decided to build a pilot plant for plutonium production in the Argonne Forest preserve, southwest of Chicago. This was designated Site A. In July, Nichols arranged for a lease of from the Cook County Forest Preserve District, and Captain James F. Grafton was appointed Chicago area engineer. It soon became apparent that the scale of operations was too great for the area, and it was decided to build the pilot plant at Oak Ridge and keep a research and testing facility in Chicago.

Delays in establishing the plant at Site A led Arthur Compton to authorize the Metallurgical Laboratory to construct the first nuclear reactor beneath the bleachers of Stagg Field at the University of Chicago. The reactor required an enormous amount of highly purified graphite blocks and uranium in both metallic and powdered oxide forms. At the time, there was a limited source of pure uranium metal; Frank Spedding of Iowa State University was able to produce only two short tons. Three short tons was supplied by Westinghouse Lamp Plant, produced in a rush with makeshift process. A large square balloon was constructed by Goodyear Tire to encase the reactor.

On 2 December 1942, a team led by Enrico Fermi initiated the first artificial self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction in an experimental reactor known as Chicago Pile-1. The point at which a reaction becomes self-sustaining became known as &quot;going critical&quot;. Compton reported the success to Conant in Washington, D.C., by a coded phone call, saying, &quot;The Italian navigator [Fermi] has just landed in the new world.&quot;

In January 1943, Grafton&#x27;s successor, Major Arthur V. Peterson, ordered Chicago Pile-1 dismantled and reassembled at the Site A in the forest preserve, as he regarded the operation of a reactor as too hazardous for a densely populated area. Site A continued scientific research as a secret extension of the Metallurgical Laboratory at the university. Chicago Pile-3, the first heavy water reactor, also went critical at this site, on 15 May 1944. After the war, operations at Site A were moved about to DuPage County, the current location of the Argonne National Laboratory.

=== Hanford ===

By December 1942 there were concerns that even Oak Ridge was too close to a major population center (Knoxville) in the unlikely event of a major nuclear accident. Groves recruited DuPont in November 1942 to be the prime contractor for the construction of the plutonium production complex. The President of the company, Walter S. Carpenter Jr., wanted no profit of any kind; for legal reasons a nominal fee of one dollar was agreed upon.
DuPont recommended that the site be located far from the existing uranium production facility at Oak Ridge. In December 1942, Groves dispatched Colonel Franklin Matthias and DuPont engineers to scout potential sites. Matthias reported that Hanford Site near Richland, Washington, was &quot;ideal in virtually all respects&quot;. It was isolated and near the Columbia River, which could supply sufficient water to cool the reactors. Groves visited the site in January and established the Hanford Engineer Works (HEW), codenamed &quot;Site W&quot;.

Under Secretary Patterson gave his approval on 9 February, allocating $5 million for the acquisition of . The federal government relocated some 1,500 residents of nearby settlements, as well as the Wanapum and other tribes using the area. A dispute arose with farmers over compensation for crops, which had already been planted. Where schedules allowed, the Army allowed the crops to be harvested, but this was not always possible. The land acquisition process dragged on and was not completed before the end of the Manhattan Project in December 1946.

The dispute did not delay work. Although progress on the reactor design at Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont was not sufficiently advanced to accurately predict the scope of the project, a start was made in April 1943 on facilities for an estimated 25,000 workers, half of whom were expected to live on-site. By July 1944, some 1,200 buildings had been erected and nearly 51,000 people were living in the construction camp. As area engineer, Matthias exercised overall control of the site. At its peak, the construction camp was the third most populous town in Washington state. Hanford operated a fleet of over 900 buses, more than the city of Chicago. Like Los Alamos and Oak Ridge, Richland was a gated community with restricted access, but it looked more like a typical wartime American boomtown: the military profile was lower, and physical security elements like high fences and guard dogs were less evident.

=== Canadian sites ===
Canada provided research, extraction and production of uranium and plutonium, and Canadian scientists worked at Los Alamos.

==== British Columbia ====
Cominco had produced electrolytic hydrogen at Trail, British Columbia, since 1930. Urey suggested in 1941 that it could produce heavy water. To the existing $10 million plant consisting of 3,215 cells consuming 75 MW of hydroelectric power, secondary electrolysis cells were added to increase the deuterium concentration in the water from 2.3% to 99.8%. For this process, Hugh Taylor of Princeton developed a platinum-on-carbon catalyst for the first three stages while Urey developed a nickel-chromia one for the fourth stage tower. The final cost was $2.8 million. The Canadian Government did not officially learn of the project until August 1942. Trail&#x27;s heavy water production started in January 1944 and continued until 1956. Heavy water from Trail was used for Chicago Pile 3, the first reactor using heavy water and natural uranium, which went critical on 15 May 1944.

==== Ontario ====
The Chalk River, Ontario, site was established to rehouse the Allied effort at the Montreal Laboratory away from an urban area. A new community was built at Deep River, Ontario, to provide residences and facilities for the team members. The site was chosen for its proximity to the industrial manufacturing area of Ontario and Quebec, and proximity to a rail head adjacent to a large military base, Camp Petawawa. Located on the Ottawa River, it had access to abundant water. The first director of the new laboratory was Hans von Halban. He was replaced by John Cockcroft in May 1944, who was succeeded by Bennett Lewis in September 1946. A pilot reactor known as ZEEP (zero-energy experimental pile) became the first Canadian reactor, and the first to be completed outside the United States, when it went critical in September 1945; ZEEP remained in use by researchers until 1970. A larger 10 MW NRX reactor, which was designed during the war, was completed and went critical in July 1947.

==== Northwest Territories ====
The Eldorado Mine at Port Radium was a source of uranium ore.

=== Heavy water sites ===

Although DuPont&#x27;s preferred designs for the nuclear reactors were helium cooled and used graphite as a moderator, DuPont still expressed an interest in using heavy water as a backup. The &quot;P-9 Project&quot; was the government&#x27;s codename for the heavy water production program. It was estimated that of heavy water would be required per month. The plant at Trail, then under construction, could produce per month. Groves therefore authorized DuPont to establish heavy water facilities at the Morgantown Ordnance Works, near Morgantown, West Virginia; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works, near Dana and Newport, Indiana; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works, near Childersburg and Sylacauga, Alabama. Although known as Ordnance Works and paid for under Ordnance Department contracts, they were built and operated by the Army Corps of Engineers. The American plants used a process different from Trail&#x27;s; heavy water was extracted by distillation, taking advantage of the slightly higher boiling point of heavy water.

== Uranium ==
=== Ore ===
The key raw material for the project was uranium, which was used as fuel for the reactors, as feed that was transformed into plutonium, and, in its enriched form, in the atomic bomb itself. There were four known major deposits of uranium in 1940: in Colorado, in northern Canada, in Joachimsthal in Czechoslovakia, and in the Belgian Congo. All but Joachimstal were in Allied hands. A 1942 survey determined that sufficient quantities of uranium were available to satisfy the project&#x27;s requirements. Nichols arranged with the State Department for export controls to be placed on uranium oxide and negotiated for the purchase of of uranium ore from the Belgian Congo that was being stored in a warehouse on Staten Island and the remaining stocks of mined ore stored in the Congo. He negotiated with Eldorado Gold Mines for the purchase of ore from its refinery in Port Hope, Ontario. The Canadian government subsequently bought up the company&#x27;s stock until it acquired a controlling interest.

Of these ores, those from the Belgian Congo contained the most uranium per mass of rock by far. Beyond their wartime needs, American and British leaders concluded that it was in their countries&#x27; interest to control as much of the world&#x27;s uranium deposits as possible. The Shinkolobwe mine was flooded and closed, and Nichols unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate its reopening and the sale of the entire future output to the United States with Edgar Sengier, the director of the company that owned the mine, the Union Minière du Haut-Katanga. The matter was then taken up by the Combined Policy Committee. As 30 percent of Union Minière&#x27;s stock was controlled by British interests, the British took the lead in negotiations. Sir John Anderson and Ambassador John Winant hammered out a deal with Sengier and the Belgian government in May 1944 for the mine to be reopened and of ore to be purchased at $1.45 a pound. To avoid dependence on the British and Canadians for ore, Groves also arranged for the purchase of US Vanadium Corporation&#x27;s stockpile in Uravan, Colorado.

The raw ore was dissolved in nitric acid to produce uranyl nitrate, which was processed into uranium trioxide, which was reduced to highly pure uranium dioxide. By July 1942, Mallinckrodt was producing a ton of highly pure oxide a day, but turning this into uranium metal initially proved more difficult. Production was too slow and quality was unacceptably low. A branch of the Metallurgical Laboratory was established at Iowa State College in Ames, Iowa, under Frank Spedding to investigate alternatives. This became known as the Ames Project, and its Ames process became available in 1943.

=== Isotope separation ===
Natural uranium consists of 99.3% uranium-238 and 0.7% uranium-235, but as only the latter is fissile it must be physically separated from the more plentiful isotope. Various methods were considered for uranium enrichment, most of which was carried out at Oak Ridge. The most obvious technology, the centrifuge, failed, but electromagnetic separation, gaseous diffusion, and thermal diffusion technologies were all successful and contributed to the project. In February 1943, Groves came up with the idea of using the output of some plants as the input for others.

==== Centrifuges ====
The centrifuge process was regarded as the only promising separation method in April 1942. Jesse Beams had developed such a process in the 1930s, but had encountered technical difficulties. In 1941 he began working with uranium hexafluoride, the only known gaseous compound of uranium, and was able to separate uranium-235. At Columbia, Karl P. Cohen produced a body of mathematical theory making it possible to design a centrifugal separation unit, which Westinghouse undertook to construct.

Scaling this up to a production plant presented a formidable technical challenge. Urey and Cohen estimated that producing a kilogram (2.2 lb) of uranium-235 per day would require up to 50,000 centrifuges with rotors, or 10,000 centrifuges with rotors, assuming that 4-meter rotors could be built. The prospect of keeping so many rotors operating continuously at high speed appeared daunting, and when Beams ran his experimental apparatus, he obtained only 60% of the predicted yield, indicating that more centrifuges were required. Beams, Urey and Cohen then began work on a series of improvements which promised to increase efficiency. However, frequent failures of motors, shafts and bearings at high speeds delayed work on the pilot plant.

In November 1942 the centrifuge process was abandoned by the Military Policy Committee. Successful gas centrifuges of the Zippe-type design were instead developed in the Soviet Union after the war. It eventually became the preferred method of uranium isotope separation, being far more economical.

==== Electromagnetic separation ====

Electromagnetic isotope separation was developed at the University of California Radiation Laboratory. This method employed devices known as calutrons. The name was derived from the words &quot;California&quot;, &quot;university&quot; and &quot;cyclotron&quot;. In the electromagnetic process, a magnetic field deflected charged particles according to mass. The process was neither scientifically elegant nor industrially efficient. Compared with a gaseous diffusion plant or a nuclear reactor, an electromagnetic separation plant would consume more scarce materials, require more manpower to operate, and cost more to build. Nonetheless, the process was approved because it was based on proven technology and therefore represented less risk. Moreover, it could be built in stages, and rapidly reach industrial capacity.
Marshall and Nichols discovered that the electromagnetic isotope separation process would require of copper, which was in desperately short supply. However, silver could be substituted, in an 11:10 copper to silver ratio. On 3 August 1942, Nichols met with Under Secretary of the Treasury Daniel W. Bell and asked for the transfer of 6,000 tons of silver bullion from the West Point Bullion Depository. Ultimately were used. The silver bars were cast into cylindrical billets, extruded into strips, and wound onto magnetic coils.
Responsibility for the design and construction of the electromagnetic separation plant, which came to be called Y-12, was assigned to Stone &amp; Webster in June 1942. The design called for five first-stage processing units, known as Alpha racetracks, and two units for final processing, known as Beta racetracks. In September 1943 Groves authorized construction of four more racetracks, known as Alpha II. Construction began in February 1943. The second Alpha I was operational at the end of January 1944, the first Beta and first and third Alpha I&#x27;s came online in March, and the fourth Alpha I was operational in April. The four Alpha II racetracks were completed between July and October 1944. Tennessee Eastman was contracted to manage Y-12. The calutrons were turned over to trained Tennessee Eastman operators known as the Calutron Girls.

The calutrons initially enriched the uranium-235 content to between 13% and 15%, and shipped the first few hundred grams of this to Los Alamos in March 1944. Only 1 part in 5,825 of the uranium feed emerged as product. Much of the rest was splattered over equipment in the process. Strenuous recovery efforts helped raise production to 10% of the uranium-235 feed by January 1945. In February the Alpha racetracks began receiving slightly enriched (1.4%) feed from the new S-50 thermal diffusion plant, and the next month they received enhanced (5%) feed from the K-25 gaseous diffusion plant. By August, K-25 was producing uranium sufficiently enriched to feed directly into the Beta tracks.

==== Gaseous diffusion ====

The most promising but also the most challenging method of isotope separation was gaseous diffusion. Graham&#x27;s law states that the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular mass, so in a box containing a semi-permeable membrane and a mixture of two gases, the lighter molecules will pass out of the container more rapidly than the heavier molecules. The idea was that such boxes could be formed into a cascade of pumps and membranes, with each successive stage containing a slightly more enriched mixture. Research into the process was carried out at Columbia University by a group that included Harold Urey, Karl P. Cohen, and John R. Dunning.
In November 1942 the Military Policy Committee approved the construction of a 600-stage gaseous diffusion plant. On 14 December, M. W. Kellogg accepted an offer to construct the plant, which was codenamed K-25. A separate corporate entity called Kellex was created for the project. The process faced formidable technical difficulties. The highly corrosive gas uranium hexafluoride had to be used as no substitute could be found, and the motors and pumps had to be vacuum tight and enclosed in inert gas. The biggest problem was the design of the barrier, which had to be strong, porous and resistant to corrosion. Edward Adler and Edward Norris created a mesh barrier from electroplated nickel. A six-stage pilot plant was built at Columbia to test the process, but the prototype proved to be too brittle. A rival barrier was developed from powdered nickel by Kellex, the Bell Telephone Laboratories and the Bakelite Corporation. In January 1944, Groves ordered the Kellex barrier into production.

Kellex&#x27;s design for K-25 called for a four-story long U-shaped structure containing 54 contiguous buildings. These were divided into nine sections containing cells of six stages. A survey party began construction by marking out the site in May 1943. Work on the main building began in October 1943, and the six-stage pilot plant was ready for operation on 17 April 1944. In 1945 Groves canceled the upper stages, directing Kellex to instead design and build a 540-stage side feed unit, which became known as K-27. Kellex transferred the last unit to the operating contractor, Union Carbide and Carbon, on 11 September 1945. The total cost, including the K-27 plant completed after the war, came to $480 million.

The production plant commenced operation in February 1945, and as cascade after cascade came online, the quality of the product increased. By April 1945, K-25 had attained a 1.1% enrichment, and the output of the S-50 thermal diffusion plant began being used as feed. Some product produced the next month reached nearly 7% enrichment. In August, the last of the 2,892 stages commenced operation. K-25 and K-27 achieved their full potential in the early postwar period, when they eclipsed the other production plants and became the prototypes for a new generation of plants.

==== Thermal diffusion ====

The thermal diffusion process was based on Sydney Chapman and David Enskog&#x27;s theory, which explained that when a mixed gas passes through a temperature gradient, the heavier one tends to concentrate at the cold end and the lighter one at the warm end. It was developed by US Navy scientists, but was not one of the enrichment technologies initially selected for use in the Manhattan Project. This was primarily due to doubts about its technical feasibility, but the inter-service rivalry between the Army and Navy also played a part. The Naval Research Laboratory continued the research under Philip Abelson&#x27;s direction, but there was little contact with the Manhattan Project until April 1944, when Captain William S. Parsons, the naval officer in charge of ordnance development at Los Alamos, brought Oppenheimer news of encouraging progress on thermal diffusion. Oppenheimer informed Groves, who approved construction of a thermal plant on 24 June 1944.
Groves contracted with the H. K. Ferguson Company of Cleveland, Ohio, to build the thermal diffusion plant, which was designated S-50. Plans called for the installation of 2,142 diffusion columns arranged in 21 racks. Inside each column were three concentric tubes. Steam, obtained from the nearby K-25 powerhouse at a pressure of and temperature of , flowed downward through the innermost nickel pipe, while water at flowed upward through the outermost iron pipe. The uranium hexafluoride flowed in the middle copper pipe, and isotope separation of the uranium occurred between the nickel and copper pipes. Work commenced on 9 July 1944, and S-50 began partial operation in September. Leaks limited production and forced shutdowns over the next few months, but in June 1945 the S-50 plant produced of slightly enriched product.

By March 1945, all 21 production racks were operating. Initially the output of S-50 was fed into Y-12, but starting in March 1945 all three enrichment processes were run in series. S-50 became the first stage, enriching the uranium from 0.71% to 0.89% uranium-235. This was then fed into the gaseous diffusion process in the K-25 plant, which produced a product enriched to about 23%. In turn, this was fed into Y-12, which boosted it to about 89%, sufficient for use in nuclear weapons. About of uranium enriched to 89% was delivered to Los Alamos by July 1945. The entire 50 kg, along with some 50%-enriched, averaging out to about 85% enriched, were used in the first Little Boy bomb.

== Plutonium ==
The second line of development pursued by the Manhattan Project used plutonium. Although small amounts of plutonium exist in nature, the best way to obtain large quantities is via a reactor. Natural uranium is bombarded by neutrons and transmuted into uranium-239, which rapidly decays, first into neptunium-239 and then into plutonium-239. As only a small amount will be transformed, the plutonium must be chemically separated from the remaining uranium, from any initial impurities, and from fission products.

=== X-10 Graphite Reactor ===
In March 1943, DuPont began construction of a plutonium plant on a site at Oak Ridge. Intended as a pilot plant for the larger production facilities at Hanford, it included the air-cooled X-10 Graphite Reactor, a chemical separation plant, and support facilities. Because of the subsequent decision to construct water-cooled reactors at Hanford, only the chemical separation plant operated as a true pilot. The X-10 Graphite Reactor consisted of a huge block of graphite, per side, weighing around , surrounded by of high-density concrete as a radiation shield.

The greatest difficulty was encountered with the uranium slugs produced by Mallinckrodt and Metal Hydrides. These had to be coated in aluminum to avoid corrosion and the escape of fission products into the cooling system. The Grasselli Chemical Company attempted to develop a hot dipping process without success. Alcoa tried canning, developing a new process for flux-less welding; 97% of the cans passed a standard vacuum test, but high temperature tests indicated a failure rate of more than 50%. Nonetheless, production began in June 1943. The Metallurgical Laboratory eventually developed an improved welding technique with the help of General Electric, which was incorporated into the production process in October 1943.

The X-10 Graphite Reactor went critical on 4 November 1943 with about of uranium. A week later the load was increased to , raising its power generation to 500 kW, and by the end of the month the first 500 mg of plutonium was created. Gradual modifications raised the power to 4,000 kW in July 1944. X-10 operated as a production plant until January 1945, when it was turned over to research.

=== Hanford reactors ===

Although an air-cooled design was chosen for the reactor at Oak Ridge to facilitate rapid construction, this was impractical for the much larger production reactors. Initial designs by the Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont used helium for cooling, before they determined that a water-cooled reactor was simpler, cheaper and quicker to build. The design did not become available until 4 October 1943; in the meantime, Matthias concentrated on improving the Hanford Site by erecting accommodations, improving the roads, building a railway switch line, and upgrading the electricity, water and telephone lines.
As at Oak Ridge, the most difficulty was encountered while canning the uranium slugs, which commenced at Hanford in March 1944. They were pickled to remove dirt and impurities, dipped in molten bronze, tin, and aluminum-silicon alloy, canned using hydraulic presses, and then capped using arc welding under an argon atmosphere. Finally, they were tested to detect holes or faulty welds. Disappointingly, most canned slugs initially failed the tests, resulting in an output of only a handful per day. But steady progress was made and by June 1944 production increased to the point where it appeared that enough canned slugs was available to start Reactor B on schedule in August 1944.

Work began on Reactor B, the first of six planned 250 MW reactors, on 10 October 1943. The reactor complexes were given letter designations A through F, with B, D and F sites developed first, as this maximized the distance between the reactors. They were the only ones constructed during the Manhattan Project. Some of steel, of concrete, 50,000 concrete blocks and 71,000 concrete bricks were used to construct the high building.

Construction of the reactor itself commenced in February 1944. Watched by Compton, Matthias, DuPont&#x27;s Crawford Greenewalt, Leona Woods and Fermi, who inserted the first slug, the reactor was powered up beginning on 13 September 1944. Over the next few days, 838 tubes were loaded and the reactor went critical. Shortly after midnight on 27 September, the operators began to withdraw the control rods to initiate production. At first all appeared well but around 03:00 the power level started to drop and by 06:30 the reactor had shut down completely. The cooling water was investigated to see if there was a leak or contamination. The next day the reactor started up again, only to shut down once more.

Fermi contacted Chien-Shiung Wu, who identified the cause of the problem as neutron poisoning from xenon-135, which has a half-life of 9.2 hours. Fermi, Woods, Donald J. Hughes and John Archibald Wheeler then calculated the nuclear cross section of xenon-135, which turned out to be 30,000 times that of uranium. DuPont engineer George Graves had deviated from the Metallurgical Laboratory&#x27;s original design in which the reactor had 1,500 tubes arranged in a circle, and had added an additional 504 tubes to fill in the corners. The scientists had originally considered this overengineering a waste of time and money, but Fermi realized that by loading all 2,004 tubes, the reactor could reach the required power level and efficiently produce plutonium. Reactor D was started on 17 December 1944 and Reactor F on 25 February 1945.

=== Separation process ===

Meanwhile, the chemists considered how plutonium could be separated from uranium when its chemical properties were not known. Working with the minute quantities of plutonium available at the Metallurgical Laboratory in 1942, a team under Charles M. Cooper developed a lanthanum fluoride process which was chosen for the pilot separation plant. A second separation process, the bismuth phosphate process, was subsequently developed by Seaborg and Stanly G. Thomson. Greenewalt favored the bismuth phosphate process due to the corrosive nature of lanthanum fluoride, and it was selected for the Hanford separation plants. Once X-10 began producing plutonium, the pilot separation plant was put to the test. The first batch was processed at 40% efficiency but over the next few months this was raised to 90%.

At Hanford, top priority was initially given to the installations in the 300 area: buildings for testing materials, preparing uranium, and assembling and calibrating instrumentation. One of the buildings housed the canning equipment for the uranium slugs, while another contained a small test reactor. Notwithstanding its priority, work on the 300 area fell behind schedule due to the unique and complex nature of the facilities, and wartime shortages of labor and materials.

Early plans called for the construction of two separation plants in each of the areas known as 200-West and 200-East. This was subsequently reduced to two, the T and U plants, in 200-West and one, the B plant, at 200-East. Each separation plant consisted of four buildings: a process cell building or &quot;canyon&quot; (known as 221), a concentration building (224), a purification building (231) and a magazine store (213). The canyons were each long and wide. Each consisted of forty cells.

Work began on 221-T and 221-U in January 1944, with the former completed in September and the latter in December. The 221-B building followed in March 1945. Because of the high levels of radioactivity involved, work in the separation plants had to be conducted by remote control using closed-circuit television, something unheard of in 1943. Maintenance was carried out with the aid of an overhead crane and specially designed tools. The 224 buildings were smaller because they had less material to process, and it was less radioactive. The 224-T and 224-U buildings were completed on 8 October 1944, and 224-B followed on 10 February 1945. The purification methods that were eventually used in 231-W were still unknown when construction commenced on 8 April 1944, but the plant was complete and the methods were selected by the end of the year. On 5 February 1945, Matthias hand-delivered the first shipment of 80 g of 95%-pure plutonium nitrate to a Los Alamos courier in Los Angeles.

=== Weapon design ===
In 1943, development efforts were directed to a gun-type fission weapon with plutonium called Thin Man. Initial research on the properties of plutonium was done using cyclotron-generated plutonium-239, which was extremely pure but could only be created in very small amounts. Los Alamos received the first sample of plutonium from the Clinton X-10 reactor in April 1944 and within days Emilio Segrè discovered a problem: the reactor-bred plutonium had a higher concentration of plutonium-240, resulting in up to five times the spontaneous fission rate of cyclotron plutonium.

This rendered it unsuitable for use in a gun-type weapon, for the plutonium-240 would start the chain reaction too soon, causing a predetonation that would disperse the critical mass after a minimal amount of plutonium had fissioned (a fizzle). A higher-velocity gun was suggested but found to be impractical. The possibility of separating the isotopes was also considered and rejected, as plutonium-240 is even harder to separate from plutonium-239 than uranium-235 from uranium-238, and attempting it &quot;would postpone the weapon indefinitely&quot;.

Work on an alternative method of bomb design, known as implosion, had begun earlier under the direction of the physicist Seth Neddermeyer. Implosion used explosives to crush a subcritical sphere of fissile material into a smaller and denser form. The critical mass is assembled in much less time than with the gun method. When the fissile atoms are packed closer together, the rate of neutron capture increases, so it also makes more efficient use of fissionable material. Neddermeyer&#x27;s 1943 and early 1944 investigations showed promise, but also made it clear that an implosion weapon was more complex than the gun-type design from both a theoretical and an engineering perspective. In September 1943, John von Neumann, who had experience with shaped charges, proposed using a spherical configuration instead of the cylindrical one that Neddermeyer was working on.

An accelerated effort on the implosion design, codenamed Fat Man, began in August 1944 when Oppenheimer implemented a sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory to focus on implosion. Two new groups were created at Los Alamos to develop the implosion weapon, X (for explosives) Division headed by explosives expert George Kistiakowsky and G (for gadget) Division under Robert Bacher. The new design featured explosive lenses that focused the implosion into a spherical shape. The design of lenses turned out to be slow, difficult and frustrating. Various explosives were tested before settling on composition B and baratol. The final design resembled a soccer ball, with 20 hexagonal and 12 pentagonal lenses, each weighing about . Getting the detonation just right required fast, reliable and safe electrical detonators, of which there were two for each lens for reliability. They used exploding-bridgewire detonators, a new invention developed at Los Alamos by a group led by Luis Alvarez.

To study the behavior of converging shock waves, Robert Serber devised the RaLa Experiment, which used the short-lived radioisotope lanthanum-140, a potent source of gamma radiation. The gamma ray source was placed in the center of a metal sphere surrounded by the explosive lenses, which in turn were inside in an ionization chamber. This allowed the taking of an X-ray movie of the implosion. The lenses were designed primarily using this series of tests. In his history of the Los Alamos project, David Hawkins wrote: &quot;RaLa became the most important single experiment affecting the final bomb design&quot;.

Within the explosives was an aluminum pusher, which provided a smooth transition from the relatively low-density explosive to the next layer, the tamper of natural uranium. Its main job was to hold the critical mass together as long as possible, but it would also reflect neutrons into the core and some of its uranium would fission. To prevent predetonation by an external neutron, the tamper was coated in a thin layer of neutron-absorbing boron. A polonium-beryllium modulated neutron initiator, known as an &quot;urchin&quot;, was developed to start the chain reaction at precisely the right moment. This work on the chemistry and metallurgy of radioactive polonium was directed by Charles Allen Thomas of the Monsanto Company and became known as the Dayton Project. Testing required up to 500 curies per month of polonium, which Monsanto was able to deliver. The whole assembly was encased in a duralumin bomb casing to protect it from bullets and flak.
The ultimate task of the metallurgists was to determine how to cast plutonium into a sphere. The difficulties became apparent when attempts to measure the density of plutonium gave inconsistent results. At first contamination was suspected, but it was soon determined that there were multiple allotropes of plutonium. The brittle α phase that exists at room temperature changes to the plastic β phase at higher temperatures. Attention then shifted to the even more malleable δ phase that normally exists in the 300 °C to 450 °C range. It was found that this was stable at room temperature when alloyed with aluminum, but aluminum emits neutrons when bombarded with alpha particles, which would exacerbate the pre-ignition problem. The metallurgists then hit upon using a plutonium-gallium alloy, which stabilized the δ phase and could be hot pressed into the desired spherical shape. As plutonium was found to corrode readily, the sphere was coated with nickel.

The work proved dangerous. By the end of the war, half the chemists and metallurgists had to be removed from work with plutonium when unacceptably high levels of the element was detected in their urine. A minor fire at Los Alamos in January 1945 led to a fear that a fire in the plutonium laboratory might contaminate the whole town, and Groves authorized the construction of a new facility for plutonium chemistry and metallurgy, which became known as the DP-site. The hemispheres for the first plutonium pit (or core) were produced and delivered on 2 July 1945. Three more hemispheres followed on 23 July and were delivered three days later.

In contrast to the plutonium Fat Man, the uranium gun-type Little Boy weapon was straightforward if not trivial to design. Overall responsibility for it was assigned to Parsons&#x27;s Ordnance (O) Division, with the design, development, and technical work at Los Alamos consolidated under Lieutenant Commander Francis Birch&#x27;s group. The gun-type design now had to work with enriched uranium only, and this allowed the design to be greatly simplified. A high-velocity gun was no longer required, and a simpler weapon was substituted.

Research into the Super was also pursued, although it was considered secondary to the development of a fission bomb. The effort was directed by Teller, who was its most enthusiastic proponent. The F-1 (Super) Group calculated that burning of liquid deuterium would release the energy of , enough to devastate . In a final report on the Super in June 1946, Teller remained upbeat about the prospect of it being successfully developed, although that opinion was not universal.

=== Trinity ===

Because of the complexity of an implosion-style weapon, it was decided that, despite the waste of fissile material, a full-scale nuclear test was required. Oppenheimer codenamed it &quot;Trinity&quot;. In March 1944, planning for the test was assigned to Kenneth Bainbridge, who selected the Alamogordo Bombing Range for the test site. A base camp was constructed with barracks, warehouses, workshops, an explosive magazine and a commissary. A pre-test explosion was conducted on 7 May 1945 to calibrate the instruments. A wooden test platform was erected from future Trinity Ground Zero and piled with about of high explosives spiked with nuclear fission products.
Groves did not relish the prospect of explaining to a Senate committee the loss of a billion dollars worth of plutonium, so a cylindrical containment vessel codenamed &quot;Jumbo&quot; was constructed to recover the active material in the event of a failure. It was fabricated at great expense from of iron and steel. By the time it arrived, however, confidence in the implosion method was high enough, and the availability of plutonium was sufficient, that Oppenheimer decided not to use it. Instead, it was placed atop a steel tower from the weapon as a rough measure of the explosion&#x27;s power. Jumbo survived, although its tower did not, adding credence to the belief that Jumbo would have successfully contained a fizzled explosion.
For the actual test, the weapon, nicknamed &quot;the gadget&quot;, was hoisted to the top of a steel tower, as detonation at that height would give a better indication of how the weapon would behave when dropped from a bomber. Detonation in the air maximized the energy applied directly to the target and generated less nuclear fallout. The gadget was assembled under the supervision of Norris Bradbury at the nearby McDonald Ranch House on 13 July, and precariously winched up the tower the following day.

At 05:30 on 16 July 1945 the gadget exploded with an energy equivalent of around 20 kilotons of TNT, leaving a crater of trinitite (radioactive glass) in the desert wide. The shock wave was felt over away, and the mushroom cloud reached in height. It was heard as far away as El Paso, Texas, so Groves issued a cover story about an ammunition magazine explosion at Alamogordo Field involving gas shells.

Oppenheimer later claimed that, while witnessing the explosion, he thought of a verse from the Hindu holy book, the &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot; (XI,12):
together with verse (XI,32), which he translated as &quot;Now I am become Death, destroyer of worlds&quot;.

The test was significantly more successful than had been anticipated; this was immediately cabled to Stimson, who was then at the Potsdam Conference, and Groves hastily prepared a lengthier report sent via courier. President Harry S. Truman was powerfully and positively affected by the news. Stimson noted in his diary that when he shared it with Churchill, Churchill remarked: &quot;Now I know what happened to Truman yesterday. I couldn&#x27;t understand it. When he got to the meeting after having read this report, he was a changed man. He told the Russians just where they got on and off and generally bossed the whole meeting.&quot;

== Personnel ==

At its peak in June 1944, the Manhattan Project employed about 129,000 workers, of whom 84,500 were construction workers, 40,500 were plant operators and 1,800 were military personnel. As construction activity declined, the workforce fell to 100,000 a year later, but the number of military personnel increased to 5,600. Procuring the required numbers of workers, especially highly skilled workers, in competition with other vital wartime programs proved very difficult. Due to high turnover, over 500,000 people worked on the project. Most African Americans were employed in low-level jobs, but there were a few African-American scientists and technicians. The unique labor and security requirements also resulted in the Manhattan Project having a higher percentage of women in technical roles than later government projects.

In 1943, Groves obtained a special temporary priority for labor from the War Manpower Commission. In March 1944, both the War Production Board and the War Manpower Commission gave the project their highest priority. The Kansas commission director stated that from April to July 1944 every qualified applicant in the state who visited a United States Employment Service office was urged to work at the Hanford Site. No other job was offered until the applicant definitively rejected the offer. Tolman and Conant, in their role as the project&#x27;s scientific advisers, drew up a list of candidate scientists and had them rated by scientists already working on the project. Groves then sent a personal letter to the head of their university or company asking for them to be released for essential war work.

One source of skilled personnel was the Army itself, particularly the Army Specialized Training Program. In 1943, the MED created the Special Engineer Detachment (SED), with an authorized strength of 675. Technicians and skilled workers drafted into the Army were assigned to the SED. Another source was the Women&#x27;s Army Corps (WAC). Initially intended for clerical tasks handling classified material, the WACs were soon tapped for technical and scientific tasks as well. On 1 February 1945, all military personnel assigned to the MED, including all SED detachments, were assigned to the 9812th Technical Service Unit, except at Los Alamos, where military personnel other than SED, including the WACs and Military Police, were assigned to the 4817th Service Command Unit.

An associate professor of Radiology at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, Stafford L. Warren, was commissioned as a colonel in the United States Army Medical Corps, and appointed as chief of the MED&#x27;s Medical Section and Groves&#x27; medical advisor. Warren&#x27;s initial task was to staff hospitals at Oak Ridge, Richland and Los Alamos. The Medical Section was responsible for medical research, but also for the MED&#x27;s health and safety programs. This presented an enormous challenge, because workers were handling a variety of toxic chemicals, using hazardous liquids and gases under high pressures, working with high voltages, and performing experiments involving explosives, not to mention the largely unknown dangers presented by radioactivity and handling fissile materials. Yet in December 1945, the National Safety Council presented the Manhattan Project with the Award of Honor for Distinguished Service to Safety in recognition of its safety record. Between January 1943 and June 1945, there were 62 fatalities and 3,879 disabling injuries—about 62 percent below the rate of private industry.

== Secrecy ==
The Manhattan Project operated under a mandate of &quot;absolute secrecy&quot; from Roosevelt, meaning that the very existence of the project itself was to be kept secret. This proved a daunting task given the amount of knowledge and speculation about nuclear fission that existed prior to the Manhattan Project, the huge numbers of people involved, and the scale of the facilities. Groves adopted an extreme version of compartmentalization (the need-to-know policy):

This clashed with the norms of many of the scientists involved, who claimed that science could not operate successfully under such requirements. The Manhattan Project officials also had difficulty with journalists, Congressmen, federal officials who were not &quot;in the know&quot;, residents near local sites, judges adjudicating land claims, and other sources of speculation, prying, and leaks, along with concerns about espionage and sabotage. Groves relied on the FBI and his own autonomous G-2 intelligence unit to investigate potential security violations. Ultimately over 1,500 &quot;loose talk&quot; cases were investigated during the war.

Because of its relative success at keeping the story out of newspapers, Byron Price, head of the Office of Censorship, ultimately designated the Manhattan Project &quot;the best-kept secret of the war&quot;. In 1945 &quot;Life&quot; estimated that before the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings &quot;probably no more than a few dozen men in the entire country knew the full meaning of the Manhattan Project, and perhaps only a thousand others even were aware that work on atoms was involved.&quot; The magazine wrote that the more than 100,000 others employed with the project &quot;worked like moles in the dark&quot;. Warned that disclosing the project&#x27;s secrets was punishable by 10 years in prison or a fine of , they monitored &quot;dials and switches while behind thick concrete walls mysterious reactions took place&quot; without knowing the purpose of their jobs.

In December 1945 the US Army published a secret report assessing the security apparatus surrounding the Manhattan Project. The report states that the project was &quot;more drastically guarded than any other highly secret war development.&quot; The surrounding security infrastructure was so vast and thorough that in the early days of the project in 1943, investigators vetted 400,000 potential employees and 600 companies for potential security risks.

=== Censorship ===

Voluntary censorship of atomic information began before the Manhattan Project. After the start of the European war in 1939 American scientists began avoiding publishing military-related research, and in 1940 scientific journals began asking the National Academy of Sciences to clear articles. William L. Laurence of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, who wrote an article on atomic fission in &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot; of 7 September 1940, later learned that government officials asked librarians nationwide in 1943 to withdraw the issue. The Soviets noticed the silence, however. In April 1942 nuclear physicist Georgy Flyorov wrote to Joseph Stalin on the absence of articles on nuclear fission in American journals; this resulted in the Soviet Union establishing its own atomic bomb project.

The Manhattan Project operated under tight security lest its discovery induce Axis powers, especially Germany, to accelerate their own nuclear projects or undertake covert operations against the project. The Office of Censorship relied on the press to comply with a voluntary code of conduct it published, and the project at first avoided notifying the office. By early 1943 newspapers began publishing reports of large construction in Tennessee and Washington, and the office began discussing with the project how to maintain secrecy. In June it asked newspapers and broadcasters to avoid discussing &quot;atom smashing, atomic energy, atomic fission, atomic splitting, or any of their equivalents. The use for military purposes of radium or radioactive materials, heavy water, high voltage discharge equipment, cyclotrons.&quot;

=== Soviet spies ===

The prospect of sabotage was always present, and sometimes suspected when there were equipment failures. While there were some problems believed to be the result of careless or disgruntled employees, there were no confirmed instances of Axis-instigated sabotage. However, on 10 March 1945, a Japanese fire balloon struck a power line, and the resulting power surge caused the three reactors at Hanford to be temporarily shut down. With so many people involved, security was difficult. A special Counter Intelligence Corps detachment was formed to handle the project&#x27;s security issues. By 1943, it was clear that the Soviet Union was attempting to penetrate the project. Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash, the head of the Counter Intelligence Branch of the Western Defense Command, investigated suspected Soviet espionage at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley. Oppenheimer informed Pash that he had been approached by a fellow professor at Berkeley, Haakon Chevalier, about passing information to the Soviet Union.

The most successful Soviet spy was Klaus Fuchs, a physicist and member of the British Mission who was intimately involved in work at Los Alamos on the design of the implosion bomb. His espionage activities were not identified until 1950, as a result of Venona project. The revelation of his espionage activities damaged the United States&#x27; nuclear cooperation with Britain and Canada, and other instances of espionage were subsequently uncovered, leading to the arrest of Harry Gold, David Greenglass, and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg. Other spies like George Koval and Theodore Hall remained unknown for decades. The value of the espionage is difficult to quantify, as the principal constraint on the Soviet atomic bomb project was their short supply of uranium ore. It may have saved the Soviets at least one or two years in the development of their own bomb, although some historians have argued the Soviets spent as much time vetting and reduplicating the information as they would have saved had they trusted it.

== Foreign intelligence ==

In addition to developing the atomic bomb, the Manhattan Project was charged with gathering intelligence on the German nuclear energy project. It was believed that the Japanese nuclear weapons program was not far advanced because Japan had little access to uranium ore, but it was initially feared that Germany was very close to developing its own weapons. At the instigation of the Manhattan Project, a bombing and sabotage campaign was carried out against heavy water plants in German-occupied Norway. A small mission was created, jointly staffed by the Office of Naval Intelligence, OSRD, the Manhattan Project, and Army Intelligence (G-2), to investigate enemy scientific developments. It was not restricted to those involving nuclear weapons. The Chief of Army Intelligence, Major General George V. Strong, appointed Boris Pash to command the unit, which was codenamed &quot;Alsos&quot; (Greek for &quot;grove&quot;). Samuel Goudsmit was the scientific director of the Alsos mission.
The Alsos Mission to Italy questioned physics laboratory staff at the University of Rome following the capture of the city in June 1944. Meanwhile, Pash formed a combined British and American Alsos mission in London under the command of Captain Horace K. Calvert to participate in Operation Overlord. Groves considered the risk that the Germans might attempt to disrupt the Normandy landings with radioactive poisons was sufficient to warn General Dwight D. Eisenhower and send an officer to brief his chief of staff, Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith. Under the codename Operation Peppermint, special equipment was prepared and Chemical Warfare Service teams were trained in its use.

Following in the wake of the advancing Allied armies, the Alsos team interrogated scientists and searched facilities in liberated areas of France and Germany to learn about the German work. Goudsmit concluded in November 1944 that the German nuclear program had never made it beyond the laboratory stage. As he put it later: &quot;The evidence at hand proved definitely that Germany had no atom bomb and was not likely to have one in any reasonable time.&quot;

Interrogation of German prisoners indicated that uranium and thorium were being processed in Oranienburg, so Groves arranged for it to be bombed on 15 March 1945 to deny its capture by the Soviet Union. An Alsos team went to Stassfurt in the Soviet Occupation Zone and retrieved 11 tons of ore from WIFO. In April 1945, Pash, in command of a composite force known as T-Force, conducted Operation Harborage, a sweep behind enemy lines of Hechingen, Bisingen, and Haigerloch—the heart of the German nuclear effort. T-Force captured nuclear laboratories, documents, equipment and supplies, including heavy water and 1.5 tons of metallic uranium.

Alsos teams rounded up German scientists including Kurt Diebner, Otto Hahn, Walther Gerlach, Werner Heisenberg, and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker. They were taken to England and interned at Farm Hall, where they were surreptitiously surveilled.

== Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki ==
=== Preparations ===

The only Allied aircraft capable of carrying the long Thin Man or the wide Fat Man was the British Avro Lancaster, but using a British aircraft would have caused difficulties with maintenance. Groves hoped that the American Boeing B-29 Superfortress could be modified to carry a Thin Man by joining its two bomb bays together. This became unnecessary after Thin Man was abandoned, as a Little Boy was short enough to fit into a B-29 bomb bay, but modifications were still required. The Army Air Forces Materiel Command at Wright Field, Ohio, began Silverplate, the codename for the modification of the B-29, in November 1943. Test drops were carried out at Muroc Army Air Field and the Naval Ordnance Test Station in California with Thin Man and Fat Man pumpkin bombs to test their ballistic, fuzing and stability characteristics.

The 509th Composite Group was activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field, Utah, under the command of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets. Its 393rd Bombardment Squadron, equipped with Silverplate B-29s, practiced long-distance flights over water and dropped pumpkin bombs. A special unit known as Project Alberta was formed at Los Alamos under Parsons&#x27;s command to assist in preparing and delivering the bombs. The 509th Composite Group deployed to North Field on Tinian in July 1945. Most of the components for the Little Boy left San Francisco on the cruiser on 16 July and arrived on Tinian on 26 July. The remaining components, which included six highly enriched uranium rings, were delivered by three Douglas C-54 Skymasters of the 509th Group&#x27;s 320th Troop Carrier Squadron. Two Fat Man assemblies traveled to Tinian in specially modified 509th Composite Group B-29s, and the first plutonium core went in a special C-54.

At the end of December 1944, worried by the heavy losses occurring in the Battle of the Bulge, Roosevelt instructed Groves and Stimson that if the atomic bombs were ready before the war with Germany ended, they should be ready to drop them on Germany, but Japan was regarded as more likely. In late April 1945, a targeting committee was established to determine which cities should be targets, and it recommended Kokura, Hiroshima, Niigata, and Kyoto. Stimson intervened, announcing that he would be making the targeting decision, and that he would not authorize the bombing of Kyoto on the grounds of its historical and religious significance. Nagasaki was ultimately substituted. In May 1945, the Interim Committee was created to advise on wartime and postwar use of nuclear energy. The Interim Committee in turn established a scientific panel consisting of Arthur Compton, Fermi, Lawrence, and Oppenheimer; the scientific panel offered its opinion not just on the likely physical effects of an atomic bomb, but on its probable military and political impact. In a meeting on 1 June, the Interim Committee resolved that &quot;the bomb should be used against Japan as soon as possible; that it be used on a war plant surrounded by workers&#x27; homes; and that it be used without prior warning&quot;.

At the Potsdam Conference in Germany, President Harry S. Truman told Stalin that the US had &quot;a new weapon of unusual destructive force&quot;, without giving any details. As he showed &quot;no special interest,&quot; Truman erroneously assumed that Stalin did not understand. In reality, Soviet spies had kept Stalin informed of the work and the planned test.

A strike order from General Thomas T. Handy to General Carl Spaatz was approved by Marshall and Stimson on 25 July which specified that the &quot;first special bomb&quot; be used &quot;after about 3 August 1945,&quot; and that &quot;additional bombs&quot; would be used &quot;as soon as made ready by the project staff&quot;. The operational plan was to drop the first bomb on 2 August, the second bomb on 10 August, and a third bomb around 24 August. However, due to weather conditions over Japan and the desire for visual bombing, the date of the first bombing mission was pushed back to 6 August, and the second was moved forward to 9 August.

=== Bombings ===
On 6 August 1945, the &quot;Enola Gay&quot;, a Boeing B-29 Superfortress of the 393d Bombardment Squadron, piloted by Tibbets, lifted off from North Field with a Little Boy in its bomb bay. Hiroshima, the headquarters of the 2nd General Army and Fifth Division and a port of embarkation, was the primary target, with Kokura and Nagasaki as alternatives. Parsons, the weaponeer in charge of the mission, completed the bomb assembly in the air to minimize the risks of a nuclear explosion in the event of a crash during takeoff. The bomb detonated at an altitude of with a blast that was later estimated to be the equivalent of 13 kilotons of TNT. An area of approximately was destroyed. Japanese officials determined that 69% of Hiroshima&#x27;s buildings were destroyed and another 6–7% damaged. Early estimates were that 66,000 people were killed and 69,000 injured; later re-estimations that included people ignored by previous methods, like Korean slave laborers and additional soldiers, concluded there might have been 140,000 dead from the attack by December 1945.
On the morning of 9 August 1945, the &quot;Bockscar&quot;, a second B-29 piloted by the 393d Bombardment Squadron&#x27;s commander, Major Charles W. Sweeney, lifted off with a Fat Man on board. This time, Ashworth served as weaponeer and Kokura was the primary target. When they reached Kokura, they found cloud cover had obscured the city, prohibiting the visual attack required by orders. After three runs and with fuel running low, they headed for the secondary target, Nagasaki. Ashworth decided that a radar approach would be used if the target was obscured, but a last-minute break in the clouds over Nagasaki allowed a visual approach as ordered. The Fat Man was dropped over the city&#x27;s industrial valley midway between the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works in the south and the Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance Works in the north. The resulting explosion had a blast yield equivalent to 21 kilotons of TNT, roughly the same as the Trinity blast, but was confined to the Urakami Valley, and a major portion of the city, including the city center, was protected by the intervening hills. About 44% of the city was destroyed, and estimates of casualties range from 40,000 to 80,000 people killed and at least 60,000 injured. Overall, an estimated 35,000–40,000 people were killed and 60,000 injured.

Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for use on 19 August, with three more in September and a further three in October. Two more Fat Man assemblies were readied, and scheduled to leave Kirtland Field for Tinian on 11 and 14 August. At Los Alamos, technicians worked 24 hours straight to cast another plutonium core. Although cast, it still needed to be pressed and coated, which would take until 16 August. It could therefore have been ready for use on 19 August.

On 10 August, Truman was informed that another bomb was being prepared. He ordered that no additional atomic bombs could be used without his express authority. According to Henry A. Wallace, Truman told his cabinet that &quot;the thought of wiping out another 100,000 people was too horrible. He didn&#x27;t like the idea of killing, as he said, &#x27;all those kids.&#x27;&quot; Groves suspended the third core&#x27;s shipment on 13 August.

On 11 August, Groves phoned Warren with orders to organize a survey team to report on the damage and radioactivity at Hiroshima and Nagasaki as soon as the war ended. A party equipped with portable Geiger counters arrived in Hiroshima on 8 September headed by Farrell and Warren, with Japanese Rear Admiral Masao Tsuzuki, who acted as a translator. They remained in Hiroshima until 14 September and then surveyed Nagasaki from 19 September to 8 October. This and other scientific missions to Japan provided valuable data on the effects of the atomic bomb, and led to the creation of the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission.

In anticipation of the bombings, Groves had commissioned physicist Henry DeWolf Smyth to prepare a sanitized technical history of the project for public consumption. The idea of releasing such information freely was controversial; the decision to do so was made by Truman personally. The &quot;Smyth Report&quot; was released to the public on 12 August 1945.

Japan announced its surrender on 15 August. The necessity of the bombings became a subject of controversy among historians. Some questioned whether &quot;atomic diplomacy&quot; would have attained the same goals, and the relative weight that the bombs and the Soviet declaration of war had on the Japanese willingness to surrender. The Franck Report was the most notable effort pushing for a demonstration but was turned down by the Interim Committee&#x27;s scientific panel. The Szilárd petition, drafted in July 1945 and signed by dozens of scientists working on the Manhattan Project, was a late attempt at warning Truman about his responsibility in using such weapons.

== After the war ==
The Manhattan Project became instantly famous after the bombing of Hiroshima and the partial lifting of its secrecy. It was widely credited with ending the war, and Groves worked to credit its contractors, whose work had hitherto been secret. Groves and Nichols presented them with Army–Navy &quot;E&quot; Awards, and over 20 Presidential Medals for Merit were awarded to key contractors and scientists, including Bush and Oppenheimer. Military personnel received the Legion of Merit.

The Manhattan Project persisted until 31 December 1946, and the Manhattan District to 15 August 1947. During this time, it suffered from numerous difficulties caused by technical problems, the effects of rapid demobilization, and a lack of clarity on its long-term mission.

At Hanford, plutonium production declined as Reactors B, D and F wore out, poisoned by fission products and swelling of the graphite moderator known as the Wigner effect. The swelling damaged the charging tubes where the uranium was irradiated to produce plutonium, rendering them unusable. Production was curtailed and the oldest unit, B pile, was closed down so at least one reactor would remain available. Research continued, with DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory developing a redox solvent extraction process as an alternative plutonium extraction technique to the bismuth phosphate process, which left unspent uranium in a state from which it could not easily be recovered.

Bomb engineering was carried out by the Z Division, initially located at Wendover Field but moved to Oxnard Field, New Mexico, in September 1945 to be closer to Los Alamos. This marked the beginning of the Sandia Base. Nearby Kirtland Field was used as a B-29 base for aircraft compatibility and drop tests. As reservist officers were demobilized, they were replaced by about fifty hand-picked regular officers.

Nichols recommended that S-50 and the Alpha tracks at Y-12 be closed down. This was done in September. Although performing better than ever, the Alpha tracks could not compete with K-25 and the new K-27, which had commenced operation in January 1946. In December, the Y-12 plant was closed, cutting the Tennessee Eastman payroll from 8,600 to 1,500 and saving $2 million a month.
Nowhere was demobilization more of a problem than at Los Alamos, where there was an exodus of talent. Much remained to be done. The bombs used on Hiroshima and Nagasaki needed work to make them simpler, safer and more reliable. Implosion methods needed to be developed for uranium in place of the wasteful gun method, and composite uranium-plutonium cores were needed now that plutonium was in short supply. However, uncertainty about the future of the laboratory made it hard to induce people to stay. Oppenheimer returned to his job at the University of California and Groves appointed Norris Bradbury as an interim replacement; Bradbury remained in the post for the next 25 years. Groves attempted to combat the dissatisfaction caused by the lack of amenities with a construction program that included an improved water supply, three hundred houses, and recreation facilities.

Manhattan Project personnel participated in the first postwar nuclear tests, Operation Crossroads, conducted at Bikini Atoll in July 1946. Two Fat Man-type bombs were detonated — one as an airburst, one as an underwater burst — to investigate the effect of nuclear weapons on warships. Press and international observers were allowed to attend, making the tests an international spectacle.

Following a domestic debate over the peacetime management of the nuclear program, the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 created the United States Atomic Energy Commission to take over the project&#x27;s functions and assets. It established civilian control over atomic development. Military aspects were taken over by the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project (AFSWP).

After the bombings at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a number of Manhattan Project physicists founded the &quot;Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists&quot; (1945) and Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists (1946), which began as an emergency action undertaken by scientists who saw urgent need for an educational program about atomic weapons. In the face of the destructiveness of the bombs and in anticipation of the nuclear arms race several project members including Bohr, Bush and Conant expressed the view that it was necessary to reach agreement on international control of nuclear research and atomic weapons. The Baruch Plan, unveiled in a speech to the newly formed United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC) in June 1946, proposed the establishment of an international atomic development authority, but was not adopted.

== Cost ==

The project expenditure through 1 October 1945 was $1.845 billion, equivalent to less than nine days of wartime spending, and was $2.191 billion when the AEC assumed control on 1 January 1947. The total allocation was $2.4 billion. 84% of the costs through the end of 1945 were spent on the plants at Oak Ridge and Hanford, producing the enriched uranium and plutonium needed to fuel the bombs. At both sites, the majority of the costs were for construction (74% at Oak Ridge, 87% at Hanford), with the rest being for operations.
Initial funding for the project was through the general budget of the Office of Scientific Research and Development. As plans were made to turn the work over to the Army Corps of Engineers, Bush wrote to Roosevelt in late 1942 that &quot;it would be ruinous to the essential secrecy to have to defend before an appropriations committee any request for funds for this project.&quot; Instead, initial funding was done through discretionary funds to which Roosevelt had access.

As it grew in size and cost, Congress was deliberately kept ignorant of the project, because of concerns that Congressmen were prone to leaking information, and because it was feared that the project would appear to be a boondoggle. Appropriations requests were quietly slipped into other bills, but the project&#x27;s mounting costs and large facilities (which appeared to many to produce nothing) attracted scrutiny from several Congressional auditors. The Truman Committee that investigated wartime waste and fraud attempted to audit the project several times, but each time their inquiries were rejected.

These Congressional inquiries, along with the need for smooth budgetary approval, led to Bush, Groves, and Stimson agreeing in the spring of 1944 that a few high-ranking Congressmen should be told of the project&#x27;s purpose. By March 1945, exactly seven Congressmen were officially informed. The funds were hidden into appropriation requests with the inconspicuous headings, frequently &quot;Engineer Service Army&quot; and &quot;Expediting Production.&quot; In late May 1945, to further expedite budget issues and assure the cooperation of Albert J. Engel, who had threatened to reveal the existence of the project if he was not told more about it, five additional Congressmen were permitted to visit the Oak Ridge site to assure themselves of &quot;the reasonableness of the various living accommodations which had been provided, [and] that they actually observe the size and scope of the installations and that some of the complexities of the project be demonstrated to them.&quot;

During the war, the Manhattan Project ultimately produced the three bombs used (the Trinity gadget, Little Boy, and Fat Man), as well as an additional unused Fat Man bomb, making the average wartime cost per bomb around $500 million in 1945 dollars. By comparison, the project&#x27;s total cost by the end of 1945 was about 90% of the total spent on the production of US small arms (not including ammunition) and 34% of the total spent on US tanks during the same period. It was the second most expensive weapons project undertaken by the United States during the war, behind only the Boeing B-29 Superfortress.

== Legacy ==

The political and cultural impacts of the development of nuclear weapons were profound. William Laurence of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the first to use the phrase &quot;Atomic Age&quot;, became the official correspondent for the Manhattan Project in spring 1945. He witnessed both the Trinity test and the bombing of Nagasaki and wrote the official press releases on them. He went on to write a series of articles extolling the virtues of the new weapon. His reporting helped to spur public awareness of the potential of nuclear technology and motivated its development in the United States and Soviet Union.

The Manhattan Project left a legacy of a network of national laboratories: the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory, and Ames Laboratory. Two more were established by Groves soon after the war, the Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, New York, and the Sandia National Laboratories at Albuquerque, New Mexico. Groves allocated $72 million to them for research activities in fiscal year 1946–1947. They would be in the vanguard of the kind of large-scale research that Alvin Weinberg, the director of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, would call Big Science.

The Naval Research Laboratory had long been interested in the prospect of using nuclear power for warship propulsion, and sought to create its own nuclear project. In May 1946, Nimitz, now Chief of Naval Operations, decided that the Navy should instead work with the Manhattan Project. A group of naval officers were assigned to Oak Ridge, the most senior of whom was Captain Hyman G. Rickover, who became assistant director there. They immersed themselves in the study of nuclear energy, laying the foundations for a nuclear-powered navy. A similar group of Air Force personnel arrived at Oak Ridge in September 1946 with the aim of developing nuclear aircraft. Their Nuclear Energy for the Propulsion of Aircraft project ran into formidable technical difficulties and was ultimately canceled.

The ability of the new reactors to create radioactive isotopes in previously unheard-of quantities sparked a revolution in nuclear medicine. Starting in mid-1946, Oak Ridge began distributing radioisotopes to hospitals and universities, primarily iodine-131 and phosphorus-32 for cancer diagnosis and treatment. Isotopes were also used in biological, industrial and agricultural research.

Its production sites, operating with new technologies, exotic substances, and under conditions of secrecy and haste, also left a vast legacy of waste and environmental damage. At Hanford, for example, corrosive and radioactive wastes were stored in &quot;hastily fabricated, single-shell, steel-lined, underground storage tanks&quot; that were intended to be temporary, awaiting a more permanent solution. Instead, they were neglected and eventually leaked. Issues of this kind resulted in Hanford becoming &quot;one of the most contaminated nuclear waste sites in North America&quot;, and the subject of significant cleanup efforts after it was deactivated in the late Cold War.

On handing over control to the Atomic Energy Commission, Groves bid farewell to the people who had worked on the Manhattan Project:
The Manhattan Project National Historical Park was established on 10 November 2015.

== See also ==
* Oppenheimer (TV series) - 1980 TV miniseries
* Fat Man and Little Boy (film) - 1989 film starring Paul Newman
* Oppenheimer (film) - 2023 film by Christopher Nolan starring Cillian Murphy
* Timeline of nuclear weapons development

== Notes ==
== Citations==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Technical histories===
* 
* (1967 interview with Groves)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (Available on )
* 
* 

===Participant accounts===
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* — Features hundreds of audio/visual interviews with Manhattan Project veterans.
* 
* Manhattan Project and Allied Scientists Collections at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="4" end="21" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="79" end="91" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="113" end="127" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314675" start="278" end="291" title="Leslie Groves" label="Leslie Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="299" end="327" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="347" end="368" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="393" end="414" title="Los Alamos Laboratory" label="Los Alamos Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="476" end="494" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="530" end="539" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="594" end="629" title="Manhattan Project" label="Development of Substitute Materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137385" start="709" end="720" title="Tube Alloys" label="Tube Alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q501416" start="774" end="819" title="Office of Scientific Research and Development" label="Office of Scientific Research and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="1039" end="1055" title="fissile material" label="fissile material"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="1091" end="1107" title="Enriched uranium" label="Enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134113" start="1124" end="1146" title="Clinton Engineer Works" label="Clinton Engineer Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="1150" end="1159" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="1161" end="1170" title="Plutonium" label="Plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="1227" end="1242" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="1254" end="1266" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="1270" end="1280" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079490" start="1493" end="1508" title="gun-type fission weapon" label="gun-type design"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1650" end="1666" title="Nuclear_weapon_design#Implosion-type_weapon" label="implosion design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="1741" end="1751" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q181013" start="1820" end="1830" title="Little Boy" label="Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188163" start="1863" end="1870" title="Fat Man" label="Fat Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="1973" end="1985" title="Trinity test" label="Trinity test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="2000" end="2026" title="White Sands Missile Range" label="White Sands Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="2250" end="2291" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="2374" end="2403" title="German nuclear weapon project" label="German nuclear weapon project"/>
<link wikidata="Q662020" start="2413" end="2428" title="Operation Alsos" label="Operation Alsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q290655" start="2662" end="2674" title="atomic spies" label="atomic spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="2783" end="2795" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="2807" end="2827" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="2895" end="2916" title="United States Department of Energy National Laboratories" label="national laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q77604" start="2950" end="2959" title="radiology" label="radiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068153" start="2994" end="3006" title="nuclear navy" label="nuclear navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="3110" end="3148" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="United States Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344449" start="3192" end="3220" title="discovery of nuclear fission" label="discovery of nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="3224" end="3233" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60859" start="3238" end="3254" title="Fritz Strassmann" label="Fritz Strassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="3299" end="3311" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q93479" start="3316" end="3327" title="Otto Frisch" label="Otto Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3337" end="3348" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="3397" end="3423" title="German atomic bomb project" label="German atomic bomb project"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3500" end="3512" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="3523" end="3530" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153238" start="3584" end="3595" title="Leo Szilard" label="Leo Szilard"/>
<link wikidata="Q155790" start="3600" end="3613" title="Eugene Wigner" label="Eugene Wigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q714081" start="3626" end="3649" title="Einstein–Szilard letter" label="Einstein–Szilard letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542864" start="3800" end="3811" title="uranium ore" label="uranium ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="3843" end="3855" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="3872" end="3894" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="3919" end="3934" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3962" end="3983" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878719" start="4007" end="4019" title="Lyman Briggs" label="Lyman Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="4027" end="4055" title="National Bureau of Standards" label="National Bureau of Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985283" start="4067" end="4096" title="Advisory Committee on Uranium" label="Advisory Committee on Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="4134" end="4147" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4369" end="4378" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="4387" end="4406" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="4456" end="4464" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407775" start="4522" end="4537" title="Eugene T. Booth" label="Eugene T. Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701540" start="4542" end="4554" title="John R. Dunning" label="John Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="4713" end="4728" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260678" start="4777" end="4787" title="Pupin Hall" label="Pupin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q501421" start="4896" end="4931" title="National Defense Research Committee" label="National Defense Research Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q501416" start="5076" end="5121" title="Office of Scientific Research and Development" label="Office of Scientific Research and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="5145" end="5158" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="5457" end="5468" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="5482" end="5491" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="5543" end="5567" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61735" start="5610" end="5624" title="Rudolf Peierls" label="Rudolf Peierls"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="5632" end="5656" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q208470" start="5699" end="5712" title="critical mass" label="critical mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="5793" end="5811" title="order of magnitude" label="order of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464975" start="5886" end="5911" title="Frisch–Peierls memorandum" label="Frisch–Peierls memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659194" start="5962" end="5976" title="MAUD Committee" label="MAUD Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316767" start="6144" end="6158" title="Tizard Mission" label="Tizard Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q62897" start="6166" end="6180" title="John Cockcroft" label="John Cockcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q727443" start="6478" end="6491" title="Mark Oliphant" label="Mark Oliphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="6765" end="6785" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="6818" end="6836" title="Ernest O. Lawrence" label="Ernest O. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49355" start="6937" end="6952" title="James B. Conant" label="James B. Conant"/>
<link wikidata="Q127944" start="6954" end="6971" title="Arthur H. Compton" label="Arthur H. Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133188" start="6976" end="6992" title="George B. Pegram" label="George B. Pegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q251666" start="7258" end="7274" title="Henry A. Wallace" label="Henry A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="7388" end="7404" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314826" start="7405" end="7421" title="Henry L. Stimson" label="Henry L. Stimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="7431" end="7457" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="Chief of Staff of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="7459" end="7466" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="7467" end="7485" title="George C. Marshall" label="George C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="7733" end="7750" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="7974" end="7996" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892409" start="8005" end="8046" title="United States declaration of war on Japan" label="United States declaration of war on Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892407" start="8051" end="8061" title="United States declaration of war on Germany (1941)" label="on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q920846" start="8107" end="8125" title="isotope separation" label="isotope separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="8156" end="8180" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q920846" start="8194" end="8220" title="electromagnetic separation" label="electromagnetic separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720301" start="8222" end="8235" title="Eger Murphree" label="Eger Murphree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688195" start="8240" end="8261" title="Jesse Wakefield Beams" label="Jesse Wakefield Beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="8286" end="8303" title="gaseous diffusion" label="gaseous diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="8307" end="8326" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q377815" start="8332" end="8346" title="Philip Abelson" label="Philip Abelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q610090" start="8370" end="8387" title="Thermophoresis" label="thermal diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043963" start="8395" end="8429" title="Carnegie Institution of Washington" label="Carnegie Institution of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="8444" end="8469" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q134141" start="8533" end="8547" title="gas centrifuge" label="gas centrifuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="8605" end="8631" title="nuclear reactor technology" label="nuclear reactor technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179777" start="8633" end="8644" title="Harold Urey" label="Harold Urey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155890" start="8656" end="8667" title="heavy water" label="heavy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433335" start="8716" end="8740" title="Metallurgical Laboratory" label="Metallurgical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774196" start="8793" end="8801" title="nuclear graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466714" start="8807" end="8824" title="neutron moderator" label="neutron moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="8927" end="8944" title="Brigadier General (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002134" start="8945" end="8961" title="Wilhelm D. Styer" label="Wilhelm D. Styer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="9171" end="9208" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="9498" end="9519" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="9579" end="9604" title="fast neutron calculations" label="fast neutron calculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545341" start="9669" end="9682" title="Gregory Breit" label="Gregory Breit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133056" start="9763" end="9777" title="John H. Manley" label="John H. Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385071" start="9949" end="9962" title="Robert Serber" label="Robert Serber"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="9970" end="9992" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="10018" end="10025" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="10087" end="10100" title="hydrodynamics" label="hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155794" start="10382" end="10392" title="Hans Bethe" label="Hans Bethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193655" start="10394" end="10408" title="John Van Vleck" label="John Van Vleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052232" start="10425" end="10440" title="Emil Konopinski" label="Emil Konopinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597638" start="10457" end="10469" title="Stan Frankel" label="Stan Frankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18366" start="10507" end="10529" title="experimental physicist" label="experimental physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="10531" end="10543" title="Emilio Segrè" label="Emilio Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q123022" start="10545" end="10556" title="Felix Bloch" label="Felix Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249138" start="10558" end="10572" title="Franco Rasetti" label="Franco Rasetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q19009" start="10586" end="10600" title="Edwin McMillan" label="Edwin McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="10798" end="10811" title="Glenn Seaborg" label="Glenn Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="11128" end="11137" title="cyclotron" label="cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="11548" end="11556" title="spheroid" label="spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="11585" end="11594" title="implosion nuclear weapon" label="implosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q714440" start="11614" end="11631" title="Richard C. Tolman" label="Richard C. Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q786897" start="11656" end="11677" title="autocatalysis" label="autocatalytic methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="11963" end="11976" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="12051" end="12065" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="12078" end="12087" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="12092" end="12099" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127944" start="12763" end="12777" title="Arthur Compton" label="Arthur Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601265" start="12993" end="13011" title="Chief of Engineers" label="Chief of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407683" start="13027" end="13041" title="Eugene Reybold" label="Eugene Reybold"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197527" start="13060" end="13077" title="James C. Marshall" label="James C. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829626" start="13237" end="13249" title="Tower 270" label="270 Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821340" start="13343" end="13366" title="North Atlantic Division" label="North Atlantic Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618835" start="13408" end="13427" title="Stone &amp;amp; Webster" label="Stone &amp;amp; Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="13594" end="13612" title="Lieutenant Colonel (United States)" label="Lieutenant Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390533" start="13613" end="13628" title="Kenneth Nichols" label="Kenneth Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q131740045" start="13809" end="13825" title="Thomas M. Robins" label="Thomas M. Robins"/>
<link wikidata="Q314675" start="13851" end="13864" title="Leslie Groves" label="Leslie Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="14766" end="14769" title="trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="15018" end="15029" title="surveying" label="survey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536750" start="15113" end="15133" title="War Production Board" label="War Production Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="15159" end="15179" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="15208" end="15234" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368619" start="15395" end="15410" title="Elza, Tennessee" label="Elza, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q369360" start="16027" end="16041" title="Lucius D. Clay" label="Lucius D. Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677294" start="16613" end="16625" title="Harvey Bundy" label="Harvey Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586762" start="17251" end="17278" title="Harry S. Truman Building" label="New War Department Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="17594" end="17606" title="Rear Admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q14585304" start="17607" end="17625" title="William R. Purnell" label="William R. Purnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294734" start="17736" end="17749" title="Donald M. Nelson" label="Donald Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="18569" end="18578" title="Project Y" label="Project Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="19162" end="19172" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q52159113" start="19194" end="19199" title="Katherine Oppenheimer" label="Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859022" start="19217" end="19229" title="Jean Tatlock" label="Jean Tatlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396898" start="19248" end="19253" title="Frank Oppenheimer" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137385" start="19753" end="19764" title="Tube Alloys" label="Tube Alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="20481" end="20494" title="European Theatre of World War II" label="war in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q80884" start="20530" end="20544" title="James Chadwick" label="James Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460752" start="20767" end="20783" title="Quebec Agreement" label="Quebec Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460752" start="20807" end="20832" title="Combined Policy Committee" label="Combined Policy Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460752" start="21106" end="21128" title="Hyde Park Aide-Mémoire" label="Hyde Park Aide-Mémoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="21919" end="21929" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q57475" start="21944" end="21955" title="Klaus Fuchs" label="Klaus Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133126" start="21977" end="21993" title="Ernest William Titterton" label="Ernest Titterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180814" start="22710" end="22736" title="Combined Development Trust" label="Combined Development Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22803" end="22815" title="thorium#Occurrence" label="thorium ores"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="22846" end="22859" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417996" start="22941" end="22968" title="Belgian Government in Exile" label="Belgian Government in Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q450751" start="23277" end="23297" title="Henry Morgenthau Jr." label="Henry Morgenthau Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q28733116" start="23851" end="23886" title="High Explosive Research" label="independent nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817269" start="23896" end="23907" title="McMahon Act" label="McMahon Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892252" start="24174" end="24210" title="United States Under Secretary of War" label="United States Under Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q723287" start="24211" end="24230" title="Robert P. Patterson" label="Robert P. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="24287" end="24301" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="24548" end="24561" title="United States Marshals Service" label="U.S. Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589724" start="25033" end="25054" title="Governor of Tennessee" label="Governor of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q884385" start="25056" end="25071" title="Prentice Cooper" label="Prentice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134113" start="25180" end="25202" title="Clinton Engineer Works" label="Clinton Engineer Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q459464" start="25332" end="25362" title="Skidmore, Owings &amp;amp; Merrill" label="Skidmore, Owings &amp;amp; Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48809" start="25496" end="25505" title="Oak Ridge, Tennessee" label="Oak Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461310" start="25855" end="25882" title="Turner Construction Company" label="Turner Construction Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="26551" end="26574" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681873" start="26696" end="26719" title="Los Alamos Ranch School" label="Los Alamos Ranch School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="27202" end="27226" title="Secretary of Agriculture" label="Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q373253" start="27227" end="27244" title="Claude R. Wickard" label="Claude R. Wickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="27262" end="27290" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="27303" end="27317" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349434" start="27878" end="27891" title="Robert Bacher" label="Robert Bacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="27896" end="27907" title="Isidor Rabi" label="Isidor Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744094" start="28153" end="28169" title="Dorothy McKibbin" label="Dorothy McKibbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q577117" start="28333" end="28344" title="pilot plant" label="pilot plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398278" start="28377" end="28400" title="Palos Forest Preserves" label="Argonne Forest preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821679" start="28444" end="28450" title="Site A" label="Site A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469080" start="28502" end="28538" title="Cook County Forest Preserve District" label="Cook County Forest Preserve District"/>
<link wikidata="Q127944" start="28845" end="28859" title="Arthur Compton" label="Arthur Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067349" start="28953" end="28961" title="bleacher" label="bleacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596914" start="28966" end="28977" title="Stagg Field" label="Stagg Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="29067" end="29075" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="29186" end="29193" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489712" start="29201" end="29215" title="Frank Spedding" label="Frank Spedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="29219" end="29240" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="29270" end="29279" title="short ton" label="short ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705924" start="29315" end="29338" title="Westinghouse Lamp Plant" label="Westinghouse Lamp Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q620875" start="29425" end="29438" title="Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company" label="Goodyear Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q284681" start="29616" end="29630" title="Chicago Pile-1" label="Chicago Pile-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007398" start="29947" end="29965" title="Arthur V. Peterson" label="Arthur V. Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095738" start="30254" end="30268" title="Chicago Pile-3" label="Chicago Pile-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q109626" start="30406" end="30419" title="DuPage County, Illinois" label="DuPage County"/>
<link wikidata="Q649120" start="30449" end="30476" title="Argonne National Laboratory" label="Argonne National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="30676" end="30682" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966028" start="30815" end="30838" title="Walter S. Carpenter Jr." label="Walter S. Carpenter Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4285039" start="31085" end="31102" title="Franklin Matthias" label="Franklin Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="31173" end="31185" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q693638" start="31191" end="31211" title="Richland, Washington" label="Richland, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="31291" end="31305" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512367" start="31679" end="31686" title="Wanapum" label="Wanapum"/>
<link wikidata="Q688725" start="33127" end="33134" title="Cominco" label="Cominco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808502" start="33173" end="33196" title="Trail, British Columbia" label="Trail, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505878" start="33499" end="33510" title="Hugh Stott Taylor" label="Hugh Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="33555" end="33563" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q407905" start="33621" end="33628" title="chromium(III) oxide" label="chromia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095738" start="33899" end="33913" title="Chicago Pile 3" label="Chicago Pile 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059760" start="34031" end="34051" title="Chalk River Laboratories" label="Chalk River, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906303" start="34110" end="34129" title="Montreal Laboratory" label="Montreal Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267284" start="34184" end="34203" title="Deep River, Ontario" label="Deep River, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q922628" start="34426" end="34439" title="Camp Petawawa" label="Camp Petawawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q113737" start="34548" end="34563" title="Hans von Halban" label="Hans von Halban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626355" start="34633" end="34646" title="Bennett Lewis" label="Bennett Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q970269" start="34691" end="34695" title="ZEEP" label="ZEEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724378" start="34924" end="34927" title="NRX" label="NRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254679" start="35055" end="35068" title="Eldorado Mine (Northwest Territories)" label="Eldorado Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230871" start="35072" end="35083" title="Port Radium" label="Port Radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821408" start="35339" end="35350" title="P-9 Project" label="P-9 Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q653636" start="35678" end="35703" title="Morgantown, West Virginia" label="Morgantown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018812" start="35712" end="35739" title="Newport Chemical Depot" label="Wabash River Ordnance Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q389733" start="35746" end="35750" title="Dana, Indiana" label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920795" start="35755" end="35771" title="Newport, Indiana" label="Newport, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705186" start="35784" end="35806" title="Alabama Army Ammunition Plant" label="Alabama Ordnance Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q80000" start="35813" end="35825" title="Childersburg, Alabama" label="Childersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79477" start="35830" end="35848" title="Sylacauga, Alabama" label="Sylacauga, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100878" start="35902" end="35921" title="Ordnance Department" label="Ordnance Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="36481" end="36493" title="Jáchymov" label="Joachimsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="36524" end="36537" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="36729" end="36745" title="State Department" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500122" start="36782" end="36795" title="uranium oxide" label="uranium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="36909" end="36922" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354107" start="37001" end="37020" title="Eldorado Mining and Refining" label="Eldorado Gold Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096071" start="37483" end="37494" title="Shinkolobwe" label="Shinkolobwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284163" start="37655" end="37668" title="Edgar Sengier" label="Edgar Sengier"/>
<link wikidata="Q763185" start="37723" end="37752" title="Union Minière du Haut-Katanga" label="Union Minière du Haut-Katanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q882987" start="37974" end="37985" title="John Winant" label="John Winant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899800" start="38274" end="38290" title="Uravan, Colorado" label="Uravan, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="38322" end="38333" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416785" start="38345" end="38359" title="uranyl nitrate" label="uranyl nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q425420" start="38386" end="38402" title="uranium trioxide" label="uranium trioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q378379" start="38437" end="38452" title="uranium dioxide" label="uranium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="38716" end="38734" title="Iowa State College" label="Iowa State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q470273" start="38738" end="38748" title="Ames, Iowa" label="Ames, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q24435339" start="38825" end="38837" title="Ames Project" label="Ames Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745891" start="38847" end="38859" title="Ames process" label="Ames process"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="39008" end="39015" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="39117" end="39135" title="uranium enrichment" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688195" start="39593" end="39604" title="Jesse Beams" label="Jesse Beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q408887" start="39722" end="39742" title="uranium hexafluoride" label="uranium hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q38463878" start="39839" end="39852" title="Karl P. Cohen" label="Karl P. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083314" start="40862" end="40872" title="Zippe-type centrifuge" label="Zippe-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q605089" start="41218" end="41226" title="calutron" label="calutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285124" start="42155" end="42186" title="United States Deputy Secretary of the Treasury" label="Under Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163021" start="42187" end="42201" title="Daniel W. Bell" label="Daniel W. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986265" start="42270" end="42299" title="West Point Bullion Depository" label="West Point Bullion Depository"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061309" start="42540" end="42544" title="Y-12 National Security Complex" label="Y-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q899022" start="43131" end="43148" title="Tennessee Eastman" label="Tennessee Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869675" start="43263" end="43277" title="Calutron Girls" label="Calutron Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048513" start="44104" end="44121" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s law" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q424532" start="44146" end="44154" title="effusion" label="effusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="44216" end="44230" title="molecular mass" label="molecular mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q38463878" start="44662" end="44675" title="Karl P. Cohen" label="Karl P. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701540" start="44681" end="44696" title="John R. Dunning" label="John R. Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q596499" start="44827" end="44840" title="M. W. Kellogg" label="M. W. Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="45570" end="45597" title="Bell Telephone Laboratories" label="Bell Telephone Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="45606" end="45614" title="Bakelite" label="Bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="46278" end="46291" title="Union Carbide" label="Union Carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q711256" start="47062" end="47076" title="Sydney Chapman (mathematician)" label="Sydney Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q440196" start="47081" end="47093" title="David Enskog" label="David Enskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133108" start="47101" end="47107" title="Chapman–Enskog theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="47729" end="47736" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568975" start="47737" end="47755" title="William S. Parsons" label="William S. Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="48039" end="48048" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181013" start="49487" end="49497" title="Little Boy" label="Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="49757" end="49767" title="nuclear transmutation" label="transmuted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="49773" end="49784" title="uranium-239" label="uranium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393673" start="49819" end="49832" title="neptunium-239" label="neptunium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141329" start="49847" end="49860" title="plutonium-239" label="plutonium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="50015" end="50031" title="fission products" label="fission products"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133095" start="50252" end="50273" title="X-10 Graphite Reactor" label="X-10 Graphite Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50903" end="50922" title="tinning#Hot-dipping" label="hot dipping process"/>
<link wikidata="Q135325" start="50940" end="50945" title="Alcoa" label="Alcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="51267" end="51283" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q577889" start="52521" end="52528" title="pickling (metal)" label="pickled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088351" start="52594" end="52616" title="silumin" label="aluminum-silicon alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q422937" start="52672" end="52683" title="arc welding" label="arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472490" start="53029" end="53038" title="B-Reactor" label="Reactor B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459873" start="53607" end="53626" title="Crawford Greenewalt" label="Crawford Greenewalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943137" start="53628" end="53639" title="Leona Woods" label="Leona Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q615306" start="53892" end="53903" title="control rod" label="control rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q450317" start="54225" end="54240" title="Chien-Shiung Wu" label="Chien-Shiung Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q221033" start="54285" end="54299" title="neutron poison" label="neutron poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501182" start="54308" end="54317" title="xenon-135" label="xenon-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="54331" end="54340" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294573" start="54369" end="54385" title="Donald J. Hughes" label="Donald J. Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="54390" end="54412" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Archibald Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562475" start="54433" end="54454" title="nuclear cross section" label="nuclear cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462838" start="55342" end="55368" title="fluoride selective electrode" label="lanthanum fluoride process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918350" start="55451" end="55476" title="bismuth phosphate process" label="bismuth phosphate process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079490" start="57911" end="57934" title="gun-type fission weapon" label="gun-type fission weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q706086" start="57957" end="57965" title="Thin Man (nuclear bomb)" label="Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="58571" end="58584" title="predetonation" label="predetonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984664" start="58676" end="58682" title="fizzle (nuclear test)" label="fizzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356799" start="59117" end="59133" title="Seth Neddermeyer" label="Seth Neddermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="59704" end="59720" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q284813" start="59746" end="59759" title="shaped charge" label="shaped charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188163" start="59925" end="59932" title="Fat Man" label="Fat Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q902967" start="60193" end="60212" title="George Kistiakowsky" label="George Kistiakowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421445" start="60286" end="60300" title="explosive lens" label="explosive lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q898998" start="60475" end="60488" title="composition B" label="composition B"/>
<link wikidata="Q807286" start="60493" end="60500" title="baratol" label="baratol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="60688" end="60697" title="detonator" label="detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421286" start="60765" end="60795" title="exploding-bridgewire detonator" label="exploding-bridgewire detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q178344" start="60856" end="60868" title="Luis Walter Alvarez" label="Luis Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="60907" end="60917" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278350" start="60946" end="60961" title="RaLa Experiment" label="RaLa Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="60990" end="61002" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q559290" start="61003" end="61016" title="lanthanum-140" label="lanthanum-140"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="61037" end="61052" title="gamma radiation" label="gamma radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q640610" start="61186" end="61204" title="ionization chamber" label="ionization chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174693" start="61371" end="61384" title="David Hawkins (philosopher)" label="David Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q108293603" start="61633" end="61639" title="Tamper (nuclear weapons)" label="tamper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889759" start="61957" end="61984" title="modulated neutron initiator" label="modulated neutron initiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075090" start="62173" end="62193" title="Charles Allen Thomas" label="Charles Allen Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207983" start="62201" end="62217" title="Monsanto Company" label="Monsanto Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243565" start="62242" end="62256" title="Dayton Project" label="Dayton Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q229354" start="62285" end="62291" title="Curie (unit)" label="curies"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="62387" end="62396" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733227" start="62739" end="62762" title="allotropes of plutonium" label="allotropes of plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="63111" end="63126" title="alpha particles" label="alpha particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205706" start="63217" end="63240" title="plutonium-gallium alloy" label="plutonium-gallium alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910801" start="63284" end="63295" title="hot pressing" label="hot pressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198547" start="63915" end="63918" title="pit (nuclear weapon)" label="pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983433" start="64343" end="64363" title="Lieutenant Commander (United States)" label="Lieutenant Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q931143" start="64364" end="64377" title="Francis Birch (geophysicist)" label="Francis Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="64842" end="64851" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="65215" end="65227" title="nuclear test" label="nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550453" start="65341" end="65359" title="Kenneth Bainbridge" label="Kenneth Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694811" start="65378" end="65402" title="Alamogordo Bombing Range" label="Alamogordo Bombing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="65726" end="65749" title="nuclear fission product" label="nuclear fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984664" start="66474" end="66491" title="Fizzle (nuclear explosion)" label="fizzled explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="66813" end="66828" title="nuclear fallout" label="nuclear fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q322456" start="66880" end="66895" title="Norris Bradbury" label="Norris Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800921" start="66910" end="66930" title="McDonald Ranch House" label="McDonald Ranch House"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="67054" end="67071" title="TNT equivalent" label="energy equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q970542" start="67122" end="67131" title="trinitite" label="trinitite"/>
<link wikidata="Q216938" start="67215" end="67229" title="mushroom cloud" label="mushroom cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="67277" end="67291" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="67501" end="67506" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="67528" end="67541" title="Bhagavad Gita" label="Bhagavad Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="67796" end="67814" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="67891" end="67906" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105730779" start="68937" end="68980" title="African-American scientists and technicians on the Manhattan Project" label="African-American scientists and technicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566218" start="69225" end="69248" title="War Manpower Commission" label="War Manpower Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889865" start="69488" end="69520" title="United States Employment Service" label="United States Employment Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794254" start="70029" end="70062" title="Army Specialized Training Program" label="Army Specialized Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574539" start="70093" end="70120" title="Special Engineer Detachment" label="Special Engineer Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q77604" start="70763" end="70772" title="Radiology" label="Radiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131850178" start="70780" end="70822" title="University of Rochester School of Medicine" label="University of Rochester School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q705698" start="70824" end="70842" title="Stafford L. Warren" label="Stafford L. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806312" start="70881" end="70913" title="United States Army Medical Corps" label="United States Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978225" start="71568" end="71591" title="National Safety Council" label="National Safety Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820981" start="72299" end="72319" title="Compartmentalization (information security)" label="compartmentalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974060" start="72325" end="72337" title="need-to-know" label="need-to-know"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="72772" end="72781" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="72786" end="72794" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="72817" end="72820" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349695" start="72844" end="72865" title="G-2 (intelligence)" label="G-2 intelligence unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004449" start="73070" end="73081" title="Byron Price" label="Byron Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079188" start="73095" end="73115" title="Office of Censorship" label="Office of Censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="73220" end="73224" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="74593" end="74621" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q167540" start="74641" end="74660" title="William L. Laurence" label="William L. Laurence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="74670" end="74688" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="74744" end="74769" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q723033" start="74970" end="74984" title="Georgy Flyorov" label="Georgy Flyorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="74994" end="75007" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="75097" end="75109" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q55554851" start="76308" end="76320" title="fire balloon" label="fire balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137074" start="76502" end="76528" title="Counter Intelligence Corps" label="Counter Intelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q893744" start="76701" end="76714" title="Boris T. Pash" label="Boris T. Pash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987773" start="76767" end="76790" title="Western Defense Command" label="Western Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636491" start="76962" end="76978" title="Haakon Chevalier" label="Haakon Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q57475" start="77063" end="77074" title="Klaus Fuchs" label="Klaus Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q696328" start="77281" end="77295" title="Venona project" label="Venona project"/>
<link wikidata="Q343655" start="77504" end="77514" title="Harry Gold" label="Harry Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q340124" start="77516" end="77532" title="David Greenglass" label="David Greenglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q769097" start="77538" end="77564" title="Julius and Ethel Rosenberg" label="Julius and Ethel Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q460016" start="77583" end="77595" title="George Koval" label="George Koval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389242" start="77600" end="77613" title="Theodore Hall" label="Theodore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006230" start="77732" end="77758" title="Soviet atomic bomb project" label="Soviet atomic bomb project"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="78189" end="78218" title="German nuclear energy project" label="German nuclear energy project"/>
<link wikidata="Q712688" start="78245" end="78277" title="Japanese nuclear weapons program" label="Japanese nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q327048" start="78481" end="78510" title="Norwegian heavy water sabotage" label="bombing and sabotage campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967781" start="78633" end="78661" title="Office of Naval Intelligence" label="Office of Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545472" start="78871" end="78887" title="George V. Strong" label="George V. Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q893744" start="78899" end="78909" title="Boris Pash" label="Boris Pash"/>
<link wikidata="Q560839" start="79000" end="79015" title="Samuel Goudsmit" label="Samuel Goudsmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="79136" end="79154" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="79347" end="79365" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="79440" end="79457" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="79514" end="79534" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q333365" start="79603" end="79622" title="Walter Bedell Smith" label="Walter Bedell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821476" start="79643" end="79663" title="Operation Peppermint" label="Operation Peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093909" start="79700" end="79724" title="Chemical Warfare Service" label="Chemical Warfare Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q14808" start="80312" end="80323" title="Oranienburg" label="Oranienburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80335" end="80363" title="Auergesellschaft#Russian Alsos" label="arranged for it to be bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q525409" start="80444" end="80453" title="Stassfurt" label="Stassfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55300" start="80461" end="80483" title="Soviet Occupation Zone" label="Soviet Occupation Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950653" start="80518" end="80522" title="WIFO (Nazi company)" label="WIFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097116" start="80605" end="80624" title="Operation Harborage" label="Operation Harborage"/>
<link wikidata="Q494529" start="80656" end="80665" title="Hechingen" label="Hechingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q538290" start="80667" end="80675" title="Bisingen" label="Bisingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q505856" start="80681" end="80691" title="Haigerloch" label="Haigerloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q66308" start="80914" end="80926" title="Kurt Diebner" label="Kurt Diebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="80928" end="80937" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q61745" start="80939" end="80954" title="Walther Gerlach" label="Walther Gerlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="80956" end="80973" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q65350" start="80979" end="81008" title="Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker" label="Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396781" start="81053" end="81062" title="Farm Hall" label="Farm Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="81278" end="81292" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="81403" end="81428" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q797813" start="81486" end="81494" title="bomb bay" label="bomb bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q407147" start="81665" end="81697" title="Air Force Materiel Command" label="Army Air Forces Materiel Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553382" start="81701" end="81713" title="Wright Field" label="Wright Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516763" start="81727" end="81738" title="Silverplate" label="Silverplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="81836" end="81856" title="Muroc Army Air Field" label="Muroc Army Air Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014558" start="81865" end="81892" title="Naval Ordnance Test Station" label="Naval Ordnance Test Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259856" start="81933" end="81945" title="pumpkin bomb" label="pumpkin bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q15044227" start="82015" end="82036" title="509th Composite Group" label="509th Composite Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982548" start="82074" end="82097" title="Wendover Army Air Field" label="Wendover Army Air Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q294555" start="82134" end="82149" title="Paul W. Tibbets" label="Paul W. Tibbets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636081" start="82155" end="82181" title="393rd Bombardment Squadron" label="393rd Bombardment Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248998" start="82310" end="82325" title="Project Alberta" label="Project Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326323" start="82467" end="82478" title="North Field (Tinian)" label="North Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q325652" start="82482" end="82488" title="Tinian" label="Tinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="82571" end="82578" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252107" start="82724" end="82746" title="Douglas C-54 Skymaster" label="Douglas C-54 Skymaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198547" start="82911" end="82925" title="plutonium core" label="plutonium core"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="83025" end="83044" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q516373" start="83364" end="83370" title="Kokura" label="Kokura"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="83372" end="83381" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q179691" start="83383" end="83390" title="Niigata (city)" label="Niigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="83396" end="83401" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="83596" end="83604" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353134" start="83650" end="83667" title="Interim Committee" label="Interim Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="84260" end="84278" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="84301" end="84316" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622107" start="84646" end="84661" title="Thomas T. Handy" label="Thomas T. Handy"/>
<link wikidata="Q579115" start="84673" end="84684" title="Carl Spaatz" label="Carl Spaatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q204424" start="85310" end="85319" title="Enola Gay" label="Enola Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128013" start="85507" end="85523" title="2nd General Army" label="2nd General Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q709183" start="85528" end="85542" title="5th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)" label="Fifth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q697041" start="86395" end="86403" title="Bockscar" label="Bockscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q241128" start="86490" end="86508" title="Charles W. Sweeney" label="Charles W. Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q63252" start="87328" end="87335" title="Urakami" label="Urakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q577946" start="87854" end="87868" title="Kirtland Air Force Base" label="Kirtland Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186448" start="87961" end="87983" title="Demon core" label="another plutonium core"/>
<link wikidata="Q251666" start="88307" end="88323" title="Henry A. Wallace" label="Henry A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q539091" start="89164" end="89195" title="Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission" label="Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q451199" start="89265" end="89283" title="Henry DeWolf Smyth" label="Henry DeWolf Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149060" start="89492" end="89504" title="Smyth Report" label="Smyth Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="89558" end="89587" title="Surrender of Japan" label="Japan announced its surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162338" start="89641" end="89680" title="debate over the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="subject of controversy among historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="89818" end="89843" title="Soviet–Japanese War (1945)" label="Soviet declaration of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q595378" start="89894" end="89907" title="Franck Report" label="Franck Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162646" start="90038" end="90054" title="Szilárd petition" label="Szilárd petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794061" start="90534" end="90563" title="Army–Navy &amp;quot;E&amp;quot; Award" label="Army–Navy &amp;quot;E&amp;quot; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307005" start="90578" end="90607" title="Presidential Medal for Merit" label="Presidential Medals for Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="90720" end="90735" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775760" start="91169" end="91182" title="Wigner effect" label="Wigner effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="91500" end="91505" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208852" start="91551" end="91571" title="nuclear reprocessing" label="plutonium extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115705" start="91801" end="91813" title="Oxnard Field" label="Oxnard Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416321" start="91906" end="91917" title="Sandia Base" label="Sandia Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="93451" end="93471" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="93486" end="93498" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817269" start="93850" end="93875" title="Atomic Energy Act of 1946" label="Atomic Energy Act of 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="93888" end="93926" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="United States Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793016" start="94078" end="94114" title="Armed Forces Special Weapons Project" label="Armed Forces Special Weapons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004412" start="94230" end="94263" title="Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists" label="Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q717200" start="94281" end="94321" title="Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists" label="Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="94534" end="94551" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q677422" start="94671" end="94731" title="International control of atomic energy" label="international control of nuclear research and atomic weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082055" start="94737" end="94748" title="Baruch Plan" label="Baruch Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q677422" start="94791" end="94830" title="United Nations Atomic Energy Commission" label="United Nations Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q501416" start="95564" end="95609" title="Office of Scientific Research and Development" label="Office of Scientific Research and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922281" start="95918" end="95937" title="black budget" label="discretionary funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943596" start="96191" end="96201" title="boondoggle" label="boondoggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790804" start="96429" end="96445" title="Truman Committee" label="Truman Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638222" start="97124" end="97139" title="Albert J. Engel" label="Albert J. Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q124968555" start="97706" end="97739" title="Third Shot" label="an additional unused Fat Man bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="98154" end="98179" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="Boeing B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q167540" start="98284" end="98300" title="William Laurence" label="William Laurence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="98310" end="98328" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q757669" start="98370" end="98380" title="Atomic Age" label="Atomic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="98863" end="98884" title="United States Department of Energy national laboratories" label="national laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="98890" end="98927" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="98929" end="98959" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="98961" end="98990" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q649120" start="98992" end="99019" title="Argonne National Laboratory" label="Argonne National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745875" start="99025" end="99040" title="Ames Laboratory" label="Ames Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="99102" end="99132" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752638" start="99136" end="99151" title="Upton, New York" label="Upton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="99161" end="99189" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q449188" start="99376" end="99390" title="Alvin Weinberg" label="Alvin Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196009" start="99454" end="99465" title="Big Science" label="Big Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="99657" end="99682" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q541637" start="99844" end="99861" title="Hyman G. Rickover" label="Hyman G. Rickover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068153" start="99986" end="100006" title="nuclear navy" label="nuclear-powered navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607394" start="100113" end="100129" title="nuclear aircraft" label="nuclear aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607198" start="100137" end="100182" title="Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion" label="Nuclear Energy for the Propulsion of Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="100387" end="100403" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q927316" start="100511" end="100521" title="iodine-131" label="iodine-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174657" start="100526" end="100539" title="phosphorus-32" label="phosphorus-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023160" start="101471" end="101513" title="Manhattan Project National Historical Park" label="Manhattan Project National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098548" start="101569" end="101592" title="Oppenheimer (TV series)" label="Oppenheimer (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215976" start="101616" end="101645" title="Fat Man and Little Boy (film)" label="Fat Man and Little Boy (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="101667" end="101678" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108839994" start="101681" end="101699" title="Oppenheimer (film)" label="Oppenheimer (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="101715" end="101732" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q202589" start="101742" end="101756" title="Cillian Murphy" label="Cillian Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806128" start="101759" end="101798" title="Timeline of nuclear weapons development" label="Timeline of nuclear weapons development"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19605" wikidata="Q3450" url="?curid=19605" title="Main sequence">
<text>In astronomy, the main sequence is a classification of stars which appear on plots of stellar color versus brightness as a continuous and distinctive band. Stars on this band are known as main-sequence stars or dwarf stars, and positions of stars on and off the band are believed to indicate their physical properties, as well as their progress through several types of star life-cycles. These are the most numerous true stars in the universe and include the Sun. Color-magnitude plots are known as Hertzsprung–Russell diagrams after Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell. 

After condensation and ignition of a star, it generates thermal energy in its dense core region through nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium. During this stage of the star&#x27;s lifetime, it is located on the main sequence at a position determined primarily by its mass but also based on its chemical composition and age. The cores of main-sequence stars are in hydrostatic equilibrium, where outward thermal pressure from the hot core is balanced by the inward pressure of gravitational collapse from the overlying layers. The strong dependence of the rate of energy generation on temperature and pressure helps to sustain this balance. Energy generated at the core makes its way to the surface and is radiated away at the photosphere. The energy is carried by either radiation or convection, with the latter occurring in regions with steeper temperature gradients, higher opacity, or both.

The main sequence is sometimes divided into upper and lower parts, based on the dominant process that a star uses to generate energy. The Sun, along with main sequence stars below about 1.5 times the mass
 of the Sun (), primarily fuse hydrogen atoms together in a series of stages to form helium, a sequence called the proton–proton chain. Above this mass, in the upper main sequence, the nuclear fusion process mainly uses atoms of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen as intermediaries in the CNO cycle that produces helium from hydrogen atoms. Main-sequence stars with more than two solar masses undergo convection in their core regions, which acts to stir up the newly created helium and maintain the proportion of fuel needed for fusion to occur. Below this mass, stars have cores that are entirely radiative with convective zones near the surface. With decreasing stellar mass, the proportion of the star forming a convective envelope steadily increases. The main-sequence stars below undergo convection throughout their mass. When core convection does not occur, a helium-rich core develops surrounded by an outer layer of hydrogen.

The more massive a star is, the shorter its lifespan on the main sequence. After the hydrogen fuel at the core has been consumed, the star evolves away from the main sequence on the HR diagram, into a supergiant, red giant, or directly to a white dwarf.

== History ==

In the early part of the 20th century, information about the types and distances of stars became more readily available. The spectra of stars were shown to have distinctive features, which allowed them to be categorized. Annie Jump Cannon and Edward Charles Pickering at Harvard College Observatory developed a method of categorization that became known as the Harvard Classification Scheme, published in the &quot;Harvard Annals&quot; in 1901.

In Potsdam in 1906, the Danish astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung noticed that the reddest stars—classified as K and M in the Harvard scheme—could be divided into two distinct groups. These stars are either much brighter than the Sun or much fainter. To distinguish these groups, he called them &quot;giant&quot; and &quot;dwarf&quot; stars. The following year he began studying star clusters; large groupings of stars that are co-located at approximately the same distance. For these stars, he published the first plots of color versus luminosity. These plots showed a prominent and continuous sequence of stars, which he named the Main Sequence.

At Princeton University, Henry Norris Russell was following a similar course of research. He was studying the relationship between the spectral classification of stars and their actual brightness as corrected for distance—their absolute magnitude. For this purpose, he used a set of stars that had reliable parallaxes and many of which had been categorized at Harvard. When he plotted the spectral types of these stars against their absolute magnitude, he found that dwarf stars followed a distinct relationship. This allowed the real brightness of a dwarf star to be predicted with reasonable accuracy.

Of the red stars observed by Hertzsprung, the dwarf stars also followed the spectra-luminosity relationship discovered by Russell. However, giant stars are much brighter than dwarfs and so do not follow the same relationship. Russell proposed that &quot;giant stars must have low density or great surface brightness, and the reverse is true of dwarf stars&quot;. The same curve also showed that there were very few faint white stars.

In 1933, Bengt Strömgren introduced the term Hertzsprung–Russell diagram to denote a luminosity-spectral class diagram. This name reflected the parallel development of this technique by both Hertzsprung and Russell earlier in the century.

As evolutionary models of stars were developed during the 1930s, it was shown that, for stars with the same composition, the star&#x27;s mass determines its luminosity and radius. Conversely, when a star&#x27;s chemical composition and its position on the main sequence are known, the star&#x27;s mass and radius can be deduced. This became known as the Vogt–Russell theorem; named after Heinrich Vogt and Henry Norris Russell. It was subsequently discovered that this relationship breaks down somewhat for stars of the non-uniform composition.

A refined scheme for stellar classification was published in 1943 by William Wilson Morgan and Philip Childs Keenan. The MK classification assigned each star a spectral type—based on the Harvard classification—and a luminosity class. The Harvard classification had been developed by assigning a different letter to each star based on the strength of the hydrogen spectral line before the relationship between spectra and temperature was known. When ordered by temperature and when duplicate classes were removed, the spectral types of stars followed, in order of decreasing temperature with colors ranging from blue to red, the sequence O, B, A, F, G, K, and M. (A popular mnemonic for memorizing this sequence of stellar classes is &quot;Oh Be A Fine Girl/Guy, Kiss Me&quot;.) The luminosity class ranged from I to V, in order of decreasing luminosity. Stars of luminosity class V belonged to the main sequence.

In April 2018, astronomers reported the detection of the most distant &quot;ordinary&quot; (i.e., main sequence) star, named Icarus (formally, MACS J1149 Lensed Star 1), at 9 billion light-years away from Earth.

== Formation and evolution ==

When a protostar is formed from the collapse of a giant molecular cloud of gas and dust in the local interstellar medium, the initial composition is homogeneous throughout, consisting of about 70% hydrogen, 28% helium, and trace amounts of other elements, by mass. The initial mass of the star depends on the local conditions within the cloud. (The mass distribution of newly formed stars is described empirically by the initial mass function.) During the initial collapse, this pre-main-sequence star generates energy through gravitational contraction. Once sufficiently dense, stars begin converting hydrogen into helium and giving off energy through an exothermic nuclear fusion process.

When nuclear fusion of hydrogen becomes the dominant energy production process and the excess energy gained from gravitational contraction has been lost, the star lies along a curve on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram (or HR diagram) called the standard main sequence. Astronomers will sometimes refer to this stage as &quot;zero-age main sequence&quot;, or ZAMS. The ZAMS curve can be calculated using computer models of stellar properties at the point when stars begin hydrogen fusion. From this point, the brightness and surface temperature of stars typically increase with age.

A star remains near its initial position on the main sequence until a significant amount of hydrogen in the core has been consumed, then begins to evolve into a more luminous star. (On the HR diagram, the evolving star moves up and to the right of the main sequence.) Thus the main sequence represents the primary hydrogen-burning stage of a star&#x27;s lifetime.

== Classification ==
Main sequence stars are divided into the following types:

* O-type main-sequence star 
* B-type main-sequence star
* A-type main-sequence star
* F-type main-sequence star
* G-type main-sequence star
* K-type main-sequence star
* M-type main-sequence star
M-type (and, to a lesser extent, K-type) main-sequence stars are usually referred to as red dwarfs.

== Properties ==
The majority of stars on a typical HR diagram lie along the main-sequence curve. This line is pronounced because both the spectral type and the luminosity depends only on a star&#x27;s mass, at least to zeroth-order approximation, as long as it is fusing hydrogen at its core—and that is what almost all stars spend most of their &quot;active&quot; lives doing.

The temperature of a star determines its spectral type via its effect on the physical properties of plasma in its photosphere. A star&#x27;s energy emission as a function of wavelength is influenced by both its temperature and composition. A key indicator of this energy distribution is given by the color index, , which measures the star&#x27;s magnitude in blue (&quot;B&quot;) and green-yellow (&quot;V&quot;) light by means of filters. This difference in magnitude provides a measure of a star&#x27;s temperature.

== Dwarf terminology ==
Main-sequence stars are called dwarf stars, but this terminology is partly historical and can be somewhat confusing. For the cooler stars, dwarfs such as red dwarfs, orange dwarfs, and yellow dwarfs are indeed much smaller and dimmer than other stars of those colors. However, for hotter blue and white stars, the difference in size and brightness between so-called &quot;dwarf&quot; stars that are on the main sequence and so-called &quot;giant&quot; stars that are not, becomes smaller. For the hottest stars the difference is not directly observable and for these stars, the terms &quot;dwarf&quot; and &quot;giant&quot; refer to differences in spectral lines which indicate whether a star is on or off the main sequence. Nevertheless, very hot main-sequence stars are still sometimes called dwarfs, even though they have roughly the same size and brightness as the &quot;giant&quot; stars of that temperature.

The common use of &quot;dwarf&quot; to mean the main sequence is confusing in another way because there are dwarf stars that are not main-sequence stars. For example, a white dwarf is the dead core left over after a star has shed its outer layers, and is much smaller than a main-sequence star, roughly the size of Earth. These represent the final evolutionary stage of many main-sequence stars.

== Parameters ==

By treating the star as an idealized energy radiator known as a black body, the luminosity &quot;L&quot; and radius &quot;R&quot; can be related to the effective temperature &quot;T&quot;eff by the Stefan–Boltzmann law:
: formula_1
where &quot;σ&quot; is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant. As the position of a star on the HR diagram shows its approximate luminosity, this relation can be used to estimate its radius.

The mass, radius, and luminosity of a star are closely interlinked, and their respective values can be approximated by three relations. First is the Stefan–Boltzmann law, which relates the luminosity &quot;L&quot;, the radius &quot;R&quot; and the surface temperature &quot;T&quot;eff. Second is the mass–luminosity relation, which relates the luminosity &quot;L&quot; and the mass &quot;M&quot;. Finally, the relationship between &quot;M&quot; and &quot;R&quot; is close to linear. The ratio of &quot;M&quot; to &quot;R&quot; increases by a factor of only three over 2.5 orders of magnitude of &quot;M&quot;. This relation is roughly proportional to the star&#x27;s inner temperature &quot;TI&quot;, and its extremely slow increase reflects the fact that the rate of energy generation in the core strongly depends on this temperature, whereas it has to fit the mass-luminosity relation. Thus, a too-high or too-low temperature will result in stellar instability.

A better approximation is to take , the energy generation rate per unit mass, as &quot;ε&quot; is proportional to &quot;TI&quot;15, where &quot;TI&quot; is the core temperature. This is suitable for stars at least as massive as the Sun, exhibiting the CNO cycle, and gives the better fit .

=== Sample parameters ===
The table below shows typical values for stars along the main sequence. The values of luminosity (&quot;L&quot;), radius (&quot;R&quot;), and mass (&quot;M&quot;) are relative to the Sun—a dwarf star with a spectral classification of G2 V. The actual values for a star may vary by as much as 20–30% from the values listed below.


== Energy generation ==
All main-sequence stars have a core region where energy is generated by nuclear fusion. The temperature and density of this core are at the levels necessary to sustain the energy production that will support the remainder of the star. A reduction of energy production would cause the overlaying mass to compress the core, resulting in an increase in the fusion rate because of higher temperature and pressure. Likewise, an increase in energy production would cause the star to expand, lowering the pressure at the core. Thus the star forms a self-regulating system in hydrostatic equilibrium that is stable over the course of its main-sequence lifetime.

Main-sequence stars employ two types of hydrogen fusion processes, and the rate of energy generation from each type depends on the temperature in the core region. Astronomers divide the main sequence into upper and lower parts, based on which of the two is the dominant fusion process. In the lower main sequence, energy is primarily generated as the result of the proton–proton chain, which directly fuses hydrogen together in a series of stages to produce helium. Stars in the upper main sequence have sufficiently high core temperatures to efficiently use the CNO cycle (see chart). This process uses atoms of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen as intermediaries in the process of fusing hydrogen into helium.

At a stellar core temperature of 18 million kelvin, the PP process and CNO cycle are equally efficient, and each type generates half of the star&#x27;s net luminosity. As this is the core temperature of a star with about , the upper main sequence consists of stars above this mass. Thus, roughly speaking, stars of spectral class F or cooler belong to the lower main sequence, while A-type stars or hotter are upper main-sequence stars. The transition in primary energy production from one form to the other spans a range difference of less than a single solar mass. In the Sun, a one solar-mass star, only 1.5% of the energy is generated by the CNO cycle. By contrast, stars with or above generate almost their entire energy output through the CNO cycle.

The observed upper limit for a main-sequence star is . The theoretical explanation for this limit is that stars above this mass can not radiate energy fast enough to remain stable, so any additional mass will be ejected in a series of pulsations until the star reaches a stable limit. The lower limit for sustained proton-proton nuclear fusion is about or 80 times the mass of Jupiter. Below this threshold are sub-stellar objects that can not sustain hydrogen fusion, known as brown dwarfs.

== Structure ==
Because there is a temperature difference between the core and the surface, or photosphere, energy is transported outward. The two modes for transporting this energy are radiation and convection. A radiation zone, where energy is transported by radiation, is stable against convection and there is very little mixing of the plasma. By contrast, in a convection zone the energy is transported by bulk movement of plasma, with hotter material rising and cooler material descending. Convection is a more efficient mode for carrying energy than radiation, but it will only occur under conditions that create a steep temperature gradient.

In massive stars (above ) the rate of energy generation by the CNO cycle is very sensitive to temperature, so the fusion is highly concentrated at the core. Consequently, there is a high temperature gradient in the core region, which results in a convection zone for more efficient energy transport. This mixing of material around the core removes the helium ash from the hydrogen-burning region, allowing more of the hydrogen in the star to be consumed during the main-sequence lifetime. The outer regions of a massive star transport energy by radiation, with little or no convection.

Intermediate-mass stars such as Sirius may transport energy primarily by radiation, with a small core convection region. Medium-sized, low-mass stars like the Sun have a core region that is stable against convection, with a convection zone near the surface that mixes the outer layers. This results in a steady buildup of a helium-rich core, surrounded by a hydrogen-rich outer region. By contrast, cool, very low-mass stars (below ) are convective throughout. Thus the helium produced at the core is distributed across the star, producing a relatively uniform atmosphere and a proportionately longer main-sequence lifespan.

== Luminosity-color variation ==

As non-fusing helium accumulates in the core of a main-sequence star, the reduction in the abundance of hydrogen per unit mass results in a gradual lowering of the fusion rate within that mass. Since it is fusion-supplied power that maintains the pressure of the core and supports the higher layers of the star, the core gradually gets compressed. This brings hydrogen-rich material into a shell around the helium-rich core at a depth where the pressure is sufficient for fusion to occur. The high power output from this shell pushes the higher layers of the star further out. This causes a gradual increase in the radius and consequently luminosity of the star over time. For example, the luminosity of the early Sun was only about 70% of its current value. As a star ages it thus changes its position on the HR diagram. This evolution is reflected in a broadening of the main sequence band which contains stars at various evolutionary stages.

Other factors that broaden the main sequence band on the HR diagram include uncertainty in the distance to stars and the presence of unresolved binary stars that can alter the observed stellar parameters. However, even perfect observation would show a fuzzy main sequence because mass is not the only parameter that affects a star&#x27;s color and luminosity. Variations in chemical composition caused by the initial abundances, the star&#x27;s evolutionary status, interaction with a close companion, rapid rotation, or a magnetic field can all slightly change a main-sequence star&#x27;s HR diagram position, to name just a few factors. As an example, there are metal-poor stars (with a very low abundance of elements with higher atomic numbers than helium) that lie just below the main sequence and are known as subdwarfs. These stars are fusing hydrogen in their cores and so they mark the lower edge of the main sequence fuzziness caused by variance in chemical composition.

A nearly vertical region of the HR diagram, known as the instability strip, is occupied by pulsating variable stars known as Cepheid variables. These stars vary in magnitude at regular intervals, giving them a pulsating appearance. The strip intersects the upper part of the main sequence in the region of class &quot;A&quot; and &quot;F&quot; stars, which are between one and two solar masses. Pulsating stars in this part of the instability strip intersecting the upper part of the main sequence are called Delta Scuti variables. Main-sequence stars in this region experience only small changes in magnitude, so this variation is difficult to detect. Other classes of unstable main-sequence stars, like Beta Cephei variables, are unrelated to this instability strip.

== Lifetime ==

The total amount of energy that a star can generate through nuclear fusion of hydrogen is limited by the amount of hydrogen fuel that can be consumed at the core. For a star in equilibrium, the thermal energy generated at the core must be at least equal to the energy radiated at the surface. Since the luminosity gives the amount of energy radiated per unit time, the total life span can be estimated, to first approximation, as the total energy produced divided by the star&#x27;s luminosity.

For a star with at least , when the hydrogen supply in its core is exhausted and it expands to become a red giant, it can start to fuse helium atoms to form carbon. The energy output of the helium fusion process per unit mass is only about a tenth the energy output of the hydrogen process, and the luminosity of the star increases. This results in a much shorter length of time in this stage compared to the main-sequence lifetime. (For example, the Sun is predicted to spend burning helium, compared to about 12 billion years burning hydrogen.) Thus, about 90% of the observed stars above will be on the main sequence. On average, main-sequence stars are known to follow an empirical mass–luminosity relationship. The luminosity (&quot;L&quot;) of the star is roughly proportional to the total mass (&quot;M&quot;) as the following power law:
: formula_2
This relationship applies to main-sequence stars in the range .

The amount of fuel available for nuclear fusion is proportional to the mass of the star. Thus, the lifetime of a star on the main sequence can be estimated by comparing it to solar evolutionary models. The Sun has been a main-sequence star for about 4.5 billion years and it will become a red giant in 6.5 billion years, for a total main-sequence lifetime of roughly 1010 years. Hence:
: formula_3
where &quot;M&quot; and &quot;L&quot; are the mass and luminosity of the star, respectively, formula_4 is a solar mass, formula_5 is the solar luminosity and formula_6 is the star&#x27;s estimated main-sequence lifetime.

Although more massive stars have more fuel to burn and might intuitively be expected to last longer, they also radiate a proportionately greater amount with increased mass. This is required by the stellar equation of state; for a massive star to maintain equilibrium, the outward pressure of radiated energy generated in the core not only must but &quot;will&quot; rise to match the titanic inward gravitational pressure of its envelope. Thus, the most massive stars may remain on the main sequence for only a few million years, while stars with less than a tenth of a solar mass may last for over a trillion years.

The exact mass-luminosity relationship depends on how efficiently energy can be transported from the core to the surface. A higher opacity has an insulating effect that retains more energy at the core, so the star does not need to produce as much energy to remain in hydrostatic equilibrium. By contrast, a lower opacity means energy escapes more rapidly and the star must burn more fuel to remain in equilibrium. A sufficiently high opacity can result in energy transport via convection, which changes the conditions needed to remain in equilibrium.

In high-mass main-sequence stars, the opacity is dominated by electron scattering, which is nearly constant with increasing temperature. Thus the luminosity only increases as the cube of the star&#x27;s mass. For stars below , the opacity becomes dependent on temperature, resulting in the luminosity varying approximately as the fourth power of the star&#x27;s mass. For very low-mass stars, molecules in the atmosphere also contribute to the opacity. Below about , the luminosity of the star varies as the mass to the power of 2.3, producing a flattening of the slope on a graph of mass versus luminosity. Even these refinements are only an approximation, however, and the mass-luminosity relation can vary depending on a star&#x27;s composition.

== Evolutionary tracks ==

When a main-sequence star has consumed the hydrogen at its core, the loss of energy generation causes its gravitational collapse to resume and the star evolves off the main sequence. The path which the star follows across the HR diagram is called an evolutionary track.

Stars with less than are predicted to directly become white dwarfs when energy generation by nuclear fusion of hydrogen at their core comes to a halt, but stars in this mass range have main-sequence lifetimes longer than the current age of the universe, so no stars are old enough for this to have occurred.

In stars more massive than , the hydrogen surrounding the helium core reaches sufficient temperature and pressure to undergo fusion, forming a hydrogen-burning shell and causing the outer layers of the star to expand and cool. The stage as these stars move away from the main sequence is known as the subgiant branch; it is relatively brief and appears as a gap in the evolutionary track since few stars are observed at that point.

When the helium core of low-mass stars becomes degenerate, or the outer layers of intermediate-mass stars cool sufficiently to become opaque, their hydrogen shells increase in temperature and the stars start to become more luminous. This is known as the red-giant branch; it is a relatively long-lived stage and it appears prominently in H–R diagrams. These stars will eventually end their lives as white dwarfs.

The most massive stars do not become red giants; instead, their cores quickly become hot enough to fuse helium and eventually heavier elements and they are known as supergiants. They follow approximately horizontal evolutionary tracks from the main sequence across the top of the H–R diagram. Supergiants are relatively rare and do not show prominently on most H–R diagrams. Their cores will eventually collapse, usually leading to a supernova and leaving behind either a neutron star or black hole.

When a cluster of stars is formed at about the same time, the main-sequence lifespan of these stars will depend on their individual masses. The most massive stars will leave the main sequence first, followed in sequence by stars of ever lower masses. The position where stars in the cluster are leaving the main sequence is known as the turnoff point. By knowing the main-sequence lifespan of stars at this point, it becomes possible to estimate the age of the cluster.

== See also ==
* Lists of astronomical objects

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Further reading==

===General===
* Kippenhahn, Rudolf, &quot;100 Billion Suns&quot;, Basic Books, New York, 1983.

===Technical===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="18" end="31" title="Main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="55" end="59" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="94" end="99" title="color index" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="107" end="117" title="absolute magnitude" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="188" end="207" title="Main sequence" label="main-sequence stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q244393" start="211" end="221" title="dwarf star" label="dwarf star"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="459" end="462" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="499" end="526" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q295099" start="534" end="551" title="Ejnar Hertzsprung" label="Ejnar Hertzsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q273159" start="556" end="576" title="Henry Norris Russell" label="Henry Norris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q209233" start="636" end="650" title="thermal energy" label="thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790215" start="664" end="675" title="stellar core" label="core region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="684" end="698" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="702" end="710" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="716" end="722" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208641" start="945" end="968" title="hydrostatic equilibrium" label="hydrostatic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q329273" start="1057" end="1079" title="gravitational collapse" label="gravitational collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="1307" end="1318" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="1352" end="1361" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="1365" end="1375" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="1676" end="1692" title="solar mass" label="mass
 of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q223073" start="1796" end="1815" title="proton–proton chain" label="proton–proton chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="1910" end="1916" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="1918" end="1926" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="1932" end="1938" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="1964" end="1973" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="2749" end="2756" title="stellar evolution" label="evolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="2811" end="2821" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="2823" end="2832" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="2851" end="2862" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="2964" end="2968" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="3005" end="3012" title="stellar spectrum" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="3101" end="3118" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Annie Jump Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156896" start="3123" end="3147" title="Edward Charles Pickering" label="Edward Charles Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q637936" start="3151" end="3178" title="Harvard College Observatory" label="Harvard College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="3241" end="3270" title="stellar classification" label="Harvard Classification Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="3329" end="3336" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q295099" start="3368" end="3385" title="Ejnar Hertzsprung" label="Ejnar Hertzsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="3699" end="3711" title="star cluster" label="star cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="3857" end="3867" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="3972" end="3992" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q273159" start="3994" end="4014" title="Henry Norris Russell" label="Henry Norris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="4197" end="4215" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="4276" end="4284" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q434113" start="5018" end="5033" title="Bengt Strömgren" label="Bengt Strömgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q458549" start="5603" end="5623" title="Vogt–Russell theorem" label="Vogt–Russell theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q105736" start="5637" end="5650" title="Heinrich Vogt (astronomer)" label="Heinrich Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="5816" end="5838" title="stellar classification" label="stellar classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q543398" start="5864" end="5885" title="William Wilson Morgan" label="William Wilson Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086095" start="5890" end="5910" title="Philip Childs Keenan" label="Philip Childs Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="6312" end="6325" title="spectral type" label="spectral type"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="6468" end="6476" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="6822" end="6826" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q51320480" start="6834" end="6840" title="Icarus (star)" label="Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51320480" start="6852" end="6876" title="MACS J1149 Lensed Star 1" label="MACS J1149 Lensed Star 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="6914" end="6919" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="6960" end="6969" title="protostar" label="protostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130216" start="6989" end="6997" title="Jeans instability" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="7003" end="7024" title="giant molecular cloud" label="giant molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="7054" end="7073" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194026" start="7374" end="7395" title="initial mass function" label="initial mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062509" start="7432" end="7454" title="pre-main-sequence star" label="pre-main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="7609" end="7619" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="7620" end="7634" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="7821" end="7826" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="7834" end="7861" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q911809" start="8674" end="8699" title="O-type main-sequence star" label="O-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q767432" start="8703" end="8728" title="B-type main-sequence star" label="B-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q471805" start="8731" end="8756" title="A-type main-sequence star" label="A-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353952" start="8759" end="8784" title="F-type main-sequence star" label="F-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864" start="8787" end="8812" title="G-type main-sequence star" label="G-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q863936" start="8815" end="8840" title="K-type main-sequence star" label="K-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="8843" end="8868" title="M-type main-sequence star" label="M-type main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="8957" end="8967" title="Red dwarf" label="red dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="9109" end="9122" title="stellar classification" label="spectral type"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="9131" end="9141" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100757" start="9190" end="9216" title="order of approximation" label="zeroth-order approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="9391" end="9404" title="spectral type" label="spectral type"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="9450" end="9456" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="9464" end="9475" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q271860" start="9650" end="9661" title="color index" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="9696" end="9705" title="apparent magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="10047" end="10056" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q863936" start="10059" end="10071" title="orange dwarf" label="orange dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864" start="10078" end="10090" title="yellow dwarf star" label="yellow dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="10541" end="10554" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="10977" end="10988" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="11123" end="11128" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="11287" end="11297" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="11375" end="11396" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q704747" start="11421" end="11441" title="Stefan–Boltzmann law" label="Stefan–Boltzmann law"/>
<link wikidata="Q704747" start="11482" end="11507" title="Stefan–Boltzmann constant" label="Stefan–Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907452" start="11938" end="11962" title="mass–luminosity relation" label="mass–luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="12210" end="12229" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="12855" end="12864" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="13006" end="13016" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="13034" end="13040" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="13062" end="13066" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q208641" start="13843" end="13866" title="hydrostatic equilibrium" label="hydrostatic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223073" start="14295" end="14314" title="proton–proton chain" label="proton–proton chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222971" start="14493" end="14502" title="CNO cycle" label="CNO cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="14543" end="14549" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="14551" end="14559" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="14565" end="14571" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="14682" end="14688" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="15772" end="15779" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="15873" end="15884" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="15983" end="15994" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="16074" end="16083" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="16088" end="16098" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q127922" start="16102" end="16116" title="radiation zone" label="radiation zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128034" start="16254" end="16269" title="convection zone" label="convection zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="17158" end="17164" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="18876" end="18887" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="19177" end="19196" title="stellar evolution" label="evolutionary status"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="19217" end="19232" title="binary star" label="close companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464" start="19234" end="19248" title="stellar rotation" label="rapid rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449" start="19255" end="19269" title="stellar magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="19396" end="19412" title="metallicity" label="metal-poor stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220" start="19547" end="19555" title="subdwarf" label="subdwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q280157" start="19770" end="19787" title="instability strip" label="instability strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="19814" end="19827" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="19838" end="19854" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q836976" start="20222" end="20242" title="Delta Scuti variable" label="Delta Scuti variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q764463" start="20418" end="20438" title="Beta Cephei variable" label="Beta Cephei variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100757" start="20905" end="20924" title="order of approximation" label="first approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="21099" end="21108" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="21131" end="21137" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="21152" end="21158" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907452" start="21681" end="21705" title="mass–luminosity relation" label="mass–luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="21829" end="21838" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="22123" end="22126" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="22423" end="22433" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q843877" start="22452" end="22468" title="solar luminosity" label="solar luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="23285" end="23292" title="opacity (optics)" label="opacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208641" start="23421" end="23444" title="hydrostatic equilibrium" label="hydrostatic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="23631" end="23641" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327107" start="23768" end="23787" title="electron scattering" label="electron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="24808" end="24819" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227" start="25364" end="25379" title="subgiant branch" label="subgiant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q129843" start="25421" end="25424" title="Hertzsprung gap" label="gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929897" start="25750" end="25766" title="red-giant branch" label="red-giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193599" start="26075" end="26085" title="supergiant" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="26344" end="26353" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="26382" end="26394" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="26398" end="26408" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="26418" end="26434" title="star cluster" label="cluster of stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461574" start="26748" end="26761" title="turnoff point" label="turnoff point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309613" start="26899" end="26928" title="Lists of astronomical objects" label="Lists of astronomical objects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19609" wikidata="Q751740" url="?curid=19609" title="Memory leak">
<text>In computer science, a memory leak is a type of resource leak that occurs when a computer program incorrectly manages memory allocations in a way that memory which is no longer needed is not released. A memory leak may also happen when an object is stored in memory but cannot be accessed by the running code (i.e. unreachable memory). A memory leak has symptoms similar to a number of other problems and generally can only be diagnosed by a programmer with access to the program&#x27;s source code.

A related concept is the &quot;space leak&quot;, which is when a program consumes excessive memory but does eventually release it.

Because they can exhaust available system memory as an application runs, memory leaks are often the cause of or a contributing factor to software aging.

==Effects==

===Minor leaks===
If a program has a memory leak and its memory usage is steadily increasing, there will not usually be an immediate symptom. In modern operating systems, normal memory used by an application is released when the application terminates. This means that a memory leak in a program that only runs for a short time may not be noticed and is rarely serious, and slow leaks can also be covered over by program restarts. Every physical system has a finite amount of memory, and if the memory leak is not contained (for example, by restarting the leaking program) it will eventually cause problems for users.

===Thrashing===
Most modern consumer desktop operating systems have both main memory which is physically housed in RAM microchips, and secondary storage such as a hard drive. Memory allocation is dynamic – each process gets as much memory as it requests. Active pages are transferred into main memory for fast access; inactive pages are pushed out to secondary storage to make room, as needed. When a single process starts consuming a large amount of memory, it usually occupies more and more of main memory, pushing other programs out to secondary storage – usually significantly slowing performance of the system. Even if the leaking program is terminated, it may take some time for other programs to swap back into main memory, and for performance to return to normal. The resulting slowness and excessive accessing of secondary storage is known as thrashing.

===Out-of-memory condition===

If a program uses all available memory before being terminated (whether there is virtual memory or only main memory, such as on an embedded system) any attempt to allocate more memory will fail. This usually causes the program attempting to allocate the memory to terminate itself, or to generate a segmentation fault. Some programs are designed to recover from this situation (possibly by falling back on pre-reserved memory). The first program to experience the out-of-memory may or may not be the program that has the memory leak.

Some multi-tasking operating systems have special mechanisms to deal with an out-of-memory condition, such as killing processes at random (which may affect &quot;innocent&quot; processes), or killing the largest process in memory (which presumably is the one causing the problem). Some operating systems have a per-process memory limit, to prevent any one program from hogging all of the memory on the system. The disadvantage to this arrangement is that the operating system sometimes must be re-configured to allow proper operation of programs that legitimately require large amounts of memory, such as those dealing with graphics, video, or scientific calculations.

If the memory leak is in the kernel, the operating system itself will likely fail. Computers without sophisticated memory management, such as embedded systems, may also completely fail from a persistent memory leak.

==Causes of serious leaks==
Much more serious leaks include those where:

* A program runs for a long time and consumes added memory over time, such as background tasks on servers, and especially in embedded systems which may be left running for many years
* New memory is allocated frequently for one-time tasks, such as when rendering the frames of a computer game or animated video
* A program can request memory, such as shared memory, that is not released, even when the program terminates
* Memory is very limited, such as in an embedded system or portable device, or where the program requires a very large amount of memory to begin with, leaving little margin for leaks
* A leak occurs within the operating system or memory manager
* A system device driver causes a leak
* The operating system does not automatically release memory on program termination

==Programming issues==
Memory leaks are a common error in programming, especially when using languages that have no built in automatic garbage collection, such as C and C++. Typically, a memory leak occurs because dynamically allocated memory has become unreachable. The prevalence of memory leak bugs has led to the development of a number of debugging tools to detect unreachable memory. &quot;BoundsChecker&quot;, &quot;Deleaker&quot;, Memory Validator, &quot;IBM Rational Purify&quot;, &quot;Valgrind&quot;, &quot;Parasoft Insure++&quot;, &quot;Dr. Memory&quot; and &quot;memwatch&quot; are some of the more popular memory debuggers for C and C++ programs. &quot;Conservative&quot; garbage collection capabilities can be added to any programming language that lacks it as a built-in feature, and libraries for doing this are available for C and C++ programs. A conservative collector finds and reclaims most, but not all, unreachable memory.

Although the memory manager can recover unreachable memory, it cannot free memory that is still reachable and therefore potentially still useful. Modern memory managers therefore provide techniques for programmers to semantically mark memory with varying levels of usefulness, which correspond to varying levels of &quot;reachability&quot;. The memory manager does not free an object that is strongly reachable. An object is strongly reachable if it is reachable either directly by a strong reference or indirectly by a chain of strong references. (A &quot;strong reference&quot; is a reference that, unlike a weak reference, prevents an object from being garbage collected.) To prevent this, the developer is responsible for cleaning up references after use, typically by setting the reference to null once it is no longer needed and, if necessary, by deregistering any event listeners that maintain strong references to the object.

In general, automatic memory management is more robust and convenient for developers, as they do not need to implement freeing routines or worry about the sequence in which cleanup is performed or be concerned about whether or not an object is still referenced. It is easier for a programmer to know when a reference is no longer needed than to know when an object is no longer referenced. However, automatic memory management can impose a performance overhead, and it does not eliminate all of the programming errors that cause memory leaks.

==Exploitation==
Publicly accessible systems such as web servers or routers are prone to denial-of-service attacks if an attacker discovers a sequence of operations which can trigger a leak. Such a sequence is known as an exploit.

==RAII==

Resource acquisition is initialization (RAII) is an approach to the problem commonly taken in C++, D, and Ada. It involves associating scoped objects with the acquired resources, and automatically releasing the resources once the objects are out of scope. Unlike garbage collection, RAII has the advantage of knowing when objects exist and when they do not. Compare the following C and C++ examples:
/* C version */
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

void f(int n)
 int* array = calloc(n, sizeof(int));
 do_some_work(array);
 free(array);

// C++ version
#include &lt;vector&gt;

void f(int n)
 std::vector&lt;int&gt; array (n);
 do_some_work(array);


The C version, as implemented in the example, requires explicit deallocation; the array is dynamically allocated (from the heap in most C implementations), and continues to exist until explicitly freed.

The C++ version requires no explicit deallocation; it will always occur automatically as soon as the object codice_1 goes out of scope, including if an exception is thrown. This avoids some of the overhead of garbage collection schemes. And because object destructors can free resources other than memory, RAII helps to prevent the leaking of input and output resources accessed through a handle, which mark-and-sweep garbage collection does not handle gracefully. These include open files, open windows, user notifications, objects in a graphics drawing library, thread synchronisation primitives such as critical sections, network connections, and connections to the Windows Registry or another database.

However, using RAII correctly is not always easy and has its own pitfalls. For instance, if one is not careful, it is possible to create dangling pointers (or references) by returning data by reference, only to have that data be deleted when its containing object goes out of scope.

D uses a combination of RAII and garbage collection, employing automatic destruction when it is clear that an object cannot be accessed outside its original scope, and garbage collection otherwise.

==Reference counting and cyclic references==
More modern garbage collection schemes are often based on a notion of reachability – if you do not have a usable reference to the memory in question, it can be collected. Other garbage collection schemes can be based on reference counting, where an object is responsible for keeping track of how many references are pointing to it. If the number goes down to zero, the object is expected to release itself and allow its memory to be reclaimed. The flaw with this model is that it does not cope with cyclic references, and this is why nowadays most programmers are prepared to accept the burden of the more costly mark and sweep type of systems.

The following Visual Basic code illustrates the canonical reference-counting memory leak:
Dim A, B
Set A = CreateObject(&quot;Some.Thing&quot;)
Set B = CreateObject(&quot;Some.Thing&quot;)
&#x27; At this point, the two objects each have one reference,

Set A.member = B
Set B.member = A
&#x27; Now they each have two references.

Set A = Nothing &#x27; You could still get out of it...

Set B = Nothing &#x27; And now you&#x27;ve got a memory leak!

End

In practice, this trivial example would be spotted straight away and fixed. In most real examples, the cycle of references spans more than two objects, and is more difficult to detect.

A well-known example of this kind of leak came to prominence with the rise of AJAX programming techniques in web browsers in the lapsed listener problem. JavaScript code which associated a DOM element with an event handler, and failed to remove the reference before exiting, would leak memory (AJAX web pages keep a given DOM alive for a lot longer than traditional web pages, so this leak was much more apparent).

==External detection==

A &quot;sawtooth&quot; pattern of memory utilization may be an indicator of a memory leak within an application, particularly if the vertical drops coincide with reboots or restarts of that application. Care should be taken though because garbage collection points could also cause such a pattern and would show a healthy usage of the heap.

Constantly increasing memory usage is not necessarily evidence of a memory leak. Some applications will store ever increasing amounts of information in memory (e.g. as a cache). If the cache can grow so large as to cause problems, this may be a programming or design error, but is not a memory leak as the information remains nominally in use. In other cases, programs may require an unreasonably large amount of memory because the programmer has assumed memory is always sufficient for a particular task; for example, a graphics file processor might start by reading the entire contents of an image file and storing it all into memory, something that is not viable where a very large image exceeds available memory. Confirmation that excessive memory use is due to a memory leak requires access to the program code.

==Examples==
===Pseudocode===
The following example, written in pseudocode, is intended to show how a memory leak can come about, and its effects, without needing any programming knowledge. The program in this case is part of some very simple software designed to control an elevator. This part of the program is run whenever anyone inside the elevator presses the button for a floor.

 When a button is pressed:
 Get some memory, which will be used to remember the floor number
 Put the floor number into the memory
 Are we already on the target floor?
 If so, we have nothing to do: finished
 Otherwise:
 Wait until the lift is idle
 Go to the required floor
 Release the memory we used to remember the floor number

The memory leak would occur if the floor number requested is the same floor that the elevator is on; the condition for releasing the memory would be skipped. Each time this case occurs, more memory is leaked.

Cases like this would not usually have any immediate effects. People do not often press the button for the floor they are already on, and in any case, the elevator might have enough spare memory that this could happen hundreds or thousands of times. However, the elevator will eventually run out of memory. This could take months or years, so it might not be discovered despite thorough testing.

The consequences would be unpleasant; at the very least, the elevator would stop responding to requests to move to another floor (such as when an attempt is made to call the elevator or when someone is inside and presses the floor buttons). If other parts of the program need memory (a part assigned to open and close the door, for example), then no one would be able to enter, and if someone happens to be inside, they will become trapped (assuming the doors cannot be opened manually).

The memory leak lasts until the system is reset. For example: if the elevator&#x27;s power were turned off or in a power outage, the program would stop running. When power was turned on again, the program would restart and all the memory would be available again, but the slow process of memory leak would restart together with the program, eventually prejudicing the correct running of the system.

The leak in the above example can be corrected by bringing the &quot;release&quot; operation outside of the conditional:

 When a button is pressed:
 Get some memory, which will be used to remember the floor number
 Put the floor number into the memory
 Are we already on the target floor?
 If not:
 Wait until the lift is idle
 Go to the required floor
 Release the memory we used to remember the floor number

===C++===
The following C++ program deliberately leaks memory by losing the pointer to the allocated memory.

int main() {
 int* a = new int(5);
 a = nullptr;
 /* The pointer in the &#x27;a&#x27; no longer exists, and therefore cannot be freed,
 but the memory is still allocated by the system.
 If the program continues to create such pointers without freeing them, 
 it will consume memory continuously.
 Therefore, a leak would occur. */


==See also==
* Buffer overflow
* Memory management
* Memory debugger
* Plumbr is a popular memory leak detection tool for applications running on Java Virtual Machine.
* nmon (short for Nigel&#x27;s Monitor) is a popular system monitor tool for the AIX and Linux operating systems.

==References==
==External links==
* Visual Leak Detector for Visual Studio, open source
* Valgrind, open source
* Deleaker for Visual Studio, proprietary
* Memory Validator for Visual Studio, Delphi, Fortran, Visual Basic, proprietary
* Detecting a Memory Leak (Using MFC Debugging Support)
* Article &quot;Memory Leak Detection in Embedded Systems&quot; by Cal Erickson
* WonderLeak, a high performance Windows heap and handle allocation profiler, proprietary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q751740" start="23" end="34" title="Memory leak" label="memory leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315829" start="48" end="61" title="resource leak" label="resource leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="81" end="97" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="118" end="135" title="memory allocation" label="memory allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="151" end="157" title="Computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="239" end="245" title="object (computer science)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771358" start="315" end="333" title="unreachable memory" label="unreachable memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="442" end="452" title="programmer" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554236" start="770" end="784" title="software aging" label="software aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="1464" end="1481" title="operating systems" label="operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="1492" end="1503" title="main memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="1554" end="1571" title="secondary storage" label="secondary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="1582" end="1592" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q656083" start="1681" end="1686" title="Paging" label="pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067413" start="2271" end="2280" title="Thrashing (computer science)" label="thrashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062340" start="2613" end="2631" title="segmentation fault" label="segmentation fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="2854" end="2867" title="Computer multitasking" label="multi-tasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="3548" end="3554" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="3935" end="3950" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q764810" start="4161" end="4174" title="shared memory" label="shared memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="4271" end="4286" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="4461" end="4475" title="Memory management" label="memory manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="4487" end="4500" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="4693" end="4702" title="programming language" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="4735" end="4753" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="4763" end="4764" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="4769" end="4772" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="4814" end="4835" title="Dynamic memory allocation" label="dynamically allocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771358" start="4854" end="4865" title="Unreachable memory" label="unreachable"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="4897" end="4901" title="Software bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="4944" end="4953" title="debugging" label="debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077784" start="4954" end="4958" title="Programming tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950003" start="4996" end="5009" title="BoundsChecker" label="BoundsChecker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5023" end="5031" title="Deleaker" label="Deleaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968974" start="5063" end="5082" title="IBM Rational Purify" label="IBM Rational Purify"/>
<link wikidata="Q924041" start="5096" end="5104" title="Valgrind" label="Valgrind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135972" start="5118" end="5126" title="Parasoft" label="Parasoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042396" start="5127" end="5135" title="Insure++" label="Insure++"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5149" end="5159" title="DynamoRIO#Dr. Memory" label="Dr. Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815930" start="5176" end="5184" title="memwatch" label="memwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339810" start="5220" end="5235" title="memory debugger" label="memory debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="5560" end="5574" title="Memory management" label="memory manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032747" start="6031" end="6047" title="strong reference" label="strong reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032747" start="6157" end="6171" title="weak reference" label="weak reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848926" start="6345" end="6349" title="null pointer" label="null"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291944" start="6418" end="6432" title="event listener" label="event listener"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="7079" end="7089" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="7094" end="7100" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q131406" start="7115" end="7139" title="denial-of-service attack" label="denial-of-service attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287" start="7248" end="7255" title="Exploit (computer security)" label="exploit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714630" start="7268" end="7306" title="Resource acquisition is initialization" label="Resource acquisition is initialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="7362" end="7365" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q319268" start="7367" end="7368" title="D programming language" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="7374" end="7377" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="8004" end="8025" title="Dynamic memory allocation" label="dynamically allocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="8326" end="8344" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647463" start="8449" end="8512" title="Handle leak" label="leaking of input and output resources accessed through a handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q463244" start="8786" end="8802" title="Windows Registry" label="Windows Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642293" start="8962" end="8978" title="dangling pointer" label="dangling pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319268" start="9109" end="9110" title="D (programming language)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="9365" end="9383" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352761" start="9573" end="9591" title="reference counting" label="reference counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353783" start="9966" end="9980" title="mark and sweep" label="mark and sweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853013" start="10013" end="10025" title="Visual Basic" label="Visual Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="10718" end="10722" title="AJAX" label="AJAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="10749" end="10760" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488391" start="10769" end="10792" title="lapsed listener problem" label="lapsed listener problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="10794" end="10804" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093" start="10829" end="10832" title="Document Object Model" label="DOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="11319" end="11337" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="11592" end="11597" title="cache (computing)" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="12304" end="12314" title="pseudocode" label="pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="12515" end="12523" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="14891" end="14894" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="15325" end="15340" title="Buffer overflow" label="Buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="15343" end="15360" title="Memory management" label="Memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339810" start="15363" end="15378" title="Memory debugger" label="Memory debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636588" start="15381" end="15387" title="Plumbr" label="Plumbr"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="15456" end="15476" title="Java virtual machine" label="Java Virtual Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042684" start="15480" end="15484" title="nmon" label="nmon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19614" wikidata="Q725417" url="?curid=19614" title="Molecular orbital">
<text>In chemistry, a molecular orbital () is a mathematical function describing the location and wave-like behavior of an electron in a molecule. This function can be used to calculate chemical and physical properties such as the probability of finding an electron in any specific region. The terms &quot;atomic orbital&quot; and &quot;molecular orbital&quot; were introduced by Robert S. Mulliken in 1932 to mean &quot;one-electron orbital wave functions&quot;. At an elementary level, they are used to describe the &quot;region&quot; of space in which a function has a significant amplitude. 

In an isolated atom, the orbital electrons&#x27; location is determined by functions called atomic orbitals. When multiple atoms combine chemically into a molecule by forming a valence chemical bond, the electrons&#x27; locations are determined by the molecule as a whole, so the atomic orbitals combine to form molecular orbitals. The electrons from the constituent atoms occupy the molecular orbitals. Mathematically, molecular orbitals are an approximate solution to the Schrödinger equation for the electrons in the field of the molecule&#x27;s atomic nuclei. They are usually constructed by combining atomic orbitals or hybrid orbitals from each atom of the molecule, or other molecular orbitals from groups of atoms. They can be quantitatively calculated using the Hartree–Fock or self-consistent field (SCF) methods.

Molecular orbitals are of three types: &quot;bonding orbitals&quot; which have an energy lower than the energy of the atomic orbitals which formed them, and thus promote the chemical bonds which hold the molecule together; &quot;antibonding orbitals&quot; which have an energy higher than the energy of their constituent atomic orbitals, and so oppose the bonding of the molecule, and &quot;non-bonding orbitals&quot; which have the same energy as their constituent atomic orbitals and thus have no effect on the bonding of the molecule.

==Overview==
A molecular orbital (MO) can be used to represent the regions in a molecule where an electron occupying that orbital is likely to be found. Molecular orbitals are approximate solutions to the Schrödinger equation for the electrons in the electric field of the molecule&#x27;s atomic nuclei. However calculating the orbitals directly from this equation is far too intractable a problem. Instead they are obtained from the combination of atomic orbitals, which predict the location of an electron in an atom. A molecular orbital can specify the electron configuration of a molecule: the spatial distribution and energy of one (or one pair of) electron(s). Most commonly a MO is represented as a linear combination of atomic orbitals (the LCAO-MO method), especially in qualitative or very approximate usage. They are invaluable in providing a simple model of bonding in molecules, understood through molecular orbital theory.
Most present-day methods in computational chemistry begin by calculating the MOs of the system. A molecular orbital describes the behavior of one electron in the electric field generated by the nuclei and some average distribution of the other electrons. In the case of two electrons occupying the same orbital, the Pauli principle demands that they have opposite spin. Necessarily this is an approximation, and highly accurate descriptions of the molecular electronic wave function do not have orbitals (see configuration interaction).

Molecular orbitals are, in general, delocalized throughout the entire molecule. Moreover, if the molecule has symmetry elements, its nondegenerate molecular orbitals are either symmetric or antisymmetric with respect to any of these symmetries. In other words, the application of a symmetry operation S (e.g., a reflection, rotation, or inversion) to molecular orbital ψ results in the molecular orbital being unchanged or reversing its mathematical sign: Sψ = ±ψ. In planar molecules, for example, molecular orbitals are either symmetric (sigma) or antisymmetric (pi) with respect to reflection in the molecular plane. If molecules with degenerate orbital energies are also considered, a more general statement that molecular orbitals form bases for the irreducible representations of the molecule&#x27;s symmetry group holds. The symmetry properties of molecular orbitals means that delocalization is an inherent feature of molecular orbital theory and makes it fundamentally different from (and complementary to) valence bond theory, in which bonds are viewed as localized electron pairs, with allowance for resonance to account for delocalization.

In contrast to these symmetry-adapted &quot;canonical&quot; molecular orbitals, localized molecular orbitals can be formed by applying certain mathematical transformations to the canonical orbitals. The advantage of this approach is that the orbitals will correspond more closely to the &quot;bonds&quot; of a molecule as depicted by a Lewis structure. As a disadvantage, the energy levels of these localized orbitals no longer have physical meaning. (The discussion in the rest of this article will focus on canonical molecular orbitals. For further discussions on localized molecular orbitals, see: natural bond orbital and sigma-pi and equivalent-orbital models.)

==Formation of molecular orbitals==
Molecular orbitals arise from allowed interactions between atomic orbitals, which are allowed if the symmetries (determined from group theory) of the atomic orbitals are compatible with each other. Efficiency of atomic orbital interactions is determined from the overlap (a measure of how well two orbitals constructively interact with one another) between two atomic orbitals, which is significant if the atomic orbitals are close in energy. Finally, the number of molecular orbitals formed must be equal to the number of atomic orbitals in the atoms being combined to form the molecule.

==Qualitative discussion==
For an imprecise, but qualitatively useful, discussion of the molecular structure, the molecular orbitals can be obtained from the &quot;Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method&quot; ansatz. Here, the molecular orbitals are expressed as linear combinations of atomic orbitals.

===Linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAO)===
Molecular orbitals were first introduced by Friedrich Hund and Robert S. Mulliken in 1927 and 1928. The linear combination of atomic orbitals or &quot;LCAO&quot; approximation for molecular orbitals was introduced in 1929 by Sir John Lennard-Jones. His ground-breaking paper showed how to derive the electronic structure of the fluorine and oxygen molecules from quantum principles. This qualitative approach to molecular orbital theory is part of the start of modern quantum chemistry.
Linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAO) can be used to estimate the molecular orbitals that are formed upon bonding between the molecule&#x27;s constituent atoms. Similar to an atomic orbital, a Schrödinger equation, which describes the behavior of an electron, can be constructed for a molecular orbital as well. Linear combinations of atomic orbitals, or the sums and differences of the atomic wavefunctions, provide approximate solutions to the Hartree–Fock equations which correspond to the independent-particle approximation of the molecular Schrödinger equation. For simple diatomic molecules, the wavefunctions obtained are represented mathematically by the equations

:formula_1
:formula_2

where formula_3 and formula_4 are the molecular wavefunctions for the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals, respectively, formula_5 and formula_6 are the atomic wavefunctions from atoms a and b, respectively, and formula_7 and formula_8 are adjustable coefficients. These coefficients can be positive or negative, depending on the energies and symmetries of the individual atomic orbitals. As the two atoms become closer together, their atomic orbitals overlap to produce areas of high electron density, and, as a consequence, molecular orbitals are formed between the two atoms. The atoms are held together by the electrostatic attraction between the positively charged nuclei and the negatively charged electrons occupying bonding molecular orbitals.

===Bonding, antibonding, and nonbonding MOs===
When atomic orbitals interact, the resulting molecular orbital can be of three types: bonding, antibonding, or nonbonding.

Bonding MOs:
* Bonding interactions between atomic orbitals are constructive (in-phase) interactions.
* Bonding MOs are lower in energy than the atomic orbitals that combine to produce them.
Antibonding MOs:
* Antibonding interactions between atomic orbitals are destructive (out-of-phase) interactions, with a nodal plane where the wavefunction of the antibonding orbital is zero between the two interacting atoms
* Antibonding MOs are higher in energy than the atomic orbitals that combine to produce them.
Nonbonding MOs:
* Nonbonding MOs are the result of no interaction between atomic orbitals because of lack of compatible symmetries.
* Nonbonding MOs will have the same energy as the atomic orbitals of one of the atoms in the molecule.

===Sigma and pi labels for MOs===
The type of interaction between atomic orbitals can be further categorized by the molecular-orbital symmetry labels σ (sigma), π (pi), δ (delta), φ (phi), γ (gamma) etc. These are the Greek letters corresponding to the atomic orbitals s, p, d, f and g respectively. The number of nodal planes containing the internuclear axis between the atoms concerned is zero for σ MOs, one for π, two for δ, three for φ and four for γ.

====σ symmetry====

A MO with σ symmetry results from the interaction of either two atomic s-orbitals or two atomic pz-orbitals. An MO will have σ-symmetry if the orbital is symmetric with respect to the axis joining the two nuclear centers, the internuclear axis. This means that rotation of the MO about the internuclear axis does not result in a phase change. A σ* orbital, sigma antibonding orbital, also maintains the same phase when rotated about the internuclear axis. The σ* orbital has a nodal plane that is between the nuclei and perpendicular to the internuclear axis.

====π symmetry====

A MO with π symmetry results from the interaction of either two atomic px orbitals or py orbitals. An MO will have π symmetry if the orbital is asymmetric with respect to rotation about the internuclear axis. This means that rotation of the MO about the internuclear axis will result in a phase change. There is one nodal plane containing the internuclear axis, if real orbitals are considered.

A π* orbital, pi antibonding orbital, will also produce a phase change when rotated about the internuclear axis. The π* orbital also has a second nodal plane between the nuclei.

====δ symmetry====

A MO with δ symmetry results from the interaction of two atomic dxy or dx2-y2 orbitals. Because these molecular orbitals involve low-energy d atomic orbitals, they are seen in transition-metal complexes. A δ bonding orbital has two nodal planes containing the internuclear axis, and a δ* antibonding orbital also has a third nodal plane between the nuclei.

====φ symmetry====
Theoretical chemists have conjectured that higher-order bonds, such as phi bonds corresponding to overlap of f atomic orbitals, are possible. There is no known example of a molecule purported to contain a phi bond.

===Gerade and ungerade symmetry===
For molecules that possess a center of inversion (centrosymmetric molecules) there are additional labels of symmetry that can be applied to molecular orbitals.
Centrosymmetric molecules include:
* Homonuclear diatomics, X2
* Octahedral, EX6
* Square planar, EX4.
Non-centrosymmetric molecules include:
* Heteronuclear diatomics, XY
* Tetrahedral, EX4.
If inversion through the center of symmetry in a molecule results in the same phases for the molecular orbital, then the MO is said to have gerade (g) symmetry, from the German word for even.
If inversion through the center of symmetry in a molecule results in a phase change for the molecular orbital, then the MO is said to have ungerade (u) symmetry, from the German word for odd.
For a bonding MO with σ-symmetry, the orbital is σg (s&#x27; + s&quot; is symmetric), while an antibonding MO with σ-symmetry the orbital is σu, because inversion of s&#x27; – s&quot; is antisymmetric.
For a bonding MO with π-symmetry the orbital is πu because inversion through the center of symmetry for would produce a sign change (the two p atomic orbitals are in phase with each other but the two lobes have opposite signs), while an antibonding MO with π-symmetry is πg because inversion through the center of symmetry for would not produce a sign change (the two p orbitals are antisymmetric by phase).

===MO diagrams===
The qualitative approach of MO analysis uses a molecular orbital diagram to visualize bonding interactions in a molecule. In this type of diagram, the molecular orbitals are represented by horizontal lines; the higher a line the higher the energy of the orbital, and degenerate orbitals are placed on the same level with a space between them. Then, the electrons to be placed in the molecular orbitals are slotted in one by one, keeping in mind the Pauli exclusion principle and Hund&#x27;s rule of maximum multiplicity (only 2 electrons, having opposite spins, per orbital; place as many unpaired electrons on one energy level as possible before starting to pair them). For more complicated molecules, the wave mechanics approach loses utility in a qualitative understanding of bonding (although is still necessary for a quantitative approach).
Some properties:
* A basis set of orbitals includes those atomic orbitals that are available for molecular orbital interactions, which may be bonding or antibonding
* The number of molecular orbitals is equal to the number of atomic orbitals included in the linear expansion or the basis set
* If the molecule has some symmetry, the degenerate atomic orbitals (with the same atomic energy) are grouped in linear combinations (called symmetry-adapted atomic orbitals (SO)), which belong to the representation of the symmetry group, so the wave functions that describe the group are known as symmetry-adapted linear combinations (SALC).
* The number of molecular orbitals belonging to one group representation is equal to the number of symmetry-adapted atomic orbitals belonging to this representation
* Within a particular representation, the symmetry-adapted atomic orbitals mix more if their atomic energy levels are closer.

The general procedure for constructing a molecular orbital diagram for a reasonably simple molecule can be summarized as follows:

1. Assign a point group to the molecule.

2. Look up the shapes of the SALCs.

3. Arrange the SALCs of each molecular fragment in order of energy, noting first whether they stem from &quot;s&quot;, &quot;p&quot;, or &quot;d&quot; orbitals
(and put them in the order &quot;s&quot; &lt; &quot;p&quot; &lt; &quot;d&quot;), and then their number of internuclear nodes.

4. Combine SALCs of the same symmetry type from the two fragments, and from N SALCs form N molecular orbitals.

5. Estimate the relative energies of the molecular orbitals from considerations of overlap and relative energies of the parent orbitals, and draw the levels on a molecular orbital energy level diagram (showing the origin of the orbitals).

6. Confirm, correct, and revise this qualitative order by carrying out a molecular orbital calculation by using commercial software.

===Bonding in molecular orbitals===

====Orbital degeneracy====

Molecular orbitals are said to be degenerate if they have the same energy. For example, in the homonuclear diatomic molecules of the first ten elements, the molecular orbitals derived from the px and the py atomic orbitals result in two degenerate bonding orbitals (of low energy) and two degenerate antibonding orbitals (of high energy).

====Ionic bonds====

In an ionic bond, oppositely charged ions are bonded by electrostatic attraction. It is possible to describe ionic bonds with molecular orbital theory by treating them as extremely polar bonds. Their bonding orbitals are very close in energy to the atomic orbitals of the anion. They are also very similar in character to the anion&#x27;s atomic orbitals, which means the electrons are completely shifted to the anion. In computer diagrams, the orbitals are centered on the anion&#x27;s core.

====Bond order====

The bond order, or number of bonds, of a molecule can be determined by combining the number of electrons in bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals. A pair of electrons in a bonding orbital creates a bond, whereas a pair of electrons in an antibonding orbital negates a bond. For example, N2, with eight electrons in bonding orbitals and two electrons in antibonding orbitals, has a bond order of three, which constitutes a triple bond.

Bond strength is proportional to bond order—a greater amount of bonding produces a more stable bond—and bond length is inversely proportional to it—a stronger bond is shorter.

There are rare exceptions to the requirement of molecule having a positive bond order. Although Be2 has a bond order of 0 according to MO analysis, there is experimental evidence of a highly unstable Be2 molecule having a bond length of 245 pm and bond energy of 10 kJ/mol.

====HOMO and LUMO====

The highest occupied molecular orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital are often referred to as the HOMO and LUMO, respectively. The difference of the energies of the HOMO and LUMO is called the HOMO-LUMO gap. This notion is often the matter of confusion in literature and should be considered with caution. Its value is usually located between the fundamental gap (difference between ionization potential and electron affinity) and the optical gap. In addition, HOMO-LUMO gap can be related to a bulk material band gap or transport gap, which is usually much smaller than fundamental gap.

==Examples==

===Homonuclear diatomics===
Homonuclear diatomic MOs contain equal contributions from each atomic orbital in the basis set. This is shown in the homonuclear diatomic MO diagrams for H2, He2, and Li2, all of which containing symmetric orbitals.

====H2====

As a simple MO example, consider the electrons in a hydrogen molecule, H2 (see molecular orbital diagram), with the two atoms labelled H&#x27; and H&quot;. The lowest-energy atomic orbitals, 1s&#x27; and 1s&quot;, do not transform according to the symmetries of the molecule. However, the following symmetry adapted atomic orbitals do:

The symmetric combination (called a bonding orbital) is lower in energy than the basis orbitals, and the antisymmetric combination (called an antibonding orbital) is higher. Because the H2 molecule has two electrons, they can both go in the bonding orbital, making the system lower in energy (hence more stable) than two free hydrogen atoms. This is called a covalent bond. The bond order is equal to the number of bonding electrons minus the number of antibonding electrons, divided by 2. In this example, there are 2 electrons in the bonding orbital and none in the antibonding orbital; the bond order is 1, and there is a single bond between the two hydrogen atoms.

====He2====
On the other hand, consider the hypothetical molecule of He2 with the atoms labeled He&#x27; and He&quot;. As with H2, the lowest energy atomic orbitals are the 1s&#x27; and 1s&quot;, and do not transform according to the symmetries of the molecule, while the symmetry adapted atomic orbitals do. The symmetric combination—the bonding orbital—is lower in energy than the basis orbitals, and the antisymmetric combination—the antibonding orbital—is higher. Unlike H2, with two valence electrons, He2 has four in its neutral ground state. Two electrons fill the lower-energy bonding orbital, σg(1s), while the remaining two fill the higher-energy antibonding orbital, σu*(1s). Thus, the resulting electron density around the molecule does not support the formation of a bond between the two atoms; without a stable bond holding the atoms together, the molecule would not be expected to exist. Another way of looking at it is that there are two bonding electrons and two antibonding electrons; therefore, the bond order is 0 and no bond exists (the molecule has one bound state supported by the Van der Waals potential).

====Li2====
Dilithium Li2 is formed from the overlap of the 1s and 2s atomic orbitals (the basis set) of two Li atoms. Each Li atom contributes three electrons for bonding interactions, and the six electrons fill the three MOs of lowest energy, σg(1s), σu*(1s), and σg(2s). Using the equation for bond order, it is found that dilithium has a bond order of one, a single bond.

====Noble gases====
Considering a hypothetical molecule of He2, since the basis set of atomic orbitals is the same as in the case of H2, we find that both the bonding and antibonding orbitals are filled, so there is no energy advantage to the pair. HeH would have a slight energy advantage, but not as much as H2 + 2 He, so the molecule is very unstable and exists only briefly before decomposing into hydrogen and helium. In general, we find that atoms such as He that have full energy shells rarely bond with other atoms. Except for short-lived Van der Waals complexes, there are very few noble gas compounds known.

===Heteronuclear diatomics===
While MOs for homonuclear diatomic molecules contain equal contributions from each interacting atomic orbital, MOs for heteronuclear diatomics contain different atomic orbital contributions. Orbital interactions to produce bonding or antibonding orbitals in heteronuclear diatomics occur if there is sufficient overlap between atomic orbitals as determined by their symmetries and similarity in orbital energies.

====HF====
In hydrogen fluoride HF overlap between the H 1s and F 2s orbitals is allowed by symmetry but the difference in energy between the two atomic orbitals prevents them from interacting to create a molecular orbital. Overlap between the H 1s and F 2pz orbitals is also symmetry allowed, and these two atomic orbitals have a small energy separation. Thus, they interact, leading to creation of σ and σ* MOs and a molecule with a bond order of 1. Since HF is a non-centrosymmetric molecule, the symmetry labels g and u do not apply to its molecular orbitals.

==Quantitative approach==
To obtain quantitative values for the molecular energy levels, one needs to have molecular orbitals that are such that the configuration interaction (CI) expansion converges fast towards the full CI limit. The most common method to obtain such functions is the Hartree–Fock method, which expresses the molecular orbitals as eigenfunctions of the Fock operator. One usually solves this problem by expanding the molecular orbitals as linear combinations of Gaussian functions centered on the atomic nuclei (see linear combination of atomic orbitals and basis set (chemistry)). The equation for the coefficients of these linear combinations is a generalized eigenvalue equation known as the Roothaan equations, which are in fact a particular representation of the Hartree–Fock equation. There are a number of programs in which quantum chemical calculations of MOs can be performed, including Spartan.

Simple accounts often suggest that experimental molecular orbital energies can be obtained by the methods of ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy for valence orbitals and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy for core orbitals. This, however, is incorrect as these experiments measure the ionization energy, the difference in energy between the molecule and one of the ions resulting from the removal of one electron. Ionization energies are linked approximately to orbital energies by Koopmans&#x27; theorem. While the agreement between these two values can be close for some molecules, it can be very poor in other cases.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q725417" start="16" end="33" title="Molecular orbital" label="molecular orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="42" end="63" title="Function (mathematics)" label="mathematical function"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="92" end="101" title="Matter wave" label="wave-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="117" end="125" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="131" end="139" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="251" end="259" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q233355" start="374" end="392" title="Robert S. Mulliken" label="Robert S. Mulliken"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="606" end="610" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="683" end="697" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="746" end="754" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q517973" start="768" end="789" title="Valence bond theory" label="valence chemical bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="1065" end="1085" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="1140" end="1153" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q900666" start="1187" end="1196" title="Linear combination of atomic orbitals" label="combining"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="1197" end="1211" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="1216" end="1230" title="hybrid orbital" label="hybrid orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="1242" end="1246" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879841" start="1362" end="1374" title="Hartree–Fock method" label="Hartree–Fock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10296949" start="1461" end="1476" title="bonding molecular orbital" label="bonding orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108736" start="1645" end="1664" title="antibonding molecular orbital" label="antibonding orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048857" start="1807" end="1826" title="non-bonding orbital" label="non-bonding orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="2035" end="2043" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="2053" end="2061" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="2160" end="2180" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="2244" end="2257" title="atomic nuclei" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q53859" start="2511" end="2533" title="electron configuration" label="electron configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q900666" start="2661" end="2698" title="Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method" label="linear combination of atomic orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q898432" start="2866" end="2890" title="molecular orbital theory" label="molecular orbital theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q369472" start="2920" end="2943" title="computational chemistry" label="computational chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="3208" end="3223" title="Pauli principle" label="Pauli principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q900672" start="3401" end="3426" title="configuration interaction" label="configuration interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q306229" start="3970" end="3975" title="sigma bond" label="sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q723069" start="3995" end="3997" title="pi bond" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13690522" start="4185" end="4211" title="irreducible representation" label="irreducible representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902019" start="4236" end="4250" title="symmetry group" label="symmetry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q517973" start="4446" end="4465" title="valence bond theory" label="valence bond theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="4541" end="4550" title="Resonance (chemistry)" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664649" start="4663" end="4691" title="localized molecular orbitals" label="localized molecular orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391470" start="5184" end="5204" title="natural bond orbital" label="natural bond orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325260" start="5209" end="5247" title="sigma-pi and equivalent-orbital models" label="sigma-pi and equivalent-orbital models"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="5346" end="5360" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="5416" end="5428" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838870" start="5550" end="5557" title="Orbital overlap" label="overlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q900666" start="6041" end="6103" title="Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method" label="Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method"/>
<link wikidata="Q568954" start="6110" end="6116" title="ansatz" label="ansatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="6164" end="6182" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="6187" end="6201" title="atomic orbital" label="atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q61201" start="6301" end="6315" title="Friedrich Hund" label="Friedrich Hund"/>
<link wikidata="Q233355" start="6320" end="6338" title="Robert S. Mulliken" label="Robert S. Mulliken"/>
<link wikidata="Q900666" start="6361" end="6398" title="linear combination of atomic orbitals" label="linear combination of atomic orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q983380" start="6482" end="6504" title="John Lennard-Jones" label="Sir John Lennard-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="6585" end="6593" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6598" end="6604" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="6725" end="6742" title="quantum chemistry" label="quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879841" start="7198" end="7220" title="Hartree–Fock method" label="Hartree–Fock equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="7297" end="7317" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10296949" start="8380" end="8390" title="Bonding molecular orbital" label="Bonding MO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108736" start="8571" end="8585" title="Antibonding molecular orbital" label="Antibonding MO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062658" start="8691" end="8702" title="Node (physics)" label="nodal plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048857" start="8889" end="8902" title="Non-bonding orbital" label="Nonbonding MO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10549" end="10562" title="Atomic orbital#Real orbitals" label="real orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="10955" end="10971" title="transition metal" label="transition-metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960366" start="11457" end="11482" title="centrosymmetry" label="centrosymmetric molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891521" start="11604" end="11615" title="Homonuclear molecule" label="Homonuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630364" start="11632" end="11642" title="Octahedral molecular geometry" label="Octahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894013" start="11650" end="11663" title="square planar molecular geometry" label="Square planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747409" start="11711" end="11724" title="Heteronuclear molecule" label="Heteronuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677111" start="11741" end="11752" title="Tetrahedral molecular geometry" label="Tetrahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526854" start="14111" end="14125" title="Representation theory of finite groups" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902019" start="14133" end="14147" title="symmetry group" label="symmetry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="14156" end="14169" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526854" start="14440" end="14454" title="Representation theory of finite groups" label="representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="14518" end="14530" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="15991" end="15994" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="16010" end="16034" title="electrostatic attraction" label="electrostatic attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="16135" end="16145" title="polar bond" label="polar bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="16226" end="16231" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914535" start="16909" end="16922" title="Bond strength" label="Bond strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q863695" start="17013" end="17024" title="bond length" label="bond length"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="17903" end="17911" title="band gap" label="band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="18306" end="18314" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18333" end="18358" title="MO diagram#Diatomic MO diagrams" label="molecular orbital diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108736" start="18733" end="18744" title="antibonding" label="antibonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="18950" end="18963" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q842809" start="18969" end="18979" title="bond order" label="bond order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189242" start="20404" end="20413" title="Dilithium" label="Dilithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="21316" end="21339" title="Van der Waals bonding" label="Van der Waals complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q898452" start="21360" end="21378" title="noble gas compound" label="noble gas compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="21846" end="21863" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="22471" end="22483" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q900672" start="22546" end="22571" title="configuration interaction" label="configuration interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754227" start="22614" end="22621" title="Full configuration interaction" label="full CI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879841" start="22684" end="22703" title="Hartree–Fock method" label="Hartree–Fock method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307821" start="22747" end="22760" title="eigenfunction" label="eigenfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526030" start="22769" end="22782" title="Fock operator" label="Fock operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054475" start="22878" end="22895" title="Gaussian function" label="Gaussian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="22913" end="22926" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q900666" start="22932" end="22969" title="Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method" label="linear combination of atomic orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664086" start="22974" end="22995" title="basis set (chemistry)" label="basis set (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="23041" end="23059" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="23078" end="23088" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q666988" start="23111" end="23129" title="Roothaan equations" label="Roothaan equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084877" start="23312" end="23319" title="Spartan (chemistry software)" label="Spartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q602144" start="23431" end="23470" title="ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy" label="ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899559" start="23496" end="23528" title="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy" label="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422649" start="23806" end="23828" title="Koopmans&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Koopmans&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19615" wikidata="Q7663837" url="?curid=19615" title="Systems Concepts">
<text>Systems Concepts, Inc. (now the SC Group), was a company co-founded by Stewart Nelson and Mike Levitt focused on making hardware products related to the DEC PDP-10 series of computers. One of its major products was the SA-10, an interface which allowed PDP-10s to be connected to disk and tape drives designed for use with the channel interfaces of IBM mainframes.

Later, Systems Concepts attempted to produce a compatible replacement for the DEC PDP-10 computers. &quot;Mars&quot; was the code name for a family of PDP-10-compatible computers built by Systems Concepts, including the initial SC-30M, the smaller SC-25, and the slower SC-20. These machines were marvels of engineering design; although not much slower than the unique Foonly F-1, they were physically smaller and consumed less power than the much slower DEC KS10 or Foonly F-2, F-3, or F-4 machines. They were also completely compatible with the DEC KL10, and ran all KL10 binaries (including the operating system) with no modifications at about 2-3 times faster than a KL10.

When DEC cancelled the Jupiter project in 1983, Systems Concepts hoped to sell their machine to customers with a software investment in PDP-10s. Their spring 1984 announcement generated excitement in the PDP-10 world. TOPS-10 was running on the Mars by the summer of 1984, and TOPS-20 by early fall. However, people at Systems Concepts were better at designing machines than at mass-producing or selling them; the company continually improved the design, but lost credibility as delivery dates continued to slip. They also overpriced; believing they were competing with the KL10 and VAX 8600 and not startups such as Sun Microsystems building workstations with comparable power at a fraction of the price. By the time SC shipped the first SC-30M to Stanford University in late 1985, most customers had already abandoned the PDP-10, usually for VMS or Unix systems. Nevertheless, a number were purchased by CompuServe, which depended on PDP-10s to run its online service and was eager to move to newer but fully compatible systems. CompuServe&#x27;s demand for the computers outpaced Systems Concepts&#x27; ability to produce them, so CompuServe licensed the design and built SC-designed computers itself.
Other companies that purchased the SC-30 machines included Telmar, Reynolds and Reynolds, The Danish National Railway.

Peter Samson was director of marketing and program development.

SC later designed the SC-40, released in 1993, a faster follow-on to the SC-30M and SC-25. It can perform up to 8 times as fast as a DEC KL-10, and it also supports more physical memory, a larger virtual address space, and more modern input/output devices. These systems were also used at CompuServe.

In 1985, the company contracted to engineer and produce a PC-based cellular automata system for Tommaso Toffoli of MIT, called the CAM-6. The CAM-6 was a 2-card &quot;sandwich&quot; that plugged into an IBM PC slot and ran cellular automata rules at a 60 Hz update rate. Toffoli provided Forth-based software to operate the card. The production problems that plagued the company&#x27;s computer products were demonstrated here as well, and only a few boards were produced.

Systems Concepts remained in business, having changed its name to the SC Group when it moved from California to Nevada.

==See also==
Other companies that produced PDP-10 compatible computers:
* Foonly
* XKL

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7663837" start="0" end="22" title="Systems Concepts" label="Systems Concepts, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7663837" start="32" end="40" title="Systems Concepts" label="SC Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615904" start="71" end="85" title="Stewart Nelson" label="Stewart Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832227" start="90" end="101" title="Mike Levitt" label="Mike Levitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="120" end="128" title="computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="153" end="156" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="157" end="163" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="174" end="182" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="280" end="284" title="disk storage" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q751913" start="289" end="293" title="tape drive" label="tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114593" start="349" end="362" title="IBM mainframe" label="IBM mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465709" start="735" end="741" title="Foonly" label="Foonly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="964" end="980" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314673" start="1067" end="1082" title="Jupiter project" label="Jupiter project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="1262" end="1269" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481861" start="1321" end="1328" title="TOPS-20" label="TOPS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906554" start="1627" end="1635" title="VAX 8000" label="VAX 8600"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="1661" end="1677" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1793" end="1812" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="1888" end="1891" title="OpenVMS" label="VMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="1895" end="1899" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="1950" end="1960" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697726" start="2308" end="2314" title="Telmar (company)" label="Telmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319680" start="2316" end="2337" title="Reynolds and Reynolds" label="Reynolds and Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q83824" start="2339" end="2366" title="DSB (railway company)" label="The Danish National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717389" start="2369" end="2381" title="Peter Samson" label="Peter Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2604" end="2619" title="random access memory" label="physical memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="2630" end="2651" title="virtual memory" label="virtual address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="2669" end="2681" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q189156" start="2803" end="2820" title="Cellular automaton" label="cellular automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074856" start="2832" end="2847" title="Tommaso Toffoli" label="Tommaso Toffoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024793" start="2867" end="2872" title="CAM-6" label="CAM-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="2939" end="2945" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q275472" start="3024" end="3029" title="Forth (programming language)" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3308" end="3318" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="3322" end="3328" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465709" start="3405" end="3411" title="Foonly" label="Foonly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042244" start="3414" end="3417" title="XKL" label="XKL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19616" wikidata="Q51626" url="?curid=19616" title="Messiah">
<text>In Abrahamic religions, a messiah or messias (; ,
; ) is a saviour or liberator of a group of people. The concepts of &quot;mashiach&quot;, messianism, and of a Messianic Age originated in Judaism, and in the Hebrew Bible, in which a &quot;mashiach&quot; is a king or High Priest traditionally anointed with holy anointing oil.

In Judaism, &quot;Ha-mashiach&quot; (), often referred to as &quot;&quot; (), is a fully human non-deity Jewish leader, physically descended via a human genetic father of an unbroken paternal Davidic line through King David and King Solomon. He will accomplish predetermined things in a future arrival, including the unification of the tribes of Israel, the gathering of all Jews to &quot;Eretz Israel&quot;, the rebuilding of the Temple in Jerusalem, the ushering in of a Messianic Age of global universal peace, and the annunciation of the world to come.

The Greek translation of Messiah is &quot;Khristós&quot; (), anglicized as &quot;Christ&quot;. It occurs 41 times in the Septuagint and 529 times in the New Testament. Christians commonly refer to Jesus of Nazareth as either the &quot;Christ&quot; or the &quot;Messiah&quot;, believing that some messianic prophecies were fulfilled in the mission, death, and resurrection of Jesus and that he will return in a second coming to fulfill the rest of messianic prophecies. Moreover, unlike the Judaic concept of the Messiah, Jesus Christ is considered the Son of God, although in the Jewish faith the King of Israel was also metaphorically called the Son of God.

In Islam, Jesus () is held to have been a prophet and the Messiah sent to the Israelites, who will return to Earth at the end of times along with the &quot;Mahdi&quot;, and defeat &quot;al-Masih ad-Dajjal&quot;, the false Messiah. 

In Ahmadiyya theology, these prophecies concerning the Mahdi and the second coming of Jesus are believed to have been fulfilled in Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908), the founder of the Ahmadiyya Movement, wherein the terms &quot;Messiah&quot; and &quot;Mahdi&quot; are synonyms for one and the same person.

In controversial Chabad messianism, Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn (r. 1920–1950), sixth &quot;Rebbe&quot; (spiritual leader) of Chabad Lubavitch, and Menachem Mendel Schneerson (1902–1994), seventh &quot;Rebbe&quot; of Chabad, are Messiah claimants.

==Etymology==
Messiah (Hebrew: or &quot;mashiach&quot;; ; , ; ) literally means &#x27;anointed one&#x27;.

In Hebrew, the Messiah is often referred to as &#x27; (; : &#x27;, ), literally meaning &#x27;the Anointed King&#x27;. The Greek Septuagint version of the Old Testament renders all 39 instances of the Hebrew &quot;mašíaḥ&quot; as &quot;Khristós&quot; (). The New Testament records the Greek transliteration &quot;Messias&quot; () twice in John.

 (, , lit. &#x27;the anointed&#x27;, &#x27;the traveller&#x27;, or &#x27;one who cures by caressing&#x27;) is the Arabic word for messiah used by both Arab Christians and Muslims. In modern Arabic, it is used as one of the many titles of Jesus, referred to as () by Arab Christians and () by Muslims.

==Judaism==
The literal translation of the Hebrew word &quot;mashiach&quot; (, messiah), is &#x27;anointed&#x27;, which refers to a ritual of consecrating someone or something by putting holy oil upon it. It is used throughout the Hebrew Bible in reference to a wide variety of individuals and objects; for example, kings, priests and prophets, the altar in the Temple, vessels, unleavened bread, and even a non-Jewish king (Cyrus the Great).

In Jewish eschatology, the term came to refer to a future Jewish king from the Davidic line, who will be &quot;anointed&quot; with holy anointing oil, to be king of God&#x27;s kingdom, and rule the Jewish people during the Messianic Age. In Judaism, the Messiah is not considered to be God or a pre-existent divine Son of God. He is considered to be a great political leader that has descended from King David, hence why he is referred to as &quot;Messiah ben David&quot;, &#x27;Messiah, son of David&#x27;. In Judaism, the messiah is considered to be a great, charismatic leader that is well oriented with the laws that are followed in Judaism.

Though originally a fringe idea, somewhat controversially, belief in the eventual coming of a future messiah is a fundamental part of Judaism, and is one of Maimonides&#x27; 13 Principles of Faith. Maimonides describes the identity of the Messiah in the following terms:

Even though the eventual coming of the messiah is a strongly upheld belief in Judaism, trying to predict the actual time when the messiah will come is an act that is frowned upon. These kinds of actions are thought to weaken the faith the people have in the religion. So in Judaism, there is no specific time when the messiah comes. Rather, it is the acts of the people that determines when the messiah comes. It is said that the messiah would come either when the world needs his coming the most (when the world is so sinful and in desperate need of saving by the messiah) or deserves it the most (when genuine goodness prevails in the world).

A common modern rabbinic interpretation is that there is a &quot;potential&quot; messiah in every generation. The Talmud, which often uses stories to make a moral point (&quot;aggadah&quot;), tells of a highly respected rabbi who found the Messiah at the gates of Rome and asked him, &quot;When will you finally come?&quot; He was quite surprised when he was told, &quot;Today.&quot; Overjoyed and full of anticipation, the man waited all day. The next day he returned, disappointed and puzzled, and asked, &quot;You said messiah would come &#x27;today&#x27; but he didn&#x27;t come! What happened?&quot; The Messiah replied, &quot;Scripture says, &#x27;Today, if you will but hearken to his voice.

A Kabbalistic tradition within Judaism is that the commonly discussed messiah who will usher in a period of freedom and peace, Messiah ben David, will be preceded by Messiah ben Joseph, who will gather the children of Israel around him, leading them to Jerusalem. After overcoming the hostile powers in Jerusalem, Messiah ben Joseph, will reestablish the Temple-worship and set up his own dominion. Then Armilus, according to one group of sources, or Gog and Magog, according to the other, will appear with their hosts before Jerusalem, wage war against Messiah ben Joseph, and slay him. His corpse, according to one group, will lie unburied in the streets of Jerusalem; according to the other, it will be hidden by the angels with the bodies of the Patriarchs, until Messiah ben David comes and brings him back to life.

=== Chabad ===

Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn (r. 1920–1950), sixth &quot;Rebbe&quot; (hereditary chassidic leader) of Chabad Lubavitch, and Menachem Mendel Schneerson (1902–1994), seventh &quot;Rebbe&quot; of Chabad, are messiah claimants.

As per Chabad-Lubavitch messianism, Menachem Mendel Schneerson openly declared his deceased father-in-law, the former 6th &quot;Rebbe&quot; of Chabad Lubavitch, to be the Messiah. He published about Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn to be &quot;Atzmus u&#x27;mehus alein vi er hat zich areingeshtalt in a guf&quot; (Yiddish and English for: &quot;Essence and Existence [of God] which has placed itself in a body&quot;). The gravesite of his deceased father-in-law Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn, known as &quot;the &quot;Ohel&quot;&quot;, became a central point of focus for Menachem Mendel Schneerson&#x27;s prayers and supplications.

Regarding the deceased Menachem Mendel Schneerson, a later Chabad Halachic ruling claims that it was &quot;incumbent on every single Jew to heed the Rebbe&#x27;s words and believe that he is indeed King Moshiach, who will be revealed imminently&quot;. Outside of Chabad messianism, in Judaism, there is no basis to these claims. If anything, this resembles the faith in the resurrection of Jesus and his second coming in early Christianity, and therefore, heretical in Judaism.

Still today, the deceased rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson is believed to be the Messiah among adherents of the Chabad movement, and his second coming is believed to be imminent. He is venerated and invocated to by thousands of visitors and letters each year at the (&quot;Ohel&quot;), especially in a pilgrimage each year on the anniversary of his death.

==Christianity==

Originating from the concept in Judaism, the messiah in Christianity is called the Christ—from Greek &quot;khristós&quot; (), translating the Hebrew word of the same meaning. &#x27;Christ&#x27; became the accepted Christian designation and title of Jesus of Nazareth, as Christians believe that the messianic prophecies in the Old Testament—that he is descended from the Davidic line, and was declared King of the Jews—were fulfilled in his mission, death, and resurrection, while the rest of the prophecies—that he will usher in a Messianic Age and the world to come—will be fulfilled at his Second Coming. Some Christian denominations, such as Catholicism, instead believe in amillenialist theology, but the Catholic Church has not adopted this term.

The majority of historical and mainline Christian theologies consider Jesus to be the Son of God and God the Son, a concept of the messiah fundamentally different from the Jewish and Islamic concepts. In each of the four New Testament Gospels, the only literal anointing of Jesus is conducted by a woman. In the Gospels of Mark, Matthew, and John, this anointing occurs in Bethany, outside Jerusalem. In the Gospel of Luke, the anointing scene takes place at an indeterminate location, but the context suggests it to be in Galilee, or even a separate anointing altogether.

Aside from Jesus, the Book of Isaiah refers to Cyrus the Great, king of the Achaemenid Empire, as a messiah for his decree to rebuild the Jerusalem Temple.

==Islam==


The Islamic faith uses the Arabic term (, ) to refer to Jesus. However the meaning is different from that found in Christianity and Judaism:
Though Islam shares many of the beliefs and characteristics of the two Semitic/Abrahamic/monotheistic religions which preceded it, the idea of messianism, which is of central importance in Judaism and Christianity, is alien to Islam as represented by the Qur&#x27;an.

Unlike the Christian view of the Death of Jesus, Muslims believe Jesus was raised to Heaven without being put on the cross and God created a resemblance to appear exactly like Jesus who was crucified instead of Jesus, and he ascended bodily to Heaven, there to remain until his Second Coming in the End days.

The Quran states that Jesus (&quot;Isa&quot;), the son of Maryam (&quot;Isa ibn Maryam&quot;), is the messiah (&quot;al-masih&quot;) and prophet sent to the Children of Israel. According to Qadi al-Nu&#x27;man, a famous Muslim jurist of the Fatimid period, the Quran identifies Jesus as the messiah because he was sent to the people who responded to him in order to remove (&quot;masaha&quot;) their impurities, the ailments of their faith, whether apparent () or hidden ().

Jesus is one of the most important prophets in the Islamic tradition, along with Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Muhammad. Unlike Christians, Muslims see Jesus as a prophet, but not as God himself or the son of God. This is because prophecy in human form does not represent the true powers of God, contrary to the popular depiction of Jesus in Christianity. Thus, like all other Islamic prophets, Jesus is one of the grand prophets who receives revelations from God. According to religious scholar Mona Siddiqui, in Islam, &quot;[p]rophecy allows God to remain veiled and there is no suggestion in the Qur&#x27;an that God wishes to reveal of himself just yet. Prophets guarantee interpretation of revelation and that God&#x27;s message will be understood.&quot; In Sura 19, the Quran describes the birth of Isa, and Sura 4 explicitly states Isa as the Son of Maryam. Sunni Muslims believe Isa is alive in Heaven and did not die in the crucifixion. Sura 4, verses 157–158, also states that:

According to religious scholar Mahmoud Ayoub, &quot;Jesus&#x27; close proximity or nearness (qurb) to God is affirmed in the Qur&#x27;anic insistence that Jesus did not die, but was taken up to God and remains with God.&quot;

While the Quran does not state that he will come back, Islamic tradition nevertheless believes that Jesus, preceded closely by al-Mahdi, will return at the end of times, and exercise his power of healing. He will forever destroy the falsehood embodied in &quot;al-Masih ad-Dajjal&quot; (the false Messiah), the great falsifier, a figure similar to the Antichrist in Christianity, who will emerge shortly before &quot;Yawm al-Qiyāmah&quot; (&#x27;the Day of Resurrection&#x27;). After he has destroyed ad-Dajjal, his final task will be to become leader of the Muslims. Isa will unify the Muslim &quot;Ummah&quot; (the followers of Islam) under the common purpose of worshipping God alone in pure Islam, thereby ending divisions and deviations by adherents. Mainstream Muslims believe that at that time, Isa will dispel Christian and Jewish claims about him.

A &quot;hadith&quot; in Abu Dawud says:
Both Sunni and Shia Muslims agree that al-Mahdi will arrive first, and after him, Isa. Isa will proclaim al-Mahdi as the Islamic community leader. A war will be fought—the Dajjal against al-Mahdi and Isa. This war will mark the approach of the coming of the Last Day. After Isa slays al-Dajjāl at the Gate of Lud, he will bear witness and reveal that Islam is indeed the true and last word from God to humanity as Yusuf Ali&#x27;s translation reads: A &quot;hadith&quot; in Sahih Bukhari says:
The Quran denies the crucifixion of Jesus, claiming that he was neither killed nor crucified. The Quran also emphasizes the difference between God and the Messiah:Those who say that Allah is the Messiah, son of Mary, are unbelievers. The Messiah said: &quot;O Children of Israel, worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord... unbelievers too are those who have said that Allah is the third of three... the Messiah, son of Mary, was only a Messenger before whom other Messengers had gone.

===Shia Islam===
The Twelver branch of Shia (or Shi&#x27;i) Islam, which significantly values and revolves around the Twelve Imams (spiritual leaders), differs significantly from the beliefs of Sunni Islam. Unlike Sunni Islam, &quot;Messianism is an essential part of religious belief and practice for almost all Shi&#x27;a Muslims.&quot; Shi&#x27;i Islam believes that the last Imam will return again, with the return of Jesus. According to religious scholar Mona Siddiqui, &quot;Shi&#x27;is are acutely aware of the existence everywhere of the twelfth Imam, who disappeared in 874.&quot; Shi&#x27;i piety teaches that the hidden Imam will return with Jesus Christ to set up the messianic kingdom before the final Judgement Day, when all humanity will stand before God. There is some controversy as to the identity of this imam. There are sources that underscore how the Shia sect agrees with the Jews and Christians that Imam Mehdi (&quot;al-Mahdi&quot;) is another name for Elijah, whose return prior to the arrival of the Messiah was prophesied in the Old Testament.

The Imams and Fatima will have a direct impact on the judgements rendered that day, representing the ultimate intercession. There is debate on whether Shi&#x27;i Muslims should accept the death of Jesus. Religious scholar Mahmoud Ayoub argues &quot;Modern Shi&#x27;i thinkers have allowed the possibility that Jesus died and only his spirit was taken up to heaven.&quot; Conversely, Siddiqui argues that Shi&#x27;i thinkers believe Jesus was &quot;neither crucified nor slain.&quot; She also argues that Shi&#x27;i Muslims believe that the twelfth imam did not die, but &quot;was taken to God to return in God&#x27;s time,&quot; and &quot;will return at the end of history to establish the kingdom of God on earth as the expected Mahdi.&quot;

===Ahmadiyya===

In the theology of Ahmadiyya, the terms &quot;Messiah&quot; and &quot;Mahdi&quot; are synonymous terms for one and the same person. The term &quot;Mahdi&quot; means &#x27;guided [by God]&#x27;, thus implying a direct ordainment by God of a divinely chosen individual. According to Ahmadi thought, Messiahship is a phenomenon through which a special emphasis is given on the transformation of a people by way of offering to suffer for the sake of God instead of giving suffering (i.e. refraining from revenge). Ahmadis believe that this special emphasis was given through the person of Jesus and Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908) among others.

Ahmadis hold that the prophesied eschatological figures of Christianity and Islam, the Messiah and Mahdi, were, in fact, to be fulfilled in one person who was to represent all previous prophets.

Numerous hadith are presented by the Ahmadis in support of their view, such as one from Sunan Ibn Majah, which says, &quot;There is No Mahdi other than Jesus son of Mary.&quot;

Ahmadis believe that the prophecies concerning the Mahdi and the second coming of Jesus have been fulfilled in Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908), the founder of the Ahmadiyya Movement. Unlike mainstream Muslims, the Ahmadis do not believe that Jesus is alive in heaven, but that he survived the crucifixion and migrated towards the east where he died a natural death and that Ghulam Ahmad was only the promised spiritual second coming and likeness of Jesus, the promised Messiah and Mahdi. He also claimed to have appeared in the likeness of Krishna and that his advent fulfilled certain prophecies found in Hindu scriptures. He stated that the founder of Sikhism was a Muslim saint, who was a reflection of the religious challenges he perceived to be occurring. Ghulam Ahmad wrote &quot;Barahin-e-Ahmadiyya&quot;, in 1880, which incorporated Indian, Sufi, Islamic and Western aspects in order to give life to Islam in the face of the British Raj, Protestant Christianity, and rising Hinduism. He later declared himself the Promised Messiah and the Mahdi following Divine revelations in 1891. Ghulam Ahmad argued that Jesus had appeared 1300 years after the formation of the Muslim community and stressed the need for a current Messiah, in turn claiming that he himself embodied both the Mahdi and the Messiah. Ghulam Ahmad was supported by Muslims who especially felt oppressed by Christian and Hindu missionaries.

==Druze faith==

In the Druze faith, Jesus is considered the Messiah and one of God&#x27;s important prophets, being among the seven prophets who appeared in different periods of history. According to the Druze manuscripts Jesus is the Greatest Imam and the incarnation of Ultimate Reason (Akl) on earth and the first cosmic principle (Hadd), and regards Jesus and Hamza ibn Ali as the incarnations of one of the five great celestial powers, who form part of their system. Druze doctrines include the beliefs that Jesus was born of a virgin named Mary, performed miracles, and died by crucifixion. In the Druze tradition, Jesus is known under three titles: the True Messiah (&quot;al-Masih al-Haq&quot;), the Messiah of all Nations (&quot;Masih al-Umam&quot;), and the Messiah of Sinners. This is due, respectively, to the belief that Jesus delivered the true Gospel message, the belief that he was the Saviour of all nations, and the belief that he offers forgiveness.

Druze believe that Hamza ibn Ali was a reincarnation of Jesus, and that Hamza ibn Ali is the true Messiah, who directed the deeds of the messiah Jesus &quot;the son of Joseph and Mary&quot;, but when messiah Jesus &quot;the son of Joseph and Mary&quot; strayed from the path of the true Messiah, Hamza filled the hearts of the Jews with hatred for him - and for that reason, they crucified him, according to the Druze manuscripts. Despite this, Hamza ibn Ali took him down from the cross and allowed him to return to his family, in order to prepare men for the preaching of his religion.

==Other religions==
* In Buddhism, Maitreya is considered to the next Buddha (awakened one) that is promised to come. He is expected to come to renew the laws of Buddhism once the teaching of Gautama Buddha has completely decayed.
* In the Bahá’í Faith, Baháʼu&#x27;lláh, the founder of the Baháʼí Faith, is believed to be &quot;He whom God will make manifest&quot; prophesied of in Bábism. He claimed to be the Messiah figure of previous religions (Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Buddhism and Hinduism). He also taught that additional Messiahs, or &quot;Manifestations of God&quot;, will appear in the distant future, but the next one would not appear until after the lapse of &quot;a full thousand years&quot;.
* Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia is believed to be the Messiah by followers of the Rastafari movement. This idea further supports the belief that God himself is black, which they (followers of the Rastafarian movement) try to further strengthen by a verse from the Bible. Even if the Emperor denied being the messiah, the followers of the Rastafari movement believe that he is a messenger from God. To justify this, Rastafarians used reasons such as Emperor Haile Selassie&#x27;s bloodline, which is assumed to come from King Solomon of Israel, and the various titles given to him, which include Lord of Lords, King of Kings and Conquering Lion of the tribe of Judah.
*In Kebatinan (Javanese religious tradition), Satrio Piningit is a character in Jayabaya&#x27;s prophecies who is destined to become a great leader of Nusantara and to rule the world from Java. In &quot;Serat Pararaton&quot;, King Jayabaya of Kediri foretold that before the coming of Satrio Piningit, there would be flash floods and that volcanoes would erupt without warning. Satrio Piningit is a Krishna-like figure known as &quot;Ratu Adil&quot; (Indonesian: &#x27;Just King, King of Justice&#x27;) and his weapon is a trishula.
*In Zoroastrianism there are three messiah figures who each progressively bring about the final renovation of the world, the Frashokereti and all of these three figures are called Saoshyant.
*In Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches, the messiah is Aradia, daughter of the goddess Diana, who comes to Earth in order to establish the practice of witchcraft before returning to Heaven.

==Popular culture==
===In films===
* &quot;Dune Messiah&quot;, a 1969 novel by Frank Herbert, second in his &quot;Dune&quot; trilogy, also part of a miniseries, one of the widest-selling works of fiction in the 1960s.
* &quot;The Messiah&quot;, a 2007 Persian film depicting the life of Jesus from an Islamic perspective
* &quot;The Young Messiah&quot;, a 2016 American film depicting the childhood life of Jesus from a Christian perspective
* &quot;Messiah&quot;, a 2020 American TV series.
===Video Games===
* Messiah appears in &quot;Persona 3&quot; as a persona for completing the Judgment Social Link.

==See also==
* Kalki, a figure in Hindu eschatology
* Li Hong, a figure in Taoist eschatology
* List of messiah claimants
** Jewish Messiah claimants
** List of people claimed to be Jesus
** List of Mahdi claimants
* Messiah complex
* Prophets in Judaism 
* Saoshyant, a figure in Zoroastrianism who brings about the final renovation of the world
* Soter
* Year 6000
* Mab Darogan, a messianic figure of Welsh legend, destined to force the Germanic Anglo-Saxons and Vikings out of Britain and reclaim it for its Celtic Briton inhabitants.

==References==

=== Footnotes ===
=== Citations ===
==Further reading==
* Aryeh Kaplan, &quot;From Messiah to Christ&quot;, New York: Orthodox Union, 2004.
* Joseph Klausner, &quot;The Messianic Idea in Israel from Its Beginning to the Completion of the Mishnah&quot;, London: George Allen &amp; Unwin, 1956.
* Jacob Neusner, William S. Green, Ernst Frerichs, &quot;Judaisms and their Messiahs at the Turn of the Christian Era&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987.

==External links==

* Messiah in Jewish Virtual Library
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="3" end="22" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="26" end="33" title="Messiah" label="messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="37" end="44" title="Messiah" label="messias"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="59" end="66" title="salvation" label="saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="124" end="132" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="mashiach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="140" end="150" title="Messianism#Judaism" label="messianism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="161" end="174" title="Messianic Age#Judaism" label="Messianic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="189" end="196" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="209" end="221" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="268" end="279" title="High Priest of Israel" label="High Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q641922" start="294" end="302" title="Anointing" label="anointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q385777" start="308" end="326" title="holy anointing oil" label="holy anointing oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701168" start="521" end="533" title="Davidic line" label="Davidic line"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="542" end="552" title="David" label="King David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="557" end="569" title="Solomon" label="King Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605404" start="665" end="681" title="Twelve Tribes of Israel" label="tribes of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="718" end="730" title="Eretz Israel" label="Eretz Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415267" start="742" end="779" title="Third Temple" label="rebuilding of the Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="871" end="884" title="World to Come#Jewish eschatology" label="world to come"/>
<link wikidata="Q642420" start="968" end="974" title="Christ (title)" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="1008" end="1018" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1040" end="1053" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="1055" end="1065" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1084" end="1101" title="Jesus of Nazareth" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="1226" end="1233" title="Ministry of Jesus" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="1235" end="1240" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="1246" end="1258" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="1297" end="1310" title="second coming" label="second coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="1408" end="1420" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="1439" end="1449" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q882685" start="1484" end="1498" title="King of Israel" label="King of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q472768" start="1534" end="1544" title="Son of God" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1550" end="1555" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q51664" start="1557" end="1562" title="Jesus in Islam" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="1589" end="1596" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="1625" end="1635" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073559" start="1669" end="1681" title="Islamic eschatology" label="end of times"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="1703" end="1708" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124554" start="1733" end="1751" title="al-Masih ad-Dajjal" label="al-Masih ad-Dajjal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="1763" end="1776" title="Antichrist" label="false Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="1783" end="1792" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q312952" start="1911" end="1929" title="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad" label="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="1962" end="1980" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609512" start="2102" end="2119" title="Chabad messianism" label="Chabad messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q966359" start="2121" end="2147" title="Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn" label="Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="2176" end="2181" title="Rebbe" label="Rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="2210" end="2226" title="Chabad Lubavitch" label="Chabad Lubavitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q381397" start="2232" end="2258" title="Menachem Mendel Schneerson" label="Menachem Mendel Schneerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289748" start="2313" end="2330" title="Messiah claimants" label="Messiah claimants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="2356" end="2362" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q641922" start="2419" end="2431" title="Anointing" label="anointed one"/>
<link wikidata="Q21283070" start="2497" end="2497" title="Tiberian vocalization" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="2569" end="2579" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="2595" end="2608" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="2641" end="2647" title="Hebrew (language)" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2699" end="2712" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="2779" end="2783" title="Gospel of John" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2900" end="2906" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="2937" end="2952" title="Arab Christians" label="Arab Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2957" end="2963" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="3230" end="3242" title="consecration" label="consecrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="3319" end="3331" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="3513" end="3528" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411408" start="3535" end="3553" title="Jewish eschatology" label="Jewish eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="3697" end="3715" title="God&amp;#x27;s kingdom" label="God&amp;#x27;s kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072928" start="3755" end="3768" title="Messianic Age" label="Messianic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q472768" start="3847" end="3857" title="Son of God" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="3980" end="3997" title="Messiah ben David" label="Messiah ben David"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="4336" end="4346" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4353" end="4375" title="Jewish principles of faith#Maimonides&amp;#x27; 13 principles of faith" label="13 Principles of Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="5113" end="5121" title="rabbinic literature" label="rabbinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="5211" end="5217" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="5317" end="5322" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5361" end="5365" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="5799" end="5810" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409655" start="5963" end="5981" title="Messiah ben Joseph" label="Messiah ben Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q687229" start="6201" end="6208" title="Armilus" label="Armilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q629060" start="6248" end="6261" title="Gog and Magog" label="Gog and Magog"/>
<link wikidata="Q966359" start="6635" end="6661" title="Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn" label="Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="6690" end="6695" title="Rebbe" label="Rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q381397" start="6757" end="6783" title="Menachem Mendel Schneerson" label="Menachem Mendel Schneerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289748" start="6838" end="6855" title="List of messiah claimants" label="messiah claimants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609512" start="6865" end="6892" title="Chabad messianism" label="Chabad-Lubavitch messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q966359" start="7057" end="7083" title="Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn" label="Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13603552" start="7096" end="7102" title="Atzmus" label="Atzmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616597" start="7156" end="7159" title="guf" label="guf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="7167" end="7174" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7179" end="7186" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199484" start="7368" end="7372" title="Ohel (Chabad-Lubavitch)" label="Ohel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7682" end="7695" title="Messiah in Judaism#Historical" label="King Moshiach"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="7709" end="7728" title="second coming" label="revealed imminently"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="7858" end="7879" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="7905" end="7923" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="7953" end="7960" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="8394" end="8406" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="8587" end="8604" title="Jesus of Nazareth" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="8609" end="8619" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q615472" start="8637" end="8657" title="Christian messianic prophecies" label="messianic prophecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q223720" start="8740" end="8756" title="Jesus, King of the Jews" label="King of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="8779" end="8786" title="Ministry of Jesus" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="8788" end="8793" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="8799" end="8811" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8892" end="8905" title="World to Come#Christian eschatology" label="world to come"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="8931" end="8944" title="Second Coming" label="Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8984" end="8995" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471317" start="9016" end="9029" title="Amillennialism" label="amillenialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="9178" end="9188" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141210" start="9193" end="9204" title="God the Son" label="God the Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="9313" end="9334" title="New Testament Gospels" label="New Testament Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988766" start="9353" end="9371" title="anointing of Jesus" label="anointing of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="9404" end="9419" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospels of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="9421" end="9428" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="9434" end="9438" title="Gospel of John" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q831190" start="9465" end="9472" title="Bethany" label="Bethany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="9500" end="9514" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="9688" end="9702" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Book of Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="9713" end="9728" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="9742" end="9759" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="9792" end="9820" title="Second Temple" label="rebuild the Jerusalem Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9839" end="9852" title="Islam" label="Islamic faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q642420" start="9950" end="9962" title="Messiah in Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="9967" end="9974" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="10278" end="10292" title="Death of Jesus" label="Death of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="10523" end="10536" title="Second Coming of Christ" label="Second Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="10544" end="10552" title="Eschatology" label="End days"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="10559" end="10564" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q51664" start="10577" end="10582" title="Jesus in Islam" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478857" start="10613" end="10619" title="Mary in Islam" label="Maryam"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="10712" end="10730" title="Children of Israel" label="Children of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q482353" start="10745" end="10764" title="Al-Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man" label="Qadi al-Nu&amp;#x27;man"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="10775" end="10781" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="10796" end="10810" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992234" start="11014" end="11014" title="Zahir (Islam)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2746654" start="11027" end="11027" title="Batin (Islam)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1782672" start="11112" end="11116" title="Noah in Islam" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="11118" end="11125" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990155" start="11127" end="11132" title="Moses in Islam" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="11138" end="11146" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="11229" end="11239" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="11404" end="11420" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="Islamic prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897719" start="11523" end="11536" title="Mona Siddiqui" label="Mona Siddiqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q220716" start="11791" end="11798" title="Maryam (surah)" label="Sura 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q219696" start="11842" end="11848" title="Sura 4" label="Sura 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="11893" end="11906" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667032" start="11931" end="11937" title="Heaven in Islam" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248277" start="12048" end="12061" title="Mahmoud M. Ayoub" label="Mahmoud Ayoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="12371" end="12379" title="Mahdi" label="al-Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073559" start="12400" end="12412" title="Islamic eschatology" label="end of times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124554" start="12505" end="12523" title="al-Masih ad-Dajjal" label="al-Masih ad-Dajjal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="12596" end="12606" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12200906" start="12661" end="12676" title="Day of Resurrection" label="Yawm al-Qiyāmah"/>
<link wikidata="Q205766" start="12844" end="12849" title="Ummah" label="Ummah"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="13110" end="13116" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q336558" start="13126" end="13135" title="Abu Dawood" label="Abu Dawud"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="13157" end="13169" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q207540" start="13451" end="13454" title="Lod" label="Lud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077843" start="13556" end="13565" title="Abdullah Yusuf Ali" label="Yusuf Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023470" start="13616" end="13629" title="Sahih Bukhari" label="Sahih Bukhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="14140" end="14147" title="Twelver" label="Twelver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="14158" end="14184" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia (or Shi&amp;#x27;i) Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q57560" start="14233" end="14249" title="the Twelve Imams" label="the Twelve Imams"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="14313" end="14324" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897719" start="14579" end="14592" title="Mona Siddiqui" label="Mona Siddiqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="14720" end="14725" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="15042" end="15052" title="Imam Mehdi" label="Imam Mehdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20722367" start="15301" end="15313" title="Intercession in Islam" label="intercession"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248277" start="15413" end="15426" title="Mahmoud M. Ayoub" label="Mahmoud Ayoub"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="15971" end="15980" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="16022" end="16027" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312952" start="16547" end="16565" title="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad" label="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="16798" end="16804" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187931" start="16877" end="16892" title="Sunan Ibn Majah" label="Sunan Ibn Majah"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="17506" end="17513" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="17620" end="17627" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096209" start="17752" end="17771" title="Barahin-e-Ahmadiyya" label="Barahin-e-Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="17899" end="17910" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="18405" end="18410" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="18418" end="18423" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="18663" end="18669" title="Reason" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="18736" end="18741" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q615555" start="18746" end="18759" title="Hamza ibn Ali" label="Hamza ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="18905" end="18921" title="Virgin birth of Jesus" label="born of a virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="18928" end="18932" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q51631" start="18944" end="18952" title="Miracles of Jesus" label="miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="18966" end="18977" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="19391" end="19404" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q615555" start="19424" end="19437" title="Hamza ibn Ali" label="Hamza ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="19497" end="19502" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="19520" end="19526" title="Saint Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="19531" end="19535" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="19583" end="19589" title="Saint Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="19594" end="19598" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="19732" end="19741" title="crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q615555" start="19797" end="19810" title="Hamza ibn Ali" label="Hamza ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="19966" end="19974" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193461" start="19976" end="19984" title="Maitreya" label="Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="20133" end="20147" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="20181" end="20193" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Bahá’í Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="20195" end="20211" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q204128" start="20324" end="20330" title="Bábism" label="Bábism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699644" start="20511" end="20532" title="Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Manifestations of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="20679" end="20693" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="20758" end="20767" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="21196" end="21208" title="King Solomon" label="King Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173931" start="21347" end="21356" title="Kebatinan" label="Kebatinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="21358" end="21366" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426468" start="21389" end="21404" title="Satrio Piningit" label="Satrio Piningit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220272" start="21423" end="21431" title="Jayabaya" label="Jayabaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q49332" start="21494" end="21503" title="Nusantara (archipelago)" label="Nusantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="21531" end="21535" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q756895" start="21586" end="21592" title="Kingdom of Kediri" label="Kediri"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="21742" end="21749" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961694" start="21777" end="21786" title="Ratu Adil" label="Ratu Adil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="21794" end="21804" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539698" start="21866" end="21874" title="trishula" label="trishula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="21880" end="21894" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068573" start="22001" end="22013" title="Frashokereti" label="Frashokereti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585455" start="22056" end="22065" title="Saoshyant" label="Saoshyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577334" start="22071" end="22107" title="Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches" label="Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q624739" start="22124" end="22130" title="Aradia" label="Aradia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="22156" end="22161" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="22220" end="22230" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q437383" start="22303" end="22315" title="Dune Messiah" label="Dune Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855269" start="22486" end="22497" title="The Messiah (2007 film)" label="The Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656805" start="22589" end="22606" title="The Young Messiah (film)" label="The Young Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816399" start="22710" end="22717" title="Messiah (American TV series)" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q910889" start="22797" end="22806" title="Persona 3" label="Persona 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q476824" start="22883" end="22888" title="Kalki" label="Kalki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766456" start="22902" end="22919" title="Hindu eschatology" label="Hindu eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538818" start="22922" end="22929" title="Li Hong (Taoist eschatology)" label="Li Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="22943" end="22949" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289748" start="22964" end="22989" title="List of messiah claimants" label="List of messiah claimants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409273" start="22993" end="23017" title="Jewish Messiah claimants" label="Jewish Messiah claimants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049509" start="23021" end="23055" title="List of people claimed to be Jesus" label="List of people claimed to be Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577555" start="23059" end="23082" title="List of Mahdi claimants" label="List of Mahdi claimants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269462" start="23085" end="23100" title="Messiah complex" label="Messiah complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190874" start="23103" end="23122" title="Prophets in Judaism" label="Prophets in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585455" start="23126" end="23135" title="Saoshyant" label="Saoshyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="23149" end="23163" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303797" start="23217" end="23222" title="Soter" label="Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q552803" start="23225" end="23234" title="Year 6000" label="Year 6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721333" start="23237" end="23248" title="Mab Darogan" label="Mab Darogan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19617" wikidata="Q180099" url="?curid=19617" title="Margaret Mead">
<text>Margaret Mead (December 16, 1901 – November 15, 1978) was an American cultural anthropologist, author and speaker, who appeared frequently in the mass media during the 1960s and the 1970s.

She earned her bachelor&#x27;s degree at Barnard College of Columbia University and her M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Columbia. Mead served as president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 1975.

Mead was a communicator of anthropology in modern American and Western culture and was often controversial as an academic. Her reports detailing the attitudes towards sex in South Pacific and Southeast Asian traditional cultures influenced the 1960s sexual revolution. She was a proponent of broadening sexual conventions within the context of Western cultural traditions.

==Early life and education==
Margaret Mead, the first of five children, was born in Philadelphia but raised in nearby Doylestown, Pennsylvania. Her father, Edward Sherwood Mead, was a professor of finance at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and her mother, Emily (née Fogg) Mead, was a sociologist who studied Italian immigrants. Her sister Katharine (1906–1907) died at the age of nine months. That was a traumatic event for Mead, who had named the girl, and thoughts of her lost sister permeated her daydreams for many years. 

Her family moved frequently and so her early education was directed by her grandmother until, at age 11, she was enrolled by her family at Buckingham Friends School in Lahaska, Pennsylvania. Her family owned the Longland farm from 1912 to 1926. Born into a family of various religious outlooks, she searched for a form of religion that gave an expression of the faith with which she had been formally acquainted, Christianity. In doing so, she found the rituals of the Episcopal Church to fit the expression of religion she was seeking. Mead studied one year, 1919, at DePauw University, then transferred to Barnard College.

Mead earned her bachelor&#x27;s degree from Barnard in 1923, began studying with professors Franz Boas and Ruth Benedict at Columbia University, and earned her master&#x27;s degree in 1924. Mead set out in 1925 to do fieldwork in Samoa. In 1926, she joined the American Museum of Natural History, New York City, as assistant curator. She received her Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1929.

==Personal life==
Mead was married three times. After a six-year engagement, she married her first husband (1923–1928), Luther Cressman, an American theology student who later became an anthropologist. Before departing for Samoa in 1925, Mead had a short affair with the linguist Edward Sapir, a close friend of her instructor Ruth Benedict. However, Sapir&#x27;s conservative stances about marriage and women&#x27;s roles were unacceptable to Mead, and as Mead left to do field work in Samoa, they separated permanently. Mead received news of Sapir&#x27;s remarriage while she was living in Samoa. There, she later burned their correspondence on a beach. Between 1925 and 1926, she was in Samoa from where on the return boat she met Reo Fortune, a New Zealander headed to Cambridge, England, to study psychology. They were married in 1928, after Mead&#x27;s divorce from Cressman. Mead dismissively characterized her union with her first husband as &quot;my student marriage&quot; in her 1972 autobiography &quot;Blackberry Winter&quot;, a sobriquet with which Cressman took vigorous issue. Mead&#x27;s third and longest-lasting marriage (1936–1950) was to the British anthropologist Gregory Bateson with whom she had a daughter, Mary Catherine Bateson, who would also become an anthropologist. She readily acknowledged that Bateson was the husband she loved the most. She was devastated when he left her and remained his loving friend ever afterward. She kept his photograph by her bedside wherever she traveled, including beside her hospital deathbed. 

Mead&#x27;s pediatrician was Benjamin Spock, whose subsequent writings on child rearing incorporated some of Mead&#x27;s own practices and beliefs acquired from her ethnological field observations which she shared with him; in particular, breastfeeding on the baby&#x27;s demand, rather than by a schedule. 
Mead also had an exceptionally close relationship with Ruth Benedict, one of her instructors. In her memoir about her parents, &quot;With a Daughter&#x27;s Eye&quot;, Mary Catherine Bateson strongly implies that the relationship between Benedict and Mead was partly sexual. Mead never openly identified herself as lesbian or bisexual. In her writings, she proposed that it is to be expected that an individual&#x27;s sexual orientation may evolve throughout life.

She spent her last years in a close personal and professional collaboration with the anthropologist Rhoda Metraux with whom she lived from 1955 until her death in 1978. Letters between the two published in 2006 with the permission of Mead&#x27;s daughter clearly express a romantic relationship.

Mead had two sisters, Elizabeth and Priscilla, and a brother, Richard. Elizabeth Mead (1909–1983), an artist and teacher, married the cartoonist William Steig, and Priscilla Mead (1911–1959) married the author Leo Rosten. Mead&#x27;s brother, Richard, was a professor. Mead was also the aunt of Jeremy Steig.

==Career and later life==

During World War II, Mead along with other social scientist like Gregory Bateson and Ruth Benedict, took on several different responsibilities. In 1940, Mead joined the Committee for National Morale. In 1941, she also contributed to an essay that was released in the Applied Anthropology, which created strategies to help produce propaganda with the intent of raising national morale. In 1942, Mead served as the executive director of the Committee on Food Habits of the National Research Council, which served to gather data on American citizens ability to get food and their overall diet during the war. During World War II, Mead also served on the Institute for Intercultural Studies (IIS), whose prime objective was to research the “national character” of the Axis powers to try and foster peace between the two sides. She was curator of ethnology at the American Museum of Natural History from 1946 to 1969. She was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1948, the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1975, and the American Philosophical Society in 1977. She taught at The New School and Columbia University, where she was an adjunct professor from 1954 to 1978 and a professor of anthropology and chair of the Division of Social Sciences at Fordham University&#x27;s Lincoln Center campus from 1968 to 1970, founding their anthropology department. In 1970, she joined the faculty of the University of Rhode Island as a Distinguished Professor of Sociology and Anthropology.

Following Ruth Benedict&#x27;s example, Mead focused her research on problems of child rearing, personality, and culture. She served as president of the Society for Applied Anthropology in 1950 and of the American Anthropological Association in 1960. In the mid-1960s, Mead joined forces with the communications theorist Rudolf Modley in jointly establishing an organization called Glyphs Inc., whose goal was to create a universal graphic symbol language to be understood by any members of culture, no matter how &quot;primitive.&quot; In the 1960s, Mead served as the Vice President of the New York Academy of Sciences. She held various positions in the American Association for the Advancement of Science, notably president in 1975 and chair of the executive committee of the board of directors in 1976. She was a recognizable figure in academia and usually wore a distinctive cape and carried a walking stick.

Mead was a key participant in the Macy conferences on cybernetics and an editor of their proceedings. Mead&#x27;s address to the inaugural conference of the American Society for Cybernetics was instrumental in the development of second-order cybernetics.

Mead was featured on two record albums published by Folkways Records. The first, released in 1959, &quot;An Interview With Margaret Mead&quot;, explored the topics of morals and anthropology. In 1971, she was included in a compilation of talks by prominent women, &quot;But the Women Rose, Vol. 2: Voices of Women in American History&quot;.

She is credited with the pluralization of the term &quot;semiotics&quot;.

In 1948 Mead was quoted in &quot;News Chronicle&quot; as supporting the deployment of Iban mercenaries to the Malayan Emergency, arguing that using Ibans (Dyaks) who enjoyed headhunting was no worse than deploying white troops who had been taught that killing was wrong.

In later life, Mead was a mentor to many young anthropologists and sociologists, including Jean Houston, author Gail Sheehy, John Langston Gwaltney, Roger Sandall, filmmaker Timothy Asch, and anthropologist Susan C. Scrimshaw, who later received the 1985 Margaret Mead Award for her research on cultural factors affecting public health delivery.

In 1972, Mead was one of the two rapporteurs from NGOs to the UN Conference on the Human Environment. In 1976, she was a key participant at UN Habitat I, the first UN forum on human settlements.

Mead died of pancreatic cancer on November 15, 1978, and is buried at Trinity Episcopal Church Cemetery, Buckingham, Pennsylvania.

==Work==
===&quot;Coming of Age in Samoa&quot; (1928)===
Mead&#x27;s first ethnographic work described the life of Samoan girls and women on the island of Tau in the Manu&#x27;a Archipelago in 1926. The book includes analyses of how children were raised and educated, sex relations, dance, development of personality, conflict, and how women matured into old age. Mead explicitly sought to contrast adolescence in Samoa with that in America, which she characterized as difficult, constrained, and awkward. In the foreword to &quot;Coming of Age in Samoa&quot;, Mead&#x27;s advisor, Franz Boas, wrote of the book&#x27;s significance:

Courtesy, modesty, good manners, conformity to definite ethical standards are universal, but what constitutes courtesy, modesty, very good manners, and definite ethical standards is not universal. It is instructive to know that standards differ in the most unexpected ways.

In this way, the book tackled the question of nature versus nurture, whether adolescence and its associated developments were a difficult biological transition for all humans or whether they were cultural processes shaped in particular societies. Mead believed childhood, adolescence, gender, and sex relations were largely driven by cultural practices and expressions.

Mead&#x27;s findings suggested that the community ignores both boys and girls until they are about 15 or 16. Before then, children have little social standing within the community. Mead also found that marriage is regarded as a social and economic arrangement in which wealth, rank, and job skills of the husband and wife are taken into consideration. Aside from marriage, Mead identified two types of sex relations: love affairs and adultery. The exceptions to these practices include women married to chiefs and young women who hold the title of taupo, a ceremonial princess, whose virginity was required. Mead described Samoan youth as often having free, experimental, and open sexual relationships, including homosexual relationships, which was at odds with mainstream American norms around sexuality.

In 1970, National Educational Television produced a documentary in commemoration of the 40th anniversary Mead&#x27;s first expedition to New Guinea. Through the eyes of Mead on her final visit to the village of Peri, the film records how the role of the anthropologist has changed in the forty years since 1928.
====Criticism by Derek Freeman====
After her death, Mead&#x27;s Samoan research was criticized by the anthropologist Derek Freeman, who published a book arguing against many of Mead&#x27;s conclusions in &quot;Coming of Age in Samoa&quot;. Freeman argued that Mead had misunderstood Samoan culture when she argued that Samoan culture did not place many restrictions on youths&#x27; sexual explorations. Freeman argued instead that Samoan culture prized female chastity and virginity and that Mead had been misled by her female Samoan informants. Freeman found that the Samoan islanders whom Mead had depicted in such utopian terms were intensely competitive and had murder and rape rates higher than those in the United States. Furthermore, the men were intensely sexually jealous, which contrasted sharply with Mead&#x27;s depiction of &quot;free love&quot; among the Samoans.

Freeman&#x27;s book was controversial in its turn and was met with considerable backlash and harsh criticism from the anthropology community, but it was received enthusiastically by communities of scientists who believed that sexual mores were more or less universal across cultures. Later in 1983, a special session of Mead&#x27;s supporters in the American Anthropological Association (to which Freeman was not invited) declared it to be &quot;poorly written, unscientific, irresponsible and misleading.&quot; Some anthropologists who studied Samoan culture argued in favor of Freeman&#x27;s findings and contradicted those of Mead, but others argued that Freeman&#x27;s work did not invalidate Mead&#x27;s work because Samoan culture had been changed by the integration of Christianity in the decades between Mead&#x27;s and Freeman&#x27;s fieldwork periods.

Eleanor Leacock traveled to Samoa in 1985 and undertook research among the youth living in urban areas. The research results indicate that the assertions of Derek Freeman were seriously flawed. Leacock pointed out that Mead&#x27;s famous Samoan fieldwork was undertaken on an outer island that had not been colonialized. Freeman, meanwhile, had undertaken fieldwork in an urban slum plagued by drug abuse, structural unemployment, and gang violence.

Mead was careful to shield the identity of all her subjects for confidentiality, but Freeman found and interviewed one of her original participants, and Freeman reported that she admitted to having willfully misled Mead. She said that she and her friends were having fun with Mead and telling her stories.

In 1996, the author Martin Orans examined Mead&#x27;s notes preserved at the Library of Congress and credits her for leaving all of her recorded data available to the general public. Orans points out that Freeman&#x27;s basic criticisms, that Mead was duped by ceremonial virgin Fa&#x27;apua&#x27;a Fa&#x27;amu, who later swore to Freeman that she had played a joke on Mead, were equivocal for several reasons. Mead was well aware of the forms and frequency of Samoan joking, she provided a careful account of the sexual restrictions on ceremonial virgins that corresponds to Fa&#x27;apua&#x27;a Fa&#x27;auma&#x27;a&#x27;s account to Freeman, and Mead&#x27;s notes make clear that she had reached her conclusions about Samoan sexuality before meeting Fa&#x27;apua&#x27;a Fa&#x27;amu. Orans points out that Mead&#x27;s data support several different conclusions and that Mead&#x27;s conclusions hinge on an interpretive, rather than positivist, approach to culture. Orans went on to point out concerning Mead&#x27;s work elsewhere that her own notes do not support her published conclusive claims. Evaluating Mead&#x27;s work in Samoa from a positivist stance, Orans&#x27;s assessment of the controversy was that Mead did not formulate her research agenda in scientific terms and that &quot;her work may properly be damned with the harshest scientific criticism of all, that it is &#x27;not even wrong&#x27;.&quot;

On the whole, anthropologists have rejected the notion that Mead&#x27;s conclusions rested on the validity of a single interview with a single person and find instead that Mead based her conclusions on the sum of her observations and interviews during her time in Samoa and that the status of the single interview did not falsify her work. Others such as Orans maintained that even though Freeman&#x27;s critique was invalid, Mead&#x27;s study was not sufficiently scientifically rigorous to support the conclusions she drew.

In 1999, Freeman published another book, &quot;The Fateful Hoaxing of Margaret Mead: A Historical Analysis of Her Samoan Research&quot;, including previously unavailable material. In his obituary in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, John Shaw stated that Freeman&#x27;s thesis, though upsetting many, had by the time of his death generally gained widespread acceptance. Recent work has nonetheless challenged Freeman&#x27;s critique. A frequent criticism of Freeman is that he regularly misrepresented Mead&#x27;s research and views. In a 2009 evaluation of the debate, anthropologist Paul Shankman concluded:

There is now a large body of criticism of Freeman&#x27;s work from a number of perspectives in which Mead, Samoa, and anthropology appear in a very different light than they do in Freeman&#x27;s work. Indeed, the immense significance that Freeman gave his critique looks like &#x27;much ado about nothing&#x27; to many of his critics.

While nurture-oriented anthropologists are more inclined to agree with Mead&#x27;s conclusions, some non-anthropologists who take a nature-oriented approach follow Freeman&#x27;s lead, such as Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker, biologist Richard Dawkins, evolutionary psychologist David Buss, science writer Matt Ridley, classicist Mary Lefkowitz.

In her 2015 book &quot;Galileo&#x27;s Middle Finger&quot;, Alice Dreger argues that Freeman&#x27;s accusations were unfounded and misleading. A detailed review of the controversy by Paul Shankman, published by the University of Wisconsin Press in 2009, supports the contention that Mead&#x27;s research was essentially correct and concludes that Freeman cherry-picked his data and misrepresented both Mead and Samoan culture.

A survey of 301 anthropology faculty in the United States in 2016 had two thirds agreeing with a statement that Mead &quot;romanticizes the sexual freedom of Samoan adolescents&quot; and half agreeing that it was ideologically motivated.
Mead&#x27;s &quot;Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies&quot; became influential within the feminist movement since it claimed that females are dominant in the Tchambuli (now spelled Chambri) Lake region of the Sepik basin of Papua New Guinea (in the western Pacific) without causing any special problems. The lack of male dominance may have been the result of the Australian administration&#x27;s outlawing of warfare. According to contemporary research, males are dominant throughout Melanesia. Others have argued that there is still much cultural variation throughout Melanesia, especially in the large island of New Guinea. Moreover, anthropologists often overlook the significance of networks of political influence among females. The formal male-dominated institutions typical of some areas of high population density were not, for example, present in the same way in Oksapmin, West Sepik Province, a more sparsely-populated area. Cultural patterns there were different from, say, Mount Hagen. They were closer to those described by Mead.

Mead stated that the Arapesh people, also in the Sepik, were pacifists, but she noted that they on occasion engage in warfare. Her observations about the sharing of garden plots among the Arapesh, the egalitarian emphasis in child rearing, and her documentation of predominantly peaceful relations among relatives are very different from the &quot;big man&quot; displays of dominance that were documented in more stratified New Guinea cultures, such as by Andrew Strathern. They are a different cultural pattern.

In brief, her comparative study revealed a full range of contrasting gender roles:
* &quot;Among the Arapesh, both men and women were peaceful in temperament and neither men nor women made war.
* &quot;Among the Mundugumor, the opposite was true: both men and women were warlike in temperament.
* &quot;And the Tchambuli were different from both. The men &#x27;primped&#x27; and spent their time decorating themselves while the women worked and were the practical ones—the opposite of how it seemed in early 20th century America.&quot;

Deborah Gewertz (1981) studied the Chambri (called Tchambuli by Mead) in 1974–1975 and found no evidence of such gender roles. Gewertz states that as far back in history as there is evidence (1850s), Chambri men dominated the women, controlled their produce, and made all important political decisions. In later years, there has been a diligent search for societies in which women dominate men or for signs of such past societies, but none has been found (Bamberger 1974). Jessie Bernard criticised Mead&#x27;s interpretations of her findings and argued that Mead&#x27;s descriptions were subjective. Bernard argues that Mead claimed the Mundugumor women were temperamentally identical to men, but her reports indicate that there were in fact sex differences; Mundugumor women hazed each other less than men hazed each other and made efforts to make themselves physically desirable to others, married women had fewer affairs than married men, women were not taught to use weapons, women were used less as hostages and Mundugumor men engaged in physical fights more often than women. In contrast, the Arapesh were also described as equal in temperament, but Bernard states that Mead&#x27;s own writings indicate that men physically fought over women, yet women did not fight over men. The Arapesh also seemed to have some conception of sex differences in temperament, as they would sometimes describe a woman as acting like a particularly quarrelsome man. Bernard also questioned if the behaviour of men and women in those societies differed as much from Western behaviour as Mead claimed. Bernard argued that some of her descriptions could be equally descriptive of a Western context.

Despite its feminist roots, Mead&#x27;s work on women and men was also criticized by Betty Friedan on the basis that it contributes to infantilizing women.

===Other research areas===
In 1926, there was much debate about race and intelligence. Mead felt the methodologies involved in the experimental psychology research supporting arguments of racial superiority in intelligence were substantially flawed. In &quot;The Methodology of Racial Testing: Its Significance for Sociology,&quot; Mead proposes that there are three problems with testing for racial differences in intelligence. First, there are concerns with the ability to validly equate one&#x27;s test score with what Mead refers to as &quot;racial admixture&quot; or how much &quot;Negro or Indian blood&quot; an individual possesses. She also considers whether that information is relevant when interpreting IQ scores. Mead remarks that a genealogical method could be considered valid if it could be &quot;subjected to extensive verification.&quot; In addition, the experiment would need a steady control group to establish whether racial admixture was actually affecting intelligence scores. Next, Mead argues that it is difficult to measure the effect that social status has on the results of a person&#x27;s intelligence test. She meant that environment (family structure, socioeconomic status, and exposure to language, etc.) has too much influence on an individual to attribute inferior scores solely to a physical characteristic such as race. Then, Mead adds that language barriers sometimes create the biggest problem of all. Similarly, Stephen J. Gould finds three main problems with intelligence testing in his 1981 book &quot;The Mismeasure of Man&quot; that relate to Mead&#x27;s view of the problem of determining whether there are racial differences in intelligence.

In 1929, Mead and Fortune visited Manus, now the northernmost province of Papua New Guinea, and traveled there by boat from Rabaul. She amply describes her stay there in her autobiography, and it is mentioned in her 1984 biography by Jane Howard. On Manus, she studied the Manus people of the south coast village of Peri. &quot;Over the next five decades Mead would come back oftener to Peri than to any other field site of her career.&#x27;

Mead has been credited with persuading the American Jewish Committee to sponsor a project to study European Jewish villages, &quot;shtetls&quot;, in which a team of researchers would conduct mass interviews with Jewish immigrants living in New York City. The resulting book, widely cited for decades, allegedly created the Jewish mother stereotype, a mother intensely loving but controlling to the point of smothering and engendering guilt in her children through the suffering she professed to undertake for their sakes.

Mead worked for the RAND Corporation, a US Air Force military-funded private research organization, from 1948 to 1950 to study Russian culture and attitudes toward authority.

As an Anglican Christian, Mead played a considerable part in the drafting of the 1979 American Episcopal Book of Common Prayer.

==Legacy==
In the 1967 musical &quot;Hair&quot;, her name is given to a transvestite &quot;tourist&quot; disturbing the show with the song &quot;My Conviction.&quot;

In 1976, Mead was inducted into the National Women&#x27;s Hall of Fame.

On January 19, 1979, U.S. President Jimmy Carter announced that he was awarding the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously to Mead. UN Ambassador Andrew Young presented the award to Mead&#x27;s daughter at a special program honoring her contributions that was sponsored by the American Museum of Natural History, where she spent many years of her career. The citation read:

In 1979, the Supersisters trading card set was produced and distributed; one of the cards featured Mead&#x27;s name and picture.

The U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp of face value 32¢ on May 28, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.

The Margaret Mead Award is awarded in her honor jointly by the Society for Applied Anthropology and the American Anthropological Association, for significant works in communicating anthropology to the general public.

In addition, there are several schools named after Mead in the United States: a junior high school in Elk Grove Village, Illinois, an elementary school in Sammamish, Washington and another in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, New York.

The 2014 novel &quot;Euphoria&quot; by Lily King is a fictionalized account of Mead&#x27;s love/marital relationships with fellow anthropologists Reo Fortune and Gregory Bateson in New Guinea before World War II.

==Publications==

Note: See also &quot;Margaret Mead: The Complete Bibliography 1925–1975&quot;, Joan Gordan, ed., The Hague: Mouton.

===As a sole author===
*&quot;Coming of Age in Samoa&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Growing Up in New Guinea&quot; (1930)
*&quot;The Changing Culture of an Indian Tribe&quot; (1932)
*&quot;Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies&quot; (1935)
*&quot;And Keep Your Powder Dry: An Anthropologist Looks at America&quot; (1942)
*&quot;Male and Female&quot; (1949)
*&quot;New Lives for Old: Cultural Transformation in Manus, 1928–1953&quot; (1956)
*&quot;People and Places&quot; (1959; a book for young readers)
*&quot;Continuities in Cultural Evolution&quot; (1964)
*&quot;Culture and Commitment&quot; (1970)
*&quot;The Mountain Arapesh: Stream of Events in Alitoa&quot; (1971)
*&quot;Blackberry Winter: My Earlier Years&quot; (1972; autobiography)

===As editor or coauthor===
*&quot;Balinese Character: A Photographic Analysis&quot;, with Gregory Bateson, 1942, New York Academy of Sciences.
* &quot;Soviet Attitudes Toward Authority&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Cultural Patterns and Technical Change&quot;, editor (1953)
*&quot;Primitive Heritage: An Anthropological Anthology&quot;, edited with Nicholas Calas (1953)
*&quot;An Anthropologist at Work&quot;, editor (1959, reprinted 1966; a volume of Ruth Benedict&#x27;s writings)
*&quot;The Study of Culture at a Distance&quot;, edited with Rhoda Metraux, 1953
*&quot;Themes in French Culture&quot;, with Rhoda Metraux, 1954
*&quot;The Wagon and the Star: A Study of American Community Initiative&quot; co-authored with Muriel Whitbeck Brown, 1966
*&quot;A Rap on Race&quot;, with James Baldwin, 1971
*&quot;A Way of Seeing&quot;, with Rhoda Metraux, 1975

==See also==

*Tim Asch
*Gregory Bateson
*Ray Birdwhistell
*Macy Conferences
*Elsie Clews Parsons
*Visual anthropology
*Zora Neale Hurston
*75½ Bedford St

==References==
==Sources==
*
*Bateson, Mary Catherine. (1984) &quot;With a Daughter&#x27;s Eye: A Memoir of Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson&quot;, New York: William Morrow. 
*Caffey, Margaret M., and Patricia A. Francis, eds. (2006). &quot;To Cherish the Life of the World: Selected Letters of Margaret Mead&quot;. New York: Basic Books.
*Caton, Hiram, ed. (1990) &quot;The Samoa Reader: Anthropologists Take Stock&quot;, University Press of America. 
*Foerstel, Leonora, and Angela Gilliam, eds. (1992). &quot;Confronting the Margaret Mead Legacy: Scholarship, Empire and the South Pacific&quot;. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
*Freeman, Derek. (1983) &quot;Margaret Mead and Samoa&quot;, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
*Freeman, Derek. (1999) &quot;The Fateful Hoaxing of Margaret Mead: A Historical Analysis of Her Samoan Research&quot;, Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
*Holmes, Lowell D. (1987). &quot;Quest for the Real Samoa: the Mead/Freeman Controversy and Beyond&quot;. South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey.
*Howard, Jane. (1984). &quot;Margaret Mead: A Life&quot;, New York: Simon and Schuster.
*Keeley, Lawrence (1996). &quot;War Before Civilization: the Myth of the Peaceful Savage&quot; (Oxford University Press). 
*Lapsley, Hilary. (1999). &quot;Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict: The Kinship of Women&quot;. University of Massachusetts Press. 
*
*Lutkehaus, Nancy C. (2008). &quot;Margaret Mead: The Making of an American Icon&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
* Mandler, Peter (2013). &quot;Return from the Natives: How Margaret Mead Won the Second World War and Lost the Cold War.&quot; New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
*
*Mead, Margaret. 1977. The Future as Frame for the Present. Audio recording of a lecture delivered July 11, 1977.
*
*
*Pinker, Steven A. (1997). &quot;How the Mind Works&quot;. 
*Sandall, Roger. (2001) &quot;The Culture Cult: Designer Tribalism and Other Essays&quot;. 
*
*
*Shore, Brad. (1982) &quot;Sala&#x27;ilua: A Samoan Mystery&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press.
*
*Virginia, Mary E. (2003). Benedict, Ruth (1887–1948). &quot;DISCovering U.S. History&quot; online edition, Detroit: Gale.

==External links==

* Margaret Mead at Monoskop
* Online video: . Documentary about the Mead-Freeman controversy, including an interview with one of Mead&#x27;s original informants.
*Creative Intelligence: Female – &quot;The Silent Revolution: Creative Man In Contemporary Society&quot; Talk at UC Berkeley, 1962 (online audio file)
*The Institute for Intercultural Studies– ethnographic institute founded by Mead, with resources relating to Mead&#x27;s work.
*Library of Congress, Margaret Mead: Human Nature and the Power of Culture
*American Museum of Natural History, Margaret Mead Film &amp; Video Festival
*&quot;Margaret Mead, 1901–1978: A Public Face of Anthropology&quot;: brief biography, Voice of America.
*Clifford Geertz, &quot;Margaret Mead&quot;, Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences (1989)
*The Dell Paperback Collection at the Library of Congress has first edition paperbacks of Mead&#x27;s works.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180099" start="0" end="13" title="Margaret Mead" label="Margaret Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="70" end="93" title="Cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="231" end="246" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="250" end="269" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="348" end="399" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="437" end="449" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="473" end="488" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="660" end="677" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="868" end="880" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010232" start="902" end="926" title="Doylestown, Pennsylvania" label="Doylestown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329269" start="996" end="1044" title="Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania" label="Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983213" start="1474" end="1499" title="Buckingham Friends School" label="Buckingham Friends School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473157" start="1503" end="1510" title="Lahaska" label="Lahaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674048" start="1547" end="1555" title="Longland (Holicong, Pennsylvania)" label="Longland"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="1804" end="1820" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179599" start="1904" end="1921" title="DePauw University" label="DePauw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q167733" start="1943" end="1958" title="Barnard College" label="Barnard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="2053" end="2063" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="2068" end="2081" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2085" end="2104" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="2191" end="2196" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="2222" end="2256" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2323" end="2342" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q594736" start="2473" end="2488" title="Luther Cressman" label="Luther Cressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="2633" end="2645" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="2680" end="2693" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="2757" end="2775" title="gender role" label="women&amp;#x27;s roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="2840" end="2845" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q683" start="3043" end="3048" title="Samoa" label="Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144944" start="3087" end="3098" title="Reo Fortune" label="Reo Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="3126" end="3135" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="3155" end="3165" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="3394" end="3403" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="3538" end="3553" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081262" start="3584" end="3606" title="Mary Catherine Bateson" label="Mary Catherine Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="3922" end="3934" title="pediatrician" label="pediatrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q310694" start="3939" end="3953" title="Benjamin Spock" label="Benjamin Spock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="4075" end="4087" title="ethnology" label="ethnological"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="4149" end="4162" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="4273" end="4286" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="4532" end="4539" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="4543" end="4551" title="Bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="4635" end="4653" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320838" start="4783" end="4796" title="Rhoda Metraux" label="Rhoda Metraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056617" start="4852" end="4859" title="Love letter" label="Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q552255" start="5125" end="5138" title="William Steig" label="William Steig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029344" start="5190" end="5200" title="Leo Rosten" label="Leo Rosten"/>
<link wikidata="Q711423" start="5275" end="5287" title="Jeremy Steig" label="Jeremy Steig"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="6159" end="6168" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="6262" end="6299" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="6327" end="6355" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="6373" end="6403" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="6427" end="6441" title="The New School" label="The New School"/>
<link wikidata="Q130965" start="6600" end="6618" title="Fordham University" label="Fordham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641788" start="6746" end="6772" title="University of Rhode Island" label="University of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552063" start="6987" end="7019" title="Society for Applied Anthropology" label="Society for Applied Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="7039" end="7075" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q29980342" start="7155" end="7168" title="Rudolf Modley" label="Rudolf Modley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069131" start="7426" end="7454" title="New York Academy of Sciences" label="New York Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="7490" end="7541" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q143363" start="7783" end="7799" title="Macy conferences" label="Macy conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="7803" end="7814" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745015" start="7906" end="7938" title="American Society for Cybernetics" label="American Society for Cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q358532" start="7978" end="8002" title="second-order cybernetics" label="second-order cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="8057" end="8073" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="8404" end="8413" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695544" start="8455" end="8469" title="News Chronicle" label="News Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="8508" end="8512" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="8532" end="8549" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170855" start="8785" end="8797" title="Jean Houston" label="Jean Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517167" start="8806" end="8817" title="Gail Sheehy" label="Gail Sheehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244007" start="8819" end="8841" title="John Langston Gwaltney" label="John Langston Gwaltney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358879" start="8843" end="8856" title="Roger Sandall" label="Roger Sandall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507650" start="8868" end="8880" title="Timothy Asch" label="Timothy Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q112457455" start="8901" end="8919" title="Susan C. Scrimshaw" label="Susan C. Scrimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q14898061" start="8949" end="8968" title="Margaret Mead Award" label="Margaret Mead Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865428" start="9181" end="9193" title="UN Habitat I" label="UN Habitat I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="9250" end="9267" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985594" start="9342" end="9352" title="Buckingham, Pennsylvania" label="Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="9951" end="9961" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873154" start="11465" end="11496" title="National Educational Television" label="National Educational Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q352603" start="11885" end="11898" title="Derek Freeman" label="Derek Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151979" start="11978" end="12000" title="Coming of Age in Samoa" label="Coming of Age in Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="12997" end="13033" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354318" start="13510" end="13525" title="Eleanor Leacock" label="Eleanor Leacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="13601" end="13611" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q352603" start="13667" end="13680" title="Derek Freeman" label="Derek Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="13945" end="13949" title="gang" label="gang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14288" end="14300" title="Martin Orans" label="Martin Orans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668142" start="15174" end="15186" title="Symbolic anthropology" label="interpretive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="15200" end="15210" title="positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225402" start="15654" end="15668" title="not even wrong" label="not even wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="17369" end="17382" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="17394" end="17409" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173874" start="17437" end="17447" title="David Buss" label="David Buss"/>
<link wikidata="Q961972" start="17464" end="17475" title="Matt Ridley" label="Matt Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q535649" start="17488" end="17502" title="Mary Lefkowitz" label="Mary Lefkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718334" start="17528" end="17556" title="Galileo&amp;#x27;s Middle Finger" label="Galileo&amp;#x27;s Middle Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430564" start="17564" end="17576" title="Alice Dreger" label="Alice Dreger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580856" start="18273" end="18290" title="feminist movement" label="feminist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318264" start="18364" end="18371" title="Chambri people" label="Chambri"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="18407" end="18423" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="18667" end="18676" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="18797" end="18807" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068097" start="19055" end="19063" title="Oksapmin" label="Oksapmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753689" start="19065" end="19084" title="West Sepik Province" label="West Sepik Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017362" start="19168" end="19179" title="Mount Hagen" label="Mount Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784223" start="19248" end="19262" title="Arapesh languages" label="Arapesh people"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="19288" end="19296" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="19428" end="19439" title="egalitarian" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628907" start="19683" end="19699" title="Andrew Strathern" label="Andrew Strathern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511616" start="19953" end="19963" title="Mundugumor people" label="Mundugumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65465217" start="20278" end="20293" title="Deborah Gewertz" label="Deborah Gewertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318264" start="20329" end="20338" title="Tchambuli" label="Tchambuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187630" start="20751" end="20765" title="Jessie Bernard" label="Jessie Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="22049" end="22062" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041074" start="22185" end="22206" title="race and intelligence" label="race and intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473730" start="23663" end="23684" title="The Mismeasure of Man" label="The Mismeasure of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q602106" start="23842" end="23847" title="Manus Island" label="Manus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218768" start="23932" end="23938" title="Rabaul" label="Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013651" start="24042" end="24053" title="Jane Howard (journalist)" label="Jane Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="24294" end="24319" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q609042" start="24382" end="24388" title="shtetl" label="shtetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611291" start="24574" end="24598" title="Jewish mother stereotype" label="Jewish mother stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="24956" end="24964" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="25045" end="25054" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="25055" end="25076" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="25116" end="25120" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967852" start="25282" end="25316" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="25355" end="25367" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="25403" end="25432" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q959635" start="25469" end="25481" title="Andrew Young" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013059" start="25711" end="25723" title="Supersisters" label="Supersisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="25832" end="25851" title="U.S. Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972283" start="25917" end="25938" title="Celebrate the Century" label="Celebrate the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q14898061" start="25964" end="25983" title="Margaret Mead Award" label="Margaret Mead Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552063" start="26023" end="26055" title="Society for Applied Anthropology" label="Society for Applied Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="26064" end="26100" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="26258" end="26276" title="junior high school" label="junior high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q328455" start="26280" end="26307" title="Elk Grove Village, Illinois" label="Elk Grove Village, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q988209" start="26333" end="26354" title="Sammamish, Washington" label="Sammamish, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524180" start="26370" end="26384" title="Sheepshead Bay" label="Sheepshead Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="26386" end="26394" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548507" start="26446" end="26455" title="Lily King" label="Lily King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144944" start="26553" end="26564" title="Reo Fortune" label="Reo Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="26569" end="26584" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151979" start="26786" end="26808" title="Coming of Age in Samoa" label="Coming of Age in Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611659" start="26829" end="26853" title="Growing Up in New Guinea" label="Growing Up in New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742914" start="27084" end="27099" title="Male and Female (book)" label="Male and Female"/>
<link wikidata="Q97278806" start="27651" end="27684" title="Soviet Attitudes Toward Authority" label="Soviet Attitudes Toward Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="27944" end="27957" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659145" start="28250" end="28263" title="A Rap on Race" label="A Rap on Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="28276" end="28289" title="James Baldwin (writer)" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507650" start="28367" end="28375" title="Tim Asch" label="Tim Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q314252" start="28377" end="28392" title="Gregory Bateson" label="Gregory Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q328844" start="28394" end="28410" title="Ray Birdwhistell" label="Ray Birdwhistell"/>
<link wikidata="Q143363" start="28412" end="28428" title="Macy Conferences" label="Macy Conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q523870" start="28430" end="28449" title="Elsie Clews Parsons" label="Elsie Clews Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746658" start="28451" end="28470" title="Visual anthropology" label="Visual anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="28472" end="28490" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643471" start="28492" end="28506" title="75½ Bedford St" label="75½ Bedford St"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081262" start="28538" end="28561" title="Mary Catherine Bateson" label="Bateson, Mary Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15496855" start="28849" end="28861" title="Hiram Caton" label="Caton, Hiram"/>
<link wikidata="Q352603" start="29148" end="29162" title="Derek Freeman" label="Freeman, Derek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013651" start="29544" end="29556" title="Jane Howard (journalist)" label="Howard, Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q57303451" start="29755" end="29770" title="Hilary Lapsley" label="Lapsley, Hilary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895718" start="29847" end="29880" title="University of Massachusetts Press" label="University of Massachusetts Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30773" end="30797" title="Mead-Freeman controversy#The Mead-Freeman controversy" label="Mead-Freeman controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="31384" end="31400" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="31549" end="31568" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19620" wikidata="Q223985" url="?curid=19620" title="Michael Palin">
<text>Sir Michael Edward Palin (; born 5 May 1943) is an English actor, comedian, writer, and television presenter. He was a member of the Monty Python comedy group. He received the BAFTA Fellowship in 2013 and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 2019.

Palin started in television working on programmes including the &quot;Ken Dodd Show&quot;, &quot;The Frost Report&quot;, and &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot;. He joined &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot; (1969–1974) alongside John Cleese, Eric Idle, Terry Gilliam, Terry Jones, and Graham Chapman. He acted in some of the most famous Python sketches, including &quot;Argument Clinic&quot;, &quot;Dead Parrot sketch&quot;, &quot;The Lumberjack Song&quot;, &quot;The Spanish Inquisition&quot;, &quot;Bicycle Repair Man&quot;, and &quot;The Fish-Slapping Dance&quot;. Palin continued to work with Jones away from Python, co-writing &quot;Ripping Yarns&quot;.

Palin co-wrote and starred in &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot; (1975), &quot;Life of Brian&quot; (1979) and &quot;The Meaning of Life&quot; (1983). For his performance in &quot;A Fish Called Wanda&quot; (1988) he received the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role. Other notable films include &quot;Jabberwocky&quot; (1977), &quot;Time Bandits&quot; (1981), &quot;The Missionary&quot; (1982), &quot;A Private Function&quot; (1984), &quot;Brazil&quot; (1985), &quot;Fierce Creatures&quot; (1997), and &quot;The Death of Stalin&quot; (2017).

Since 1980, Palin has made numerous television travel documentaries and is a widely recognised writer and presenter. He has been a travel writer and travel documentarian in programmes broadcast on the BBC. His journeys have taken him across the world, including the North and South Poles, the Sahara, the Himalayas, Eastern Europe, and Brazil; in 2018, he visited North Korea, documenting his visit to the isolated country in a series broadcast on Channel 5. Palin visited Nigeria in 2023 to make a travel documentary that was aired in 2024. From 2009 to 2012 he was president of the Royal Geographical Society.

== Early life and education ==
Palin was born in Ranmoor, Sheffield, the second child and only son of Edward Moreton Palin (1900–1977) and Mary Rachel Lockhart (née Ovey; 1903–1990). His father was a Shrewsbury and Cambridge-educated engineer working for a steel firm. His maternal grandfather, Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Lockhart Ovey, DSO, was High Sheriff of Oxfordshire in 1927.

Palin was educated at Birkdale and Shrewsbury School. His sister Angela was nine years his senior; despite the age gap the two had a close relationship until her suicide in 1987. Palin has ancestral roots in Letterkenny, County Donegal. His great-grandmother fled the Irish Famine and was adopted by a wealthy English family.

When he was five years old, Palin had his first acting experience at Birkdale playing Martha Cratchit in a school performance of &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot;. At the age of 10, still interested in acting, he made a comedy monologue and read a Shakespeare play to his mother while playing all the parts. 

After leaving Shrewsbury in 1962, he went on to read Modern History at Brasenose College, Oxford. With fellow student Robert Hewison he performed and wrote, for the first time, comedy material at a university Christmas party. Terry Jones, also a student at Oxford, saw that performance and began writing with Hewison and Palin. That year Palin joined the Brightside and Carbrook Co-operative Society Players and first gained fame when he won an acting award at a Co-op drama festival. He also performed and wrote in the Oxford Revue (called the Et ceteras) with Jones.

== Career ==
=== Early career ===
After finishing university in 1965, Palin became a presenter on a comedy pop show called &quot;Now!&quot; for the television contractor Television Wales and the West. At the same time, Palin was contacted by Jones, who had left university a year earlier, to help with writing a theatrical documentary about sex through the ages. Although this project was eventually abandoned, it brought Palin and Jones together as a writing duo and led them to write comedy for various BBC programmes, such as &quot;The Ken Dodd Show&quot;, &quot;The Billy Cotton Bandshow&quot;, and &quot;The Illustrated Weekly Hudd&quot;. They collaborated in writing lyrics for an album by Barry Booth called &quot;Diversions&quot;. They were also in the team of writers working for &quot;The Frost Report&quot;, whose other members included Frank Muir, Barry Cryer, Marty Feldman, Ronnie Barker, Ronnie Corbett, Dick Vosburgh and future Monty Python members Graham Chapman, John Cleese and Eric Idle.

Although the members of Monty Python had already encountered each other over the years, &quot;The Frost Report&quot; was the first time all the British members of Monty Python (its sixth member, Terry Gilliam, was at that time an American citizen) worked together. During the run of &quot;The Frost Report&quot; the Palin/Jones team contributed material to two shows starring John Bird: &quot;The Late Show&quot; and &quot;A Series of Birds&quot;. For &quot;A Series of Birds&quot; the Palin/Jones team had their first experience of writing narrative instead of the short sketches they were accustomed to conceiving.

Following &quot;The Frost Report&quot; the Palin/Jones team worked both as actors and writers on the show &quot;Twice a Fortnight&quot; with Graeme Garden, Bill Oddie and Jonathan Lynn, and the successful children&#x27;s comedy show &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot; with Idle and David Jason. The show also featured musical numbers by the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, including future Monty Python musical collaborator Neil Innes. The animations for &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot; were made by Terry Gilliam. Eager to work with Palin sans Jones, Cleese later asked him to perform in &quot;How to Irritate People&quot; together with Chapman and Tim Brooke-Taylor. The Palin/Jones team were reunited for &quot;The Complete and Utter History of Britain&quot;.

===&quot;Monty Python&quot;===

On the strength of their work on &quot;The Frost Report&quot; and other programmes, Cleese and Chapman had been offered a show by the BBC, but Cleese was reluctant to do a two-man show for various reasons, among them Chapman&#x27;s reputedly difficult personality. During this period Cleese contacted Palin about doing the show that ultimately became &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;. At the same time the success of &quot;Do Not Adjust Your Set&quot; had led Palin, Jones, Idle and Gilliam to be offered their own series and, while it was still in production, Palin agreed to Cleese&#x27;s proposal and brought along Idle, Jones and Gilliam. Thus the formation of the Monty Python troupe has been referred to as a result of Cleese&#x27;s desire to work with Palin and the chance circumstances that brought the other four members into the fold.

Palin played various roles in &quot;Monty Python&quot;, which ranged from manic enthusiasm (such as the lumberjack of &quot;The Lumberjack Song&quot;, or Herbert Anchovy, host of the game show &quot;Blackmail&quot;) to unflappable calmness (such as the dead parrot seller or cheese shop proprietor). As a straight man he was often a foil to the rising ire of characters portrayed by Cleese. He also played timid, socially inept characters such as Arthur Putey, the man who sits quietly as a marriage counsellor (Eric Idle) makes love to his wife (Carol Cleveland), and Mr Anchovy, a chartered accountant who wants to become a lion tamer. He appeared as the &quot;It&#x27;s&quot; man (a Robinson Crusoe-type castaway with torn clothes and a long, unkempt beard) at the beginning of most episodes. He also frequently played a Gumby, a character Palin said &quot;had these moronic views that were expressed with extraordinary force&quot;.

Palin frequently co-wrote sketches with Terry Jones, including the &quot;Spanish Inquisition sketch&quot;, which featured the catchphrase &quot;Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!&quot;. He also composed songs with Jones including &quot;The Lumberjack Song&quot;, &quot;Every Sperm Is Sacred&quot; and &quot;Spam&quot;. His solo musical compositions included &quot;Decomposing Composers&quot; and &quot;Finland&quot;.

===1974–1996: &quot;Ripping Yarns&quot; and film roles ===

In 1971, he co-wrote, with Hugh Leonard and Terence Feely, the film &quot;Percy&quot;, which depicts a penis transplant.

After the &quot;Monty Python&quot; television series ended in 1974, the Palin/Jones team worked on &quot;Ripping Yarns&quot;, an intermittent television comedy series broadcast over three years from 1976. They had earlier collaborated on the play &quot;Secrets&quot; from the BBC series &quot;Black and Blue&quot; in 1973. He played the lead role of the peasant Dennis in Terry Gilliam&#x27;s 1977 film &quot;Jabberwocky&quot;. (He had earlier played the cameo role of &quot;Dennis the Peasant&quot; in &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot;, also directed by Gilliam.) Palin also appeared in &quot;All You Need Is Cash&quot; (1978) as Eric Manchester (based on Derek Taylor), the press agent for the Rutles. In 1980, Palin co-wrote &quot;Time Bandits&quot; with Terry Gilliam. He also acted in the film.

In 1982, Palin wrote and starred in &quot;The Missionary&quot;, co-starring Maggie Smith. In it, he plays the Reverend Charles Fortescue, who is recalled from Africa to aid prostitutes. He co-starred with Maggie Smith again in the 1984 comedy film &quot;A Private Function&quot;. In 1984, he reunited with Terry Gilliam to appear in &quot;Brazil&quot;. He appeared in the comedy film &quot;A Fish Called Wanda&quot;, which co-starred and was co-written by John Cleese, for which he won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role. Cleese reunited the main cast almost a decade later to make &quot;Fierce Creatures&quot;. After filming for &quot;Fierce Creatures&quot; finished, Palin went on a travel journey for a BBC documentary and, returning a year later, found that the end of &quot;Fierce Creatures&quot; had failed at test screenings and had to be reshot.

=== 1996–present ===
After &quot;Fierce Creatures&quot; and a small part in &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot;, a film directed by and starring Terry Jones, it was twenty years until Palin&#x27;s next film role, as Soviet politician Vyacheslav Molotov in the 2017 satirical black comedy &quot;The Death of Stalin&quot;. Palin also appeared with John Cleese in his documentary &quot;The Human Face&quot;. Palin was cast in a supporting role in the Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan romantic comedy &quot;You&#x27;ve Got Mail&quot;, but his role was eventually cut entirely.

Palin has also appeared in serious drama. In 1991 he appeared in the film &quot;American Friends&quot;, which he wrote based upon a real event in the life of his great-grandfather, a fellow at St John&#x27;s College, Oxford. In that same year he also played the part of a headmaster in Alan Bleasdale&#x27;s Channel 4 drama series &quot;GBH&quot;. In 1994, Palin narrated the English language audiobook version of &quot;Esio Trot&quot; by children&#x27;s author Roald Dahl.

In 1997, Palin had a small cameo role in the Australian soap opera &quot;Home and Away&quot;. He played an English surfer with a fear of sharks, who interrupts a conversation between two main characters to ask whether there were any sharks in the sea. This was filmed while he was in Australia for the &quot;Full Circle&quot; series, with a segment about the filming of the role featuring in the series. In November 2005, he appeared in the &quot;John Peel&#x27;s Record Box&quot; documentary.
In 2013, Palin appeared in a First World War drama titled &quot;The Wipers Times&quot; written by Ian Hislop and Nick Newman. At the Cannes Film Festival in 2016, it was announced that Palin was set to star alongside Adam Driver in Terry Gilliam&#x27;s &quot;The Man Who Killed Don Quixote&quot;. Palin, however, dropped out of the film after it ran into a financial problem.

While speaking at the Edinburgh International Film Festival, Palin announced that he was presenting the two-part documentary &quot;Michael Palin in North Korea&quot; to be broadcast on the British television network Channel 5. The documentary was broadcast in September 2018, in two one-hour segments on Channel 5 in the UK and in a single two-hour programme on National Geographic in the United States. It was broadcast again by Channel 5, in a single two-hour programme in December 2018.

In July 2019, Palin performed a one-man stage show at the Torch Theatre, Milford Haven, Wales, about the loss of HMS &quot;Erebus&quot; during the third Franklin expedition, which is recounted in his book &quot;Erebus: The Story of a Ship&quot;.

==Television documentaries==
===Travel===
Palin&#x27;s first travel documentary was episode 4 of the 1980 BBC Television series &quot;Great Railway Journeys of the World&quot;, entitled &quot;Confessions of a Trainspotter&quot;. Throughout the hour-long show, Palin humorously reminisces about his childhood hobby of train spotting while he travels throughout the UK by train from London to the Kyle of Lochalsh, via Manchester, York, Newcastle upon Tyne, Edinburgh and Inverness. He rides vintage railway lines and trains including the &quot;Flying Scotsman&quot;. At the Kyle of Lochalsh, Palin bought the station&#x27;s long metal platform sign and is seen lugging it back to London with him.

In 1994, Palin travelled through Ireland for the same series, entitled &quot;Derry to Kerry&quot;. In a quest for family roots, he attempted to trace his great-grandmother – Brita Gallagher – who had set sail from Ireland 150 years earlier during the Great Famine (1845–1849), bound for a new life in Burlington, New Jersey. The series is a trip along the Palin family line.

Between 1989 and 2012, Palin appeared as a presenter in a series of travel programmes made for the BBC. It was after the veteran TV globetrotter Alan Whicker and journalist Miles Kington turned down presenting the first of these, &quot;Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin&quot;, that gave Palin the opportunity to present his first and subsequent travel shows. In 2018, he was hired by ITN Productions to present travel documentaries commissioned by Channel 5, with journeys to North Korea and Iraq completed by 2022. 

* &quot;Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin&quot; (travel 1988; programme release 1989): travelling as closely as possible the path described in the famous Jules Verne story without using aircraft.
* &quot;Pole to Pole with Michael Palin&quot; (travel 1991; programme release 1992): travelling from the North Pole to the South Pole, following as closely as possible the 30-degree line of longitude, over as much land as possible, i.e., through Europe and Africa.
* &quot;Full Circle with Michael Palin&quot; (travel 1995/96; programme release 1997): in which he circumnavigated the lands around the Pacific Ocean anti-clockwise; a journey of almost starting on Little Diomede Island in the Bering Strait and taking him through Asia, Oceania and the Americas.
* &quot;Michael Palin&#x27;s Hemingway Adventure&quot; (1999): retracing the footsteps of Ernest Hemingway through the United States, Europe, Africa and the Caribbean.
* &quot;Sahara with Michael Palin&quot; (travel 2001/02; programme release 2002): in which he trekked around and through the world&#x27;s largest desert.
* &quot;Himalaya with Michael Palin&quot; (travel 2003/04; programme release 2004): in which he travels through the Himalaya region.
* &quot;Michael Palin&#x27;s New Europe&quot; (travel 2006/07; programme release 2007): in which he travels through Central and Eastern Europe.
* &quot;Brazil with Michael Palin&quot; (2012) in which he travels through Brazil.
* &quot;Michael Palin in North Korea&quot; on Channel 5 (2018, this ITN production was released in the US as &quot;North Korea from the Inside with Michael Palin&quot;) in which he visits North Korea at the time of the April 2018 inter-Korean summit.
* &quot;Michael Palin: Into Iraq&quot; on Channel 5 (2022).
* &quot;Michael Palin in Nigeria&quot; on Channel 5 (2024).

Following each trip, Palin wrote a book about his travels, providing information and insights not included in the TV programme. Each book is illustrated with photographs by Basil Pao, the stills photographer who was on the team. (Exception: the first book, &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot;, contains some pictures by Pao but most are by other photographers.)

All seven of these books were also made available as audiobooks, and all of them are read by Palin himself. &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot; and &quot;Hemingway Adventure&quot; are unabridged, while the other four books were made in both abridged and unabridged versions.

For four of the trips, a photography book was made by Pao, each with an introduction written by Palin. These are large coffee-table-style books with pictures printed on glossy paper. The majority of the pictures are of various people encountered on the trip, as informal portraits or showing them engaged in some interesting activity. Some of the landscape photos are displayed as two-page spreads.

Palin&#x27;s travel programmes are responsible for a phenomenon called the &quot;Palin effect&quot;, referring to areas of the world that he has visited suddenly become popular tourist attractions – for example, the significant increase in the number of tourists interested in Peru after Palin visited Machu Picchu. In a 2006 survey of &quot;15 of the world&#x27;s top travel writers&quot; by &quot;The Observer&quot;, Palin named Peru&#x27;s Pongo de Mainique (canyon below the Machu Picchu) his &quot;favourite place in the world&quot;.

Palin notes in his book of &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot; that the final leg of his journey could originally have taken him and his crew on one of the trains involved in the Clapham Junction rail crash, but they arrived ahead of schedule and caught an earlier train.

===Art and history===
In recent years, Palin has written and presented occasional documentary programmes about artists who interest him. The first, on Scottish painter Anne Redpath, was &quot;Palin on Redpath&quot; in 1997. In &quot;The Bright Side of Life&quot; (2000), Palin continued on a Scottish theme, looking at the work of the Scottish Colourists. Two further programmes followed on European painters; &quot;Michael Palin and the Ladies Who Loved Matisse&quot; (2004) and &quot;Michael Palin and the Mystery of Hammershøi&quot; (2005), about the French artist Henri Matisse and Danish artist Vilhelm Hammershøi respectively. The DVD &quot;Michael Palin on Art&quot; contains all these documentaries except for the Matisse programme. In 2013, he travelled to the United States and filmed in both Maine and Pennsylvania, to write and present &quot;Michael Palin in Wyeth World&quot;, which is about the American painter Andrew Wyeth and the people who inspired his paintings.

In November 2008, Palin presented a First World War documentary about Armistice Day, 11 November 1918, when thousands of soldiers lost their lives in battle after the war had officially ended. Palin filmed on the battlefields of Northern France and Belgium for the programme, called the &quot;Last Day of World War One&quot;, produced for the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Timewatch&quot; series.

==Personal life==
In 1966, Palin married Helen Gibbins (born October 1942), whom he first met in 1959 on holiday in Southwold in Suffolk. This meeting was later fictionalised in Palin&#x27;s teleplay for the 1987 BBC television drama &quot;East of Ipswich&quot;. Their marriage lasted for 57 years, until Helen&#x27;s death from kidney failure on 2 May 2023. 

Palin has three adult children: Thomas (born 1969), William (born 1970), and Rachel (born 1975); he also has four grandchildren. Rachel is a BBC TV director, whose work includes &quot;&quot;. William is Director of Conservation at the Old Royal Naval College, Greenwich, London, and oversaw the 2018–19 restoration of the Painted Hall. A photograph of William as a baby briefly appeared in &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot; as &quot;Sir Not-appearing-in-this-film&quot;. The theatre designer Jeremy Herbert is a nephew. 

Palin describes his religious belief as &quot;agnostic with doubts&quot;. He has lived in Gospel Oak, London, since the 1960s.
Palin is a supporter of Sheffield Wednesday, holding aloft a trophy and shouting the club&#x27;s name while in Venice shooting &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot;. He has also followed the fortunes of Sheffield United and Stenhousemuir F.C.

On turning 80, Palin said, 

==Activism and charity ==
Palin assisted Campaign for Better Transport and others with campaigns on sustainable transport, particularly those relating to urban areas, and has been president of the campaign since 1986.

On 2 January 2011, he became the first person to sign the UK-based Campaign for Better Transport&#x27;s Fair Fares Now campaign. In July 2015, he signed an open letter and gave an interview to support &quot;a strong BBC at the centre of British life&quot; at a time when the government was reviewing the corporation&#x27;s size and activities.

In July 2010, Palin sent a message of support for the Dongria Kondh tribe of India, who were resisting mining on their land by the company Vedanta Resources. Palin said, &quot;I&#x27;ve been to the Nyamgiri Hills in Orissa and seen the forces of money and power that Vedanta Resources have arrayed against a people who have occupied their land for thousands of years, who husband the forest sustainably and make no great demands on the state or the government. The tribe I visited simply want to carry on living in the villages that they and their ancestors have always lived in.&quot;

Palin is a longstanding Vice President of the National Churches Trust.

Palin is a co-founder of The Michael Palin Centre for Stammering. When it opened in 1993 Palin became Vice President of Action for Stammering Children. Palin&#x27;s awareness and understanding of stammering stemmed from his father’s experience as a person who stammers. Over the years Palin has provided support and connection to young people and families of people who stammer.

==Filmography==
=== Film ===
===Television===
===Radio===
*&quot;The Weekend&quot; (2017, adapted from his 1994 stage play)
*&quot;John Finnemore&#x27;s Double Acts&quot; – &quot;The Wroxton Box&quot; (Series 2, Episode 6; 2017)
*Torchwood: Tropical Beach Sounds and Other Relaxing Seascapes #4 (April 2020)

==Bibliography==
===Travel books===
* &quot;Around the World in 80 Days&quot; (1989) 
* &quot;Pole to Pole&quot; (1992) 
* &quot;Full Circle&quot; (1997) 
* &quot;Michael Palin&#x27;s Hemingway Adventure&quot; (1999) 
* &quot;Sahara&quot; (2002) 
* &quot;Himalaya&quot; (2004) 
* &quot;New Europe&quot; (2007) 
* &quot;Brazil&quot; (2012) 
* &quot;North Korea Journal&quot; (2019) 
* &quot;Into Iraq&quot; (2022) 
* &quot;Across Nigeria&quot; (2025) 

All but the latest two of his travel books can be read with no charge, complete and unabridged, on Palin&#x27;s Travels website .

===Autobiography (contributor)===
* &quot;The Pythons&quot; Autobiography by The Pythons (2003) 

===Diaries===
* &quot;Diaries 1969–1979: The Python Years&quot;. 2006. 
* &quot;Diaries 1980–1988: Halfway to Hollywood – The Film Years&quot;. London, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. 2009. 
* &quot;Diaries 1988–1998: Travelling to Work&quot;. London, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. 2014. 
* &quot;Diaries 1999–2009: There and Back&quot;. London, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. 2024. 

===Fiction===
*&quot;Bert Fegg&#x27;s Nasty Book for Boys and Girls&quot; with Terry Jones, illus Martin Honeysett, Frank Bellamy et al. (1974) 
*&quot;Dr Fegg&#x27;s Encyclopaedia of All World Knowledge&quot; (1984) (expanded reprint of the above, with Terry Jones and Martin Honeysett) 
*&quot;Hemingway&#x27;s Chair&quot; (1995) 
*&quot;The Truth&quot; (2012) 

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;Erebus: The Story of a Ship&quot; (2018, UK) 
*&quot;Erebus: One Ship, Two Epic Voyages, and the Greatest Naval Mystery of All Time&quot; (2018, US/Canada) 
*&quot;Great-Uncle Harry: A Tale of War and Empire&quot; (2023) 

===Children&#x27;s books===
*&quot;Small Harry and the Toothache Pills&quot; (1982) 
*&quot;Limerics&quot; or &quot;The Limerick Book&quot; (1985) 
*&quot;Cyril and the House of Commons&quot; (1986) 
*&quot;Cyril and the Dinner Party&quot; (1986) 
*&quot;The Mirrorstone&quot; with Alan Lee and Richard Seymour (1986) 

===Plays===
*&quot;The Weekend&quot; (1994) 

==Awards, honours and legacy==

Palin was instrumental in setting up the Michael Palin Centre for Stammering Children in 1993. Also in 1993, each member of Monty Python had an asteroid named after them. Palin&#x27;s is Asteroid 9621 Michaelpalin. In 2003, inside the Globe a commemorative stone was placed – Palin has his own stone, to mark donors to the theatre, but it is misspelt as &quot;Michael Pallin&quot;. The story goes that John Cleese paid for the stone, and mischievously insisted on misspelling his name.

In honour of his achievements as a traveller, especially rail travel, Palin has two British trains named after him. In 2002, Virgin Trains&#x27; new £5 million high-speed Super Voyager train number 221130 was named &quot;Michael Palin&quot; it carries his name externally and a plaque is located adjacent to the onboard shop with information on Palin and his many journeys. Also, National Express East Anglia named a British Rail Class 153 (unit number 153335) after him. (He is a model railway enthusiast.)
In 2008, he received the James Joyce Award of the Literary and Historical Society in Dublin. In recognition of his services to the promotion of geography, Palin was awarded the Livingstone Medal of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society in March 2009, along with a Fellowship of this Society (FRGS).

In June 2013, he was similarly honoured in Canada with a gold medal for achievements in geography by the Royal Canadian Geographical Society. In June 2009, Palin was elected for a three-year term as President of the Royal Geographical Society. Because of his self-described &quot;amenable, conciliatory character&quot; Michael Palin has been referred to as unofficially &quot;Britain&#x27;s Nicest Man&quot;. In a 2018 poll for Yorkshire Day he was named the greatest Yorkshireman ever, ahead of Sean Bean and Patrick Stewart.

In September 2013, Moorlands School, Leeds, named one of their school houses &quot;Palin&quot; after him. The University of St Andrews awarded Palin an honorary Doctor of Science degree during their June 2017 graduation ceremonies, with the degree recognising his contribution to the public&#x27;s understanding of contemporary geography. He joins his fellow Pythons John Cleese and Terry Jones in receiving an honorary degree from the Fife institution. In October 2018, the Royal Canadian Geographical Society awarded Palin the first Louie Kamookak Medal for advances in geography, for his book on the history of the polar exploration vessel HMS &quot;Erebus&quot;.

Palin was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2000 New Year Honours for &quot;services to television drama and travel documentaries&quot;. He then was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG) in the 2019 New Year Honours for &quot;services to travel, culture and geography&quot;. Palin is the only member of the Monty Python team to receive a knighthood.

In 2017, the British Library acquired Palin&#x27;s archive consisting of project files relating to his work, notebooks, and personal diaries. The papers in the archive (Add MS 89284) relate to his work with &quot;Monty Python&quot;, his later TV work, and his children&#x27;s and humorous books.

BAFTA Awards
* 1984 Nominated – BAFTA Award for &quot;Best Original Song&quot; (the award was discontinued after the 1985 ceremonies) for Every Sperm is Sacred from &quot;The Meaning of Life&quot; (shared with André Jacquemin, Dave Howman and Terry Jones)
* 1989 Won – BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for &quot;A Fish Called Wanda&quot; (as Ken Pile)
* 1992 Nominated – British Academy Television Award for Best Actor for &quot;GBH&quot;
* 2005 Won – BAFTA Special Award
* 2009 Won – BAFTA Special Award as part of the Monty Python team for outstanding contribution to film and television
* 2013 Won – BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award

Other awards
* 2011 Awarded the Aardman Slapstick Visual Comedy Legend award for &quot;significant contributions made to the world of comedy&quot;.
* 2020 National Television Awards Special Recognition Award

* 2024 Association for International Broadcasting Lifetime Achievement Award 

==References==
==Further reading==
* Jones, Mark (2010). &quot;The Famous Charisma Discography&quot; The Record Press/Bristol Folk Publications  – discography of Monty Python&#x27;s record label, includes foreword by Michael Palin
* Novick, Jeremy (2001). &quot;Life of Michael: an Illustrated Biography of Michael Palin&quot; Headline Publishing (a division of Hodder Headline) 
* Wilmut, Roger (1980). &quot;From Fringe to Flying Circus: Celebrating a Unique Generation of Comedy 1960–1980&quot; Eyre Methuen Ltd 

==External links==
* 
* Michael Palin  – BBC Guide to Comedy
* Michael Palin  – Comedy Zone
* 
* Michael Palin Centre for Stammering Children
* Michael Palin interview on BBC Radio 4 &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot;, 23 November 1979
* Michael Palin | Culture | The Guardian</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="0" end="24" title="Michael Palin" label="Sir Michael Edward Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="133" end="145" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510489" start="146" end="158" title="comedy group" label="comedy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="176" end="192" title="BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="209" end="217" title="knighthood" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="227" end="239" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q60219043" start="243" end="247" title="2019 New Year Honours" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738596" start="320" end="328" title="Ken Dodd" label="Ken Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319366" start="347" end="363" title="The Frost Report" label="The Frost Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q613171" start="381" end="403" title="Do Not Adjust Your Set" label="Do Not Adjust Your Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="427" end="460" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="489" end="500" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="502" end="511" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="513" end="526" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="528" end="539" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962" start="545" end="559" title="Graham Chapman" label="Graham Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821828" start="630" end="645" title="Argument Clinic" label="Argument Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196138" start="659" end="677" title="Dead Parrot sketch" label="Dead Parrot sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q889388" start="691" end="710" title="The Lumberjack Song" label="The Lumberjack Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216336" start="724" end="747" title="The Spanish Inquisition (Monty Python)" label="The Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470548" start="761" end="779" title="Bicycle Repair Man" label="Bicycle Repair Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734233" start="797" end="820" title="The Fish-Slapping Dance" label="The Fish-Slapping Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271288" start="898" end="911" title="Ripping Yarns" label="Ripping Yarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043" start="956" end="987" title="Monty Python and the Holy Grail" label="Monty Python and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953" start="1008" end="1021" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Life of Brian" label="Life of Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24980" start="1045" end="1064" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s The Meaning of Life" label="The Meaning of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q466186" start="1108" end="1127" title="A Fish Called Wanda" label="A Fish Called Wanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q548389" start="1157" end="1204" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676842" start="1240" end="1251" title="Jabberwocky (film)" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426318" start="1272" end="1284" title="Time Bandits" label="Time Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504975" start="1305" end="1319" title="The Missionary" label="The Missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q769337" start="1340" end="1358" title="A Private Function" label="A Private Function"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="1379" end="1385" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q496019" start="1406" end="1422" title="Fierce Creatures" label="Fierce Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905490" start="1447" end="1466" title="The Death of Stalin" label="The Death of Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670855" start="1529" end="1549" title="travel documentaries" label="travel documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072723" start="1613" end="1626" title="travel writer" label="travel writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1683" end="1686" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="1748" end="1753" title="North Pole" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="1758" end="1768" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="1775" end="1781" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="1787" end="1796" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1818" end="1824" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1846" end="1857" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="1930" end="1939" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="2066" end="2092" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293369" start="2144" end="2151" title="Ranmoor" label="Ranmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="2153" end="2162" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280221" start="2295" end="2305" title="Shrewsbury School" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2310" end="2319" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="2432" end="2435" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797908" start="2441" end="2468" title="High Sheriff of Oxfordshire" label="High Sheriff of Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916401" start="2501" end="2509" title="Birkdale School" label="Birkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280221" start="2514" end="2531" title="Shrewsbury School" label="Shrewsbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q952497" start="2687" end="2698" title="Letterkenny" label="Letterkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="2700" end="2714" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="2747" end="2759" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="2941" end="2958" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q261197" start="3029" end="3038" title="monologue" label="monologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="3050" end="3061" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q899030" start="3183" end="3208" title="Brasenose College, Oxford" label="Brasenose College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345485" start="3230" end="3244" title="Robert Hewison" label="Robert Hewison"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="3338" end="3349" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755808" start="3628" end="3644" title="the Oxford Revue" label="the Oxford Revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696983" start="3852" end="3881" title="Television Wales and the West" label="Television Wales and the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4187" end="4190" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319366" start="4477" end="4493" title="The Frost Report" label="The Frost Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082743" start="4530" end="4540" title="Frank Muir" label="Frank Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q809024" start="4542" end="4553" title="Barry Cryer" label="Barry Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="4555" end="4568" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q963893" start="4570" end="4583" title="Ronnie Barker" label="Ronnie Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q756377" start="4585" end="4599" title="Ronnie Corbett" label="Ronnie Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706975" start="4601" end="4614" title="Dick Vosburgh" label="Dick Vosburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962" start="4647" end="4661" title="Graham Chapman" label="Graham Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="4663" end="4674" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="4679" end="4688" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="4886" end="4899" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221952" start="5067" end="5076" title="John Bird (actor)" label="John Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001039" start="5421" end="5438" title="Twice a Fortnight" label="Twice a Fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q612607" start="5450" end="5463" title="Graeme Garden" label="Graeme Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="5465" end="5475" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q524711" start="5480" end="5493" title="Jonathan Lynn" label="Jonathan Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q613171" start="5548" end="5570" title="Do Not Adjust Your Set" label="Do Not Adjust Your Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q964329" start="5591" end="5602" title="David Jason" label="David Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q205356" start="5650" end="5672" title="Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band" label="Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q918538" start="5725" end="5735" title="Neil Innes" label="Neil Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q203900" start="5899" end="5921" title="How to Irritate People" label="How to Irritate People"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="5954" end="5971" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727211" start="6018" end="6059" title="The Complete and Utter History of Britain" label="The Complete and Utter History of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="6272" end="6284" title="Double act" label="two-man show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124183" start="7063" end="7073" title="lumberjack" label="lumberjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q889388" start="7083" end="7102" title="The Lumberjack Song" label="The Lumberjack Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196138" start="7212" end="7223" title="Dead Parrot sketch" label="dead parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362592" start="7234" end="7245" title="Cheese Shop sketch" label="cheese shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="7264" end="7276" title="Double act" label="straight man"/>
<link wikidata="Q210741" start="7471" end="7480" title="Eric Idle" label="Eric Idle"/>
<link wikidata="Q238012" start="7506" end="7521" title="Carol Cleveland" label="Carol Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636184" start="7616" end="7641" title="&amp;quot;It&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot; man" label="&amp;quot;It&amp;#x27;s&amp;quot; man"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="7645" end="7660" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="Robinson Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7783" end="7788" title="List of recurring Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus characters#Gumbys" label="Gumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="7936" end="7947" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216336" start="7969" end="7995" title="The Spanish Inquisition (Monty Python)" label="Spanish Inquisition sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708515" start="8022" end="8033" title="catchphrase" label="catchphrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="8059" end="8078" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q960627" start="8170" end="8191" title="Every Sperm Is Sacred" label="Every Sperm Is Sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777591" start="8208" end="8212" title="Spam (Monty Python)" label="Spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704550" start="8265" end="8286" title="Decomposing Composers" label="Decomposing Composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836846" start="8303" end="8310" title="Finland (comedy song)" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634447" start="8406" end="8418" title="Hugh Leonard" label="Hugh Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701901" start="8423" end="8436" title="Terence Feely" label="Terence Feely"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657" start="8453" end="8458" title="Percy (1971 film)" label="Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357664" start="8482" end="8498" title="penis transplant" label="penis transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271288" start="8606" end="8619" title="Ripping Yarns" label="Ripping Yarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444472" start="8754" end="8761" title="Secrets (Black and Blue)" label="Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951991" start="8794" end="8808" title="Black and Blue (TV series)" label="Black and Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676842" start="8910" end="8921" title="Jabberwocky (film)" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754214" start="9105" end="9125" title="All You Need Is Cash" label="All You Need Is Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711139" start="9168" end="9180" title="Derek Taylor" label="Derek Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187709" start="9203" end="9213" title="the Rutles" label="the Rutles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426318" start="9245" end="9257" title="Time Bandits" label="Time Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504975" start="9354" end="9368" title="The Missionary" label="The Missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172653" start="9388" end="9400" title="Maggie Smith" label="Maggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q769337" start="9566" end="9584" title="A Private Function" label="A Private Function"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="9651" end="9657" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q466186" start="9702" end="9721" title="A Fish Called Wanda" label="A Fish Called Wanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q548389" start="9802" end="9849" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q496019" start="9917" end="9933" title="Fierce Creatures" label="Fierce Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424381" start="10266" end="10289" title="The Wind in the Willows (1996 film)" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q132899" start="10418" end="10436" title="Vyacheslav Molotov" label="Vyacheslav Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905490" start="10478" end="10497" title="The Death of Stalin" label="The Death of Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740852" start="10567" end="10581" title="The Human Face" label="The Human Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="10632" end="10641" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="10646" end="10654" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q284229" start="10677" end="10697" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q468572" start="10828" end="10844" title="American Friends" label="American Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q609646" start="10941" end="10971" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543145" start="11034" end="11048" title="Alan Bleasdale" label="Alan Bleasdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="11056" end="11065" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093037" start="11085" end="11088" title="G.B.H. (TV drama)" label="GBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="11141" end="11150" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358233" start="11168" end="11177" title="Esio Trot" label="Esio Trot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="11210" end="11220" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324189" start="11296" end="11309" title="Home and Away" label="Home and Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="11338" end="11344" title="surfer" label="surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="11360" end="11365" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252415" start="11670" end="11697" title="John Peel&amp;#x27;s Record Box" label="John Peel&amp;#x27;s Record Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11746" end="11761" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569425" start="11781" end="11797" title="The Wipers Times" label="The Wipers Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655550" start="11815" end="11825" title="Ian Hislop" label="Ian Hislop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027600" start="11830" end="11841" title="Nick Newman" label="Nick Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="11934" end="11945" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="11949" end="11962" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095178" start="11976" end="12006" title="The Man Who Killed Don Quixote" label="The Man Who Killed Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284745" start="12116" end="12153" title="Edinburgh International Film Festival" label="Edinburgh International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="12310" end="12319" title="Channel 5 (UK)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="12456" end="12475" title="National Geographic (U.S. TV channel)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825552" start="12643" end="12671" title="Torch Theatre, Milford Haven" label="Torch Theatre, Milford Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q512615" start="12702" end="12720" title="HMS Erebus (1826)" label="&amp;quot;Erebus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305" start="12732" end="12757" title="Franklin&amp;#x27;s lost expedition" label="third Franklin expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="12938" end="12952" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599830" start="12966" end="13001" title="Great Railway Journeys of the World" label="Great Railway Journeys of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323006" start="13149" end="13163" title="train spotting" label="train spotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q939913" start="13227" end="13243" title="Kyle of Lochalsh" label="Kyle of Lochalsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="13249" end="13259" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="13261" end="13265" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="13267" end="13286" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="13302" end="13311" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175270" start="13375" end="13390" title="LNER Class A3 4472 Flying Scotsman" label="Flying Scotsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="13780" end="13804" title="Great Irish Famine" label="Great Famine (1845–1849)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550922" start="13830" end="13840" title="Burlington, New Jersey" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708035" start="14050" end="14062" title="Alan Whicker" label="Alan Whicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851441" start="14078" end="14091" title="Miles Kington" label="Miles Kington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833346" start="14141" end="14187" title="Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin" label="Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833346" start="14444" end="14490" title="Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin" label="Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="14603" end="14614" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209262" start="14653" end="14684" title="Pole to Pole with Michael Palin" label="Pole to Pole with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="14750" end="14760" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="14768" end="14778" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277379" start="14817" end="14844" title="30th meridian east" label="30-degree line of longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873058" start="14918" end="14948" title="Full Circle with Michael Palin" label="Full Circle with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224996" start="15108" end="15122" title="Little Diomede" label="Little Diomede"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="15137" end="15150" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833343" start="15214" end="15254" title="Michael Palin&amp;#x27;s Hemingway Adventure" label="Michael Palin&amp;#x27;s Hemingway Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="15296" end="15312" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="15363" end="15372" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399511" start="15382" end="15407" title="Sahara with Michael Palin" label="Sahara with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="15512" end="15526" title="Sahara" label="largest desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764973" start="15536" end="15563" title="Himalaya with Michael Palin" label="Himalaya with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="15644" end="15659" title="Himalaya" label="Himalaya region"/>
<link wikidata="Q593403" start="15669" end="15700" title="Michael Palin&amp;#x27;s New Europe" label="Michael Palin&amp;#x27;s New Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="15777" end="15784" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954371" start="15813" end="15838" title="Brazil with Michael Palin" label="Brazil with Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="15880" end="15886" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356030" start="15896" end="15924" title="Michael Palin in North Korea" label="Michael Palin in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="15934" end="15943" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="16076" end="16087" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50396447" start="16107" end="16137" title="April 2018 inter-Korean summit" label="April 2018 inter-Korean summit"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16147" end="16171" title="Michael Palin: Into Iraq" label="Michael Palin: Into Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="16181" end="16190" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q125727726" start="16207" end="16231" title="Michael Palin in Nigeria" label="Michael Palin in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="16241" end="16250" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867238" start="16433" end="16442" title="Basil Pao" label="Basil Pao"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="17584" end="17588" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q676203" start="17609" end="17621" title="Machu Picchu" label="Machu Picchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="17706" end="17718" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794480" start="17750" end="17767" title="Pongo de Mainique" label="Pongo de Mainique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125870" start="18030" end="18057" title="Clapham Junction rail crash" label="Clapham Junction rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="18275" end="18283" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768742" start="18292" end="18304" title="Anne Redpath" label="Anne Redpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q657377" start="18459" end="18478" title="Scottish Colourists" label="Scottish Colourists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="18692" end="18705" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="18710" end="18716" title="Danes" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q380706" start="18724" end="18742" title="Vilhelm Hammershøi" label="Vilhelm Hammershøi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="18846" end="18853" title="Henri Matisse" label="Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19143" end="19158" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="19177" end="19190" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="19345" end="19351" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="19356" end="19363" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494285" start="19400" end="19425" title="Last Day of World War One" label="Last Day of World War One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854554" start="19608" end="19617" title="Southwold" label="Southwold"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19705" end="19708" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329768" start="19732" end="19747" title="East of Ipswich" label="East of Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753590" start="20088" end="20111" title="Old Royal Naval College" label="Old Royal Naval College"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043" start="20249" end="20280" title="Monty Python and the Holy Grail" label="Monty Python and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181467" start="20355" end="20369" title="Jeremy Herbert" label="Jeremy Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="20431" end="20439" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q149587" start="20475" end="20485" title="Gospel Oak" label="Gospel Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="20536" end="20555" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="20623" end="20629" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833346" start="20645" end="20672" title="Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin" label="Around the World in 80 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="20717" end="20733" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140392" start="20738" end="20756" title="Stenhousemuir F.C." label="Stenhousemuir F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5027785" start="20828" end="20857" title="Campaign for Better Transport (UK)" label="Campaign for Better Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215963" start="21405" end="21418" title="Dongria Kondh" label="Dongria Kondh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21428" end="21433" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503753" start="21490" end="21507" title="Vedanta Resources" label="Vedanta Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="21567" end="21573" title="Odisha" label="Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971493" start="21984" end="22007" title="National Churches Trust" label="National Churches Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906004" start="22521" end="22554" title="John Finnemore&amp;#x27;s Double Acts" label="John Finnemore&amp;#x27;s Double Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713693" start="22620" end="22629" title="Torchwood (audio drama series)" label="Torchwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795644" start="22743" end="22770" title="Around the World in 80 Days (Michael Palin book)" label="Around the World in 80 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209263" start="22793" end="22805" title="Pole to Pole (book)" label="Pole to Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508012" start="22828" end="22839" title="Full Circle – Michael Palin" label="Full Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833343" start="22862" end="22902" title="Michael Palin&amp;#x27;s Hemingway Adventure" label="Michael Palin&amp;#x27;s Hemingway Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399479" start="22925" end="22931" title="Sahara (Michael Palin book)" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138427" start="22954" end="22962" title="Himalaya (book)" label="Himalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007515" start="22985" end="22995" title="New Europe (book)" label="New Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958621" start="23018" end="23024" title="Brazil (Palin book)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23402" end="23437" title="Diaries 1969–1979: The Python Years" label="Diaries 1969–1979: The Python Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895055" start="23774" end="23820" title="Bert Fegg&amp;#x27;s Nasty Book for Boys and Girls" label="Bert Fegg&amp;#x27;s Nasty Book for Boys and Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775704" start="23851" end="23867" title="Martin Honeysett" label="Martin Honeysett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627950" start="23869" end="23882" title="Frank Bellamy" label="Frank Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q512615" start="24143" end="24149" title="HMS Erebus (1826)" label="Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204698" start="24486" end="24494" title="Limerick (poetry)" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833345" start="24805" end="24849" title="Michael Palin Centre for Stammering Children" label="Michael Palin Centre for Stammering Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="24908" end="24916" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q429639" start="24960" end="24977" title="9621 Michaelpalin" label="9621 Michaelpalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7725501" start="24999" end="25004" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe" label="Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q606882" start="25422" end="25435" title="British Rail Class 221" label="Super Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967136" start="25631" end="25659" title="National Express East Anglia" label="National Express East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303693" start="25668" end="25690" title="British Rail Class 153" label="British Rail Class 153"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="25732" end="25745" title="model railway" label="model railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806623" start="25784" end="25801" title="James Joyce Award" label="James Joyce Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647647" start="25809" end="25840" title="Literary and Historical Society (University College Dublin)" label="Literary and Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650805" start="25936" end="25953" title="David Livingstone Centenary Medal" label="Livingstone Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193179" start="25961" end="25996" title="Royal Scottish Geographical Society" label="Royal Scottish Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="26025" end="26051" title="Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society" label="Fellowship of this Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098719" start="26166" end="26201" title="Royal Canadian Geographical Society" label="Royal Canadian Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="26277" end="26303" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055705" start="26489" end="26502" title="Yorkshire Day" label="Yorkshire Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q191104" start="26557" end="26566" title="Sean Bean" label="Sean Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="26571" end="26586" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="26699" end="26723" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="26741" end="26749" title="honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="26750" end="26767" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="26956" end="26967" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="26972" end="26983" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098719" start="27064" end="27099" title="Royal Canadian Geographical Society" label="Royal Canadian Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q512615" start="27232" end="27254" title="HMS Erebus (1826)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Erebus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27279" end="27323" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597696" start="27337" end="27358" title="2000 New Year Honours" label="2000 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="27454" end="27511" title="Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q60219043" start="27526" end="27547" title="2019 New Year Honours" label="2019 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="28012" end="28023" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q960627" start="28118" end="28139" title="Every Sperm is Sacred" label="Every Sperm is Sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q24980" start="28151" end="28170" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s The Meaning of Life" label="The Meaning of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="28223" end="28234" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q548389" start="28249" end="28296" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q466186" start="28307" end="28326" title="A Fish Called Wanda" label="A Fish Called Wanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925701" start="28366" end="28413" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actor" label="British Academy Television Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093037" start="28424" end="28427" title="G.B.H. (TV series)" label="GBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="28598" end="28628" title="BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award" label="BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="28662" end="28669" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089389" start="28670" end="28679" title="Slapstick Festival" label="Slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809459" start="28846" end="28888" title="Association for International Broadcasting" label="Association for International Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="29624" end="29643" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19622" wikidata="Q228736" url="?curid=19622" title="Materials science">
<text>Materials science is an interdisciplinary field of researching and discovering materials. Materials engineering is an engineering field of finding uses for materials in other fields and industries.

The intellectual origins of materials science stem from the Age of Enlightenment, when researchers began to use analytical thinking from chemistry, physics, and engineering to understand ancient, phenomenological observations in metallurgy and mineralogy. Materials science still incorporates elements of physics, chemistry, and engineering. As such, the field was long considered by academic institutions as a sub-field of these related fields. Beginning in the 1940s, materials science began to be more widely recognized as a specific and distinct field of science and engineering, and major technical universities around the world created dedicated schools for its study.

Materials scientists emphasize understanding how the history of a material (&quot;processing&quot;) influences its structure, and thus the material&#x27;s properties and performance. The understanding of processing -structure-properties relationships is called the materials paradigm. This paradigm is used to advance understanding in a variety of research areas, including nanotechnology, biomaterials, and metallurgy.

Materials science is also an important part of forensic engineering and failure analysis investigating materials, products, structures or components, which fail or do not function as intended, causing personal injury or damage to property. Such investigations are key to understanding, for example, the causes of various aviation accidents and incidents.

==History==
The material of choice of a given era is often a defining point. Phases such as Stone Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age, and Steel Age are historic, if arbitrary examples. Originally deriving from the manufacture of ceramics and its putative derivative metallurgy, materials science is one of the oldest forms of engineering and applied science. Modern materials science evolved directly from metallurgy, which itself evolved from the use of fire. A major breakthrough in the understanding of materials occurred in the late 19th century, when the American scientist Josiah Willard Gibbs demonstrated that the thermodynamic properties related to atomic structure in various phases are related to the physical properties of a material. Important elements of modern materials science were products of the Space Race; the understanding and engineering of the metallic alloys, and silica and carbon materials, used in building space vehicles enabling the exploration of space. Materials science has driven, and been driven by, the development of revolutionary technologies such as rubbers, plastics, semiconductors, and biomaterials.

Before the 1960s (and in some cases decades after), many eventual &quot;materials science&quot; departments were &quot;metallurgy&quot; or &quot;ceramics engineering&quot; departments, reflecting the 19th and early 20th-century emphasis on metals and ceramics. The growth of material science in the United States was catalyzed in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency, which funded a series of university-hosted laboratories in the early 1960s, &quot;to expand the national program of basic research and training in the materials sciences.&quot; In comparison with mechanical engineering, the nascent material science field focused on addressing materials from the macro-level and on the approach that materials are designed on the basis of knowledge of behavior at the microscopic level. Due to the expanded knowledge of the link between atomic and molecular processes as well as the overall properties of materials, the design of materials came to be based on specific desired properties. The materials science field has since broadened to include every class of materials, including ceramics, polymers, semiconductors, magnetic materials, biomaterials, and nanomaterials, generally classified into three distinct groups: ceramics, metals, and polymers. The prominent change in materials science during the recent decades is active usage of computer simulations to find new materials, predict properties and understand phenomena.

==Fundamentals==

A material is defined as a substance (most often a solid, but other condensed phases can be included) that is intended to be used for certain applications. There are a myriad of materials around us; they can be found in anything from new and advanced materials that are being developed include nanomaterials, biomaterials, and energy materials to name a few.

The basis of materials science is studying the interplay between the structure of materials, the processing methods to make that material, and the resulting material properties. The complex combination of these produce the performance of a material in a specific application. Many features across many length scales impact material performance, from the constituent chemical elements, its microstructure, and macroscopic features from processing. Together with the laws of thermodynamics and kinetics materials scientists aim to understand and improve materials.

===Structure===
Structure is one of the most important components of the field of materials science. The very definition of the field holds that it is concerned with the investigation of &quot;the relationships that exist between the structures and properties of materials&quot;. Materials science examines the structure of materials from the atomic scale, all the way up to the macro scale. Characterization is the way materials scientists examine the structure of a material. This involves methods such as diffraction with X-rays, electrons or neutrons, and various forms of spectroscopy and chemical analysis such as Raman spectroscopy, energy-dispersive spectroscopy, chromatography, thermal analysis, electron microscope analysis, etc.

Structure is studied in the following levels.

====Atomic structure====
Atomic structure deals with the atoms of the materials, and how they are arranged to give rise to molecules, crystals, etc. Much of the electrical, magnetic and chemical properties of materials arise from this level of structure. The length scales involved are in angstroms (Å). The chemical bonding and atomic arrangement (crystallography) are fundamental to studying the properties and behavior of any material.

=====Bonding=====

To obtain a full understanding of the material structure and how it relates to its properties, the materials scientist must study how the different atoms, ions and molecules are arranged and bonded to each other. This involves the study and use of quantum chemistry or quantum physics. Solid-state physics, solid-state chemistry and physical chemistry are also involved in the study of bonding and structure.

=====Crystallography=====
Crystallography is the science that examines the arrangement of atoms in crystalline solids. Crystallography is a useful tool for materials scientists. One of the fundamental concepts regarding the crystal structure of a material includes the unit cell, which is the smallest unit of a crystal lattice (space lattice) that repeats to make up the macroscopic crystal structure. Most common structural materials include parallelpiped and hexagonal lattice types. In single crystals, the effects of the crystalline arrangement of atoms is often easy to see macroscopically, because the natural shapes of crystals reflect the atomic structure. Further, physical properties are often controlled by crystalline defects. The understanding of crystal structures is an important prerequisite for understanding crystallographic defects. Examples of crystal defects consist of dislocations including edges, screws, vacancies, self inter-stitials, and more that are linear, planar, and three dimensional types of defects. New and advanced materials that are being developed include nanomaterials, biomaterials. Mostly, materials do not occur as a single crystal, but in polycrystalline form, as an aggregate of small crystals or grains with different orientations. Because of this, the powder diffraction method, which uses diffraction patterns of polycrystalline samples with a large number of crystals, plays an important role in structural determination. Most materials have a crystalline structure, but some important materials do not exhibit regular crystal structure. Polymers display varying degrees of crystallinity, and many are completely non-crystalline. Glass, some ceramics, and many natural materials are amorphous, not possessing any long-range order in their atomic arrangements. The study of polymers combines elements of chemical and statistical thermodynamics to give thermodynamic and mechanical descriptions of physical properties.

====Nanostructure====
Materials, which atoms and molecules form constituents in the nanoscale (i.e., they form nanostructures) are called nanomaterials. Nanomaterials are the subject of intense research in the materials science community due to the unique properties that they exhibit.

Nanostructure deals with objects and structures that are in the 1 – 100 nm range. In many materials, atoms or molecules agglomerate to form objects at the nanoscale. This causes many interesting electrical, magnetic, optical, and mechanical properties.

In describing nanostructures, it is necessary to differentiate between the number of dimensions on the nanoscale.

Nanotextured surfaces have &quot;one dimension&quot; on the nanoscale, i.e., only the thickness of the surface of an object is between 0.1 and 100 nm.

Nanotubes have &quot;two dimensions&quot; on the nanoscale, i.e., the diameter of the tube is between 0.1 and 100 nm; its length could be much greater.

Finally, spherical nanoparticles have &quot;three dimensions&quot; on the nanoscale, i.e., the particle is between 0.1 and 100 nm in each spatial dimension. The terms nanoparticles and ultrafine particles (UFP) often are used synonymously although UFP can reach into the micrometre range. The term &#x27;nanostructure&#x27; is often used, when referring to magnetic technology. Nanoscale structure in biology is often called ultrastructure.

====Microstructure====
Microstructure is defined as the structure of a prepared surface or thin foil of material as revealed by a microscope above 25× magnification. It deals with objects from 100 nm to a few cm. The microstructure of a material (which can be broadly classified into metallic, polymeric, ceramic and composite) can strongly influence physical properties such as strength, toughness, ductility, hardness, corrosion resistance, high/low temperature behavior, wear resistance, and so on. Most of the traditional materials (such as metals and ceramics) are microstructured.

The manufacture of a perfect crystal of a material is physically impossible. For example, any crystalline material will contain defects such as precipitates, grain boundaries (Hall–Petch relationship), vacancies, interstitial atoms or substitutional atoms. The microstructure of materials reveals these larger defects and advances in simulation have allowed an increased understanding of how defects can be used to enhance material properties.

====Macrostructure====
Macrostructure is the appearance of a material in the scale millimeters to meters, it is the structure of the material as seen with the naked eye.

===Properties===

Materials exhibit myriad properties, including the following.
:*Mechanical properties, see Strength of materials
:*Chemical properties, see Chemistry
:*Electrical properties, see Electricity
:*Thermal properties, see Thermodynamics
:*Optical properties, see Optics and Photonics
:*Magnetic properties, see Magnetism
The properties of a material determine its usability and hence its engineering application.

===Processing===
Synthesis and processing involves the creation of a material with the desired micro-nanostructure. A material cannot be used in industry if no economically viable production method for it has been developed. Therefore, developing processing methods for materials that are reasonably effective and cost-efficient is vital to the field of materials science. Different materials require different processing or synthesis methods. For example, the processing of metals has historically defined eras such as the Bronze Age and Iron Age and is studied under the branch of materials science named &quot;physical metallurgy&quot;. Chemical and physical methods are also used to synthesize other materials such as polymers, ceramics, semiconductors, and thin films. As of the early 21st century, new methods are being developed to synthesize nanomaterials such as graphene.

===Thermodynamics===
Thermodynamics is concerned with heat and temperature and their relation to energy and work. It defines macroscopic variables, such as internal energy, entropy, and pressure, that partly describe a body of matter or radiation. It states that the behavior of those variables is subject to general constraints common to all materials. These general constraints are expressed in the four laws of thermodynamics. Thermodynamics describes the bulk behavior of the body, not the microscopic behaviors of the very large numbers of its microscopic constituents, such as molecules. The behavior of these microscopic particles is described by, and the laws of thermodynamics are derived from, statistical mechanics.

The study of thermodynamics is fundamental to materials science. It forms the foundation to treat general phenomena in materials science and engineering, including chemical reactions, magnetism, polarizability, and elasticity. It explains fundamental tools such as phase diagrams and concepts such as phase equilibrium.

===Kinetics===

Chemical kinetics is the study of the rates at which systems that are out of equilibrium change under the influence of various forces. When applied to materials science, it deals with how a material changes with time (moves from non-equilibrium to equilibrium state) due to application of a certain field. It details the rate of various processes evolving in materials including shape, size, composition and structure. Diffusion is important in the study of kinetics as this is the most common mechanism by which materials undergo change. Kinetics is essential in processing of materials because, among other things, it details how the microstructure changes with application of heat.

==Research==
Materials science is a highly active area of research. Together with materials science departments, physics, chemistry, and many engineering departments are involved in materials research. Materials research covers a broad range of topics; the following non-exhaustive list highlights a few important research areas.

===Nanomaterials===
Nanomaterials describe, in principle, materials of which a single unit is sized (in at least one dimension) between 1 and 1000 nanometers (10−9 meter), but is usually 1 nm – 100 nm. Nanomaterials research takes a materials science based approach to nanotechnology, using advances in materials metrology and synthesis, which have been developed in support of microfabrication research. Materials with structure at the nanoscale often have unique optical, electronic, or mechanical properties. The field of nanomaterials is loosely organized, like the traditional field of chemistry, into organic (carbon-based) nanomaterials, such as fullerenes, and inorganic nanomaterials based on other elements, such as silicon. Examples of nanomaterials include fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, nanocrystals, etc.

===Biomaterials===
A biomaterial is any matter, surface, or construct that interacts with biological systems. Biomaterials science encompasses elements of medicine, biology, chemistry, tissue engineering, and materials science.

Biomaterials can be derived either from nature or synthesized in a laboratory using a variety of chemical approaches using metallic components, polymers, bioceramics, or composite materials. They are often intended or adapted for medical applications, such as biomedical devices which perform, augment, or replace a natural function. Such functions may be benign, like being used for a heart valve, or may be bioactive with a more interactive functionality such as hydroxylapatite-coated hip implants. Biomaterials are also used every day in dental applications, surgery, and drug delivery. For example, a construct with impregnated pharmaceutical products can be placed into the body, which permits the prolonged release of a drug over an extended period of time. A biomaterial may also be an autograft, allograft or xenograft used as an organ transplant material.

===Electronic, optical, and magnetic===

Semiconductors, metals, and ceramics are used today to form highly complex systems, such as integrated electronic circuits, optoelectronic devices, and magnetic and optical mass storage media. These materials form the basis of our modern computing world, and hence research into these materials is of vital importance.

Semiconductors are a traditional example of these types of materials. They are materials that have properties that are intermediate between conductors and insulators. Their electrical conductivities are very sensitive to the concentration of impurities, which allows the use of doping to achieve desirable electronic properties. Hence, semiconductors form the basis of the traditional computer.

This field also includes new areas of research such as superconducting materials, spintronics, metamaterials, etc. The study of these materials involves knowledge of materials science and solid-state physics or condensed matter physics.

===Computational materials science===

With continuing increases in computing power, simulating the behavior of materials has become possible. This enables materials scientists to understand behavior and mechanisms, design new materials, and explain properties formerly poorly understood. Efforts surrounding integrated computational materials engineering are now focusing on combining computational methods with experiments to drastically reduce the time and effort to optimize materials properties for a given application. This involves simulating materials at all length scales, using methods such as density functional theory, molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, dislocation dynamics, phase field, finite element, and many more.

==Industry==

Radical materials advances can drive the creation of new products or even new industries, but stable industries also employ materials scientists to make incremental improvements and troubleshoot issues with currently used materials. Industrial applications of materials science include materials design, cost-benefit tradeoffs in industrial production of materials, processing methods (casting, rolling, welding, ion implantation, crystal growth, thin-film deposition, sintering, glassblowing, etc.), and analytic methods (characterization methods such as electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, calorimetry, nuclear microscopy (HEFIB), Rutherford backscattering, neutron diffraction, small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), etc.).

Besides material characterization, the material scientist or engineer also deals with extracting materials and converting them into useful forms. Thus ingot casting, foundry methods, blast furnace extraction, and electrolytic extraction are all part of the required knowledge of a materials engineer. Often the presence, absence, or variation of minute quantities of secondary elements and compounds in a bulk material will greatly affect the final properties of the materials produced. For example, steels are classified based on 1/10 and 1/100 weight percentages of the carbon and other alloying elements they contain. Thus, the extracting and purifying methods used to extract iron in a blast furnace can affect the quality of steel that is produced.

Solid materials are generally grouped into three basic classifications: ceramics, metals, and polymers. This broad classification is based on the empirical makeup and atomic structure of the solid materials, and most solids fall into one of these broad categories. An item that is often made from each of these materials types is the beverage container. The material types used for beverage containers accordingly provide different advantages and disadvantages, depending on the material used. Ceramic (glass) containers are optically transparent, impervious to the passage of carbon dioxide, relatively inexpensive, and are easily recycled, but are also heavy and fracture easily. Metal (aluminum alloy) is relatively strong, is a good barrier to the diffusion of carbon dioxide, and is easily recycled. However, the cans are opaque, expensive to produce, and are easily dented and punctured. Polymers (polyethylene plastic) are relatively strong, can be optically transparent, are inexpensive and lightweight, and can be recyclable, but are not as impervious to the passage of carbon dioxide as aluminum and glass.

===Ceramics and glasses===
Another application of materials science is the study of ceramics and glasses, typically the most brittle materials with industrial relevance. Many ceramics and glasses exhibit covalent or ionic-covalent bonding with SiO2 (silica) as a fundamental building block. Ceramics – not to be confused with raw, unfired clay – are usually seen in crystalline form. The vast majority of commercial glasses contain a metal oxide fused with silica. At the high temperatures used to prepare glass, the material is a viscous liquid which solidifies into a disordered state upon cooling. Windowpanes and eyeglasses are important examples. Fibers of glass are also used for long-range telecommunication and optical transmission. Scratch resistant Corning Gorilla Glass is a well-known example of the application of materials science to drastically improve the properties of common components.

Engineering ceramics are known for their stiffness and stability under high temperatures, compression and electrical stress. Alumina, silicon carbide, and tungsten carbide are made from a fine powder of their constituents in a process of sintering with a binder. Hot pressing provides higher density material. Chemical vapor deposition can place a film of a ceramic on another material. Cermets are ceramic particles containing some metals. The wear resistance of tools is derived from cemented carbides with the metal phase of cobalt and nickel typically added to modify properties.

Ceramics can be significantly strengthened for engineering applications using the principle of crack deflection. This process involves the strategic addition of second-phase particles within a ceramic matrix, optimizing their shape, size, and distribution to direct and control crack propagation. This approach enhances fracture toughness, paving the way for the creation of advanced, high-performance ceramics in various industries.

===Composites===
Another application of materials science in industry is making composite materials. These are structured materials composed of two or more macroscopic phases.

Applications range from structural elements such as steel-reinforced concrete, to the thermal insulating tiles, which play a key and integral role in NASA&#x27;s Space Shuttle thermal protection system, which is used to protect the surface of the shuttle from the heat of re-entry into the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. One example is reinforced Carbon-Carbon (RCC), the light gray material, which withstands re-entry temperatures up to and protects the Space Shuttle&#x27;s wing leading edges and nose cap. RCC is a laminated composite material made from graphite rayon cloth and impregnated with a phenolic resin. After curing at high temperature in an autoclave, the laminate is pyrolized to convert the resin to carbon, impregnated with furfuryl alcohol in a vacuum chamber, and cured-pyrolized to convert the furfuryl alcohol to carbon. To provide oxidation resistance for reusability, the outer layers of the RCC are converted to silicon carbide.

Other examples can be seen in the &quot;plastic&quot; casings of television sets, cell-phones and so on. These plastic casings are usually a composite material made up of a thermoplastic matrix such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) in which calcium carbonate chalk, talc, glass fibers or carbon fibers have been added for added strength, bulk, or electrostatic dispersion. These additions may be termed reinforcing fibers, or dispersants, depending on their purpose.

===Polymers===

Polymers are chemical compounds made up of a large number of identical components linked together like chains. Polymers are the raw materials (the resins) used to make what are commonly called plastics and rubber. Plastics and rubber are the final product, created after one or more polymers or additives have been added to a resin during processing, which is then shaped into a final form. Plastics in former and in current widespread use include polyethylene, polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene, nylons, polyesters, acrylics, polyurethanes, and polycarbonates. Rubbers include natural rubber, styrene-butadiene rubber, chloroprene, and butadiene rubber. Plastics are generally classified as &quot;commodity&quot;, &quot;specialty&quot; and &quot;engineering&quot; plastics.

Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is widely used, inexpensive, and annual production quantities are large. It lends itself to a vast array of applications, from artificial leather to electrical insulation and cabling, packaging, and containers. Its fabrication and processing are simple and well-established. The versatility of PVC is due to the wide range of plasticisers and other additives that it accepts. The term &quot;additives&quot; in polymer science refers to the chemicals and compounds added to the polymer base to modify its material properties.

Polycarbonate would be normally considered an engineering plastic (other examples include PEEK, ABS). Such plastics are valued for their superior strengths and other special material properties. They are usually not used for disposable applications, unlike commodity plastics.

Specialty plastics are materials with unique characteristics, such as ultra-high strength, electrical conductivity, electro-fluorescence, high thermal stability, etc.

The dividing lines between the various types of plastics is not based on material but rather on their properties and applications. For example, polyethylene (PE) is a cheap, low friction polymer commonly used to make disposable bags for shopping and trash, and is considered a commodity plastic, whereas medium-density polyethylene (MDPE) is used for underground gas and water pipes, and another variety called ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) is an engineering plastic which is used extensively as the glide rails for industrial equipment and the low-friction socket in implanted hip joints.

===Metal alloys===
The alloys of iron (steel, stainless steel, cast iron, tool steel, alloy steels) make up the largest proportion of metals today both by quantity and commercial value.

Iron alloyed with various proportions of carbon gives low, mid and high carbon steels. An iron-carbon alloy is only considered steel if the carbon level is between 0.01% and 2.00% by weight. For steels, the hardness and tensile strength of the steel is related to the amount of carbon present, with increasing carbon levels also leading to lower ductility and toughness. Heat treatment processes such as quenching and tempering can significantly change these properties, however. In contrast, certain metal alloys exhibit unique properties where their size and density remain unchanged across a range of temperatures. Cast iron is defined as an iron–carbon alloy with more than 2.00%, but less than 6.67% carbon. Stainless steel is defined as a regular steel alloy with greater than 10% by weight alloying content of chromium. Nickel and molybdenum are typically also added in stainless steels.

Other significant metallic alloys are those of aluminium, titanium, copper and magnesium. Copper alloys have been known for a long time (since the Bronze Age), while the alloys of the other three metals have been relatively recently developed. Due to the chemical reactivity of these metals, the electrolytic extraction processes required were only developed relatively recently. The alloys of aluminium, titanium and magnesium are also known and valued for their high strength to weight ratios and, in the case of magnesium, their ability to provide electromagnetic shielding. These materials are ideal for situations where high strength to weight ratios are more important than bulk cost, such as in the aerospace industry and certain automotive engineering applications.

===Semiconductors===

A semiconductor is a material that has a resistivity between a conductor and insulator. Modern day electronics run on semiconductors, and the industry had an estimated US$530 billion market in 2021. Its electronic properties can be greatly altered through intentionally introducing impurities in a process referred to as doping. Semiconductor materials are used to build diodes, transistors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and analog and digital electric circuits, among their many uses. Semiconductor devices have replaced thermionic devices like vacuum tubes in most applications. Semiconductor devices are manufactured both as single discrete devices and as integrated circuits (ICs), which consist of a number—from a few to millions—of devices manufactured and interconnected on a single semiconductor substrate.

Of all the semiconductors in use today, silicon makes up the largest portion both by quantity and commercial value. Monocrystalline silicon is used to produce wafers used in the semiconductor and electronics industry. Gallium arsenide (GaAs) is the second most popular semiconductor used. Due to its higher electron mobility and saturation velocity compared to silicon, it is a material of choice for high-speed electronics applications. These superior properties are compelling reasons to use GaAs circuitry in mobile phones, satellite communications, microwave point-to-point links and higher frequency radar systems. Other semiconductor materials include germanium, silicon carbide, and gallium nitride and have various applications.

==Relation with other fields==

Materials science evolved, starting from the 1950s because it was recognized that to create, discover and design new materials, one had to approach it in a unified manner. Thus, materials science and engineering emerged in many ways: renaming and/or combining existing metallurgy and ceramics engineering departments; splitting from existing solid state physics research (itself growing into condensed matter physics); pulling in relatively new polymer engineering and polymer science; recombining from the previous, as well as chemistry, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, and electrical engineering; and more.

The field of materials science and engineering is important both from a scientific perspective, as well as for applications field. Materials are of the utmost importance for engineers (or other applied fields) because usage of the appropriate materials is crucial when designing systems. As a result, materials science is an increasingly important part of an engineer&#x27;s education.

Materials physics is the use of physics to describe the physical properties of materials. It is a synthesis of physical sciences such as chemistry, solid mechanics, solid state physics, and materials science. Materials physics is considered a subset of condensed matter physics and applies fundamental condensed matter concepts to complex multiphase media, including materials of technological interest. Current fields that materials physicists work in include electronic, optical, and magnetic materials, novel materials and structures, quantum phenomena in materials, nonequilibrium physics, and soft condensed matter physics. New experimental and computational tools are constantly improving how materials systems are modeled and studied and are also fields when materials physicists work in.

The field is inherently interdisciplinary, and the materials scientists or engineers must be aware and make use of the methods of the physicist, chemist and engineer. Conversely, fields such as life sciences and archaeology can inspire the development of new materials and processes, in bioinspired and paleoinspired approaches. Thus, there remain close relationships with these fields. Conversely, many physicists, chemists and engineers find themselves working in materials science due to the significant overlaps between the fields.

==Emerging technologies==

==Subdisciplines==

The main branches of materials science stem from the four main classes of materials: ceramics, metals, polymers and composites.
* Ceramic engineering
* Metallurgy
* Polymer science and engineering
* Composite engineering

There are additionally broadly applicable, materials independent, endeavors.
* Materials characterization (spectroscopy, microscopy, diffraction)
* Computational materials science
* Materials informatics and selection

There are also relatively broad focuses across materials on specific phenomena and techniques.
* Crystallography
* Surface science
* Tribology
* Microelectronics

== Related or interdisciplinary fields ==
* Condensed matter physics, solid-state physics and solid-state chemistry
* Nanotechnology
* Mineralogy
* Supramolecular chemistry
* Biomaterials science

==Professional societies==
* American Ceramic Society
* ASM International
* Association for Iron and Steel Technology
* Materials Research Society
* The Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials Society

==See also==
* Bio-based material
* Bioplastic
* Forensic materials engineering
* List of emerging materials science technologies
* List of materials science journals
* List of materials analysis methods
* Materials science in science fiction
* Timeline of materials technology
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Timeline of Materials Science at The Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials Society (TMS) accessed March 2007
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==


* MS&amp;T conference organized by the main materials societies
* MIT OpenCourseWare for MSE</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="0" end="17" title="Materials science" label="Materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="24" end="41" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q214609" start="79" end="87" title="material" label="material"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="90" end="111" title="Materials science" label="Materials engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="118" end="129" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="259" end="279" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="336" end="345" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="347" end="354" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="360" end="371" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q124883245" start="395" end="411" title="Empirical relationship" label="phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="428" end="438" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="443" end="453" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486226" start="1014" end="1040" title="Material properties" label="material&amp;#x27;s properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="1165" end="1173" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="1249" end="1263" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q865663" start="1265" end="1276" title="biomaterial" label="biomaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="1283" end="1293" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151013" start="1343" end="1363" title="forensic engineering" label="forensic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022240" start="1368" end="1384" title="failure analysis" label="failure analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="1617" end="1649" title="aviation accidents and incidents" label="aviation accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="1744" end="1753" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1755" end="1765" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1767" end="1775" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1781" end="1790" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Steel Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="1872" end="1879" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="2049" end="2059" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="2222" end="2242" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="2265" end="2278" title="thermodynamic" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="2301" end="2305" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="2329" end="2335" title="phase (matter)" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932" start="2458" end="2468" title="Space Race" label="Space Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2492" end="2503" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="2520" end="2525" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="2532" end="2538" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="2543" end="2549" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="2732" end="2738" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="2741" end="2748" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="2751" end="2764" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q865663" start="2771" end="2782" title="biomaterial" label="biomaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="3128" end="3161" title="DARPA" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966635" start="3387" end="3394" title="Nascent state" label="nascent"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="3890" end="3897" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="3916" end="3924" title="magnetism" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q967847" start="3954" end="3966" title="nanomaterial" label="nanomaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q967847" start="4539" end="4552" title="nanomaterials" label="nanomaterials"/>
<link wikidata="Q865663" start="4554" end="4565" title="biomaterial" label="biomaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="4572" end="4588" title="Photovoltaic cell" label="energy materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498213" start="4994" end="5008" title="microstructure" label="microstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="5078" end="5092" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108792" start="5097" end="5105" title="kinetics (physics)" label="kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165586" start="5561" end="5577" title="Characterization (materials science)" label="Characterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="5694" end="5699" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="5702" end="5710" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="5715" end="5722" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="5746" end="5758" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="5763" end="5780" title="chemical analysis" label="chemical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="5789" end="5807" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q386334" start="5809" end="5839" title="energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy" label="energy-dispersive spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="5841" end="5855" title="chromatography" label="chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q542419" start="5857" end="5873" title="thermal analysis" label="thermal analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="5875" end="5894" title="electron microscope" label="electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="6258" end="6259" title="Angstrom" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="6665" end="6682" title="quantum chemistry" label="quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="6686" end="6701" title="quantum physics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="6703" end="6722" title="Solid-state physics" label="Solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q908684" start="6724" end="6745" title="solid-state chemistry" label="solid-state chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="6750" end="6768" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="7096" end="7105" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q181658" start="7271" end="7284" title="Parallelepiped" label="parallelpiped"/>
<link wikidata="Q754943" start="7317" end="7331" title="single crystal" label="single crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="7654" end="7677" title="crystallographic defect" label="crystallographic defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q967847" start="7923" end="7936" title="nanomaterials" label="nanomaterials"/>
<link wikidata="Q865663" start="7938" end="7949" title="biomaterial" label="biomaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q376044" start="8127" end="8152" title="Powder diffraction" label="powder diffraction method"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="8415" end="8422" title="Polymer" label="Polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="8507" end="8512" title="Glass" label="Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="8560" end="8569" title="Amorphous solid" label="amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="9439" end="9448" title="Nanoscopic scale" label="nanoscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131125" start="9451" end="9471" title="Nanotextured surface" label="Nanotextured surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="9775" end="9787" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880535" start="9941" end="9959" title="ultrafine particle" label="ultrafine particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141316" start="10181" end="10195" title="ultrastructure" label="ultrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="10815" end="10822" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="10914" end="10921" title="crystallographic defect" label="defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="10930" end="10942" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitates"/>
<link wikidata="Q264845" start="10962" end="10985" title="Hall–Petch" label="Hall–Petch relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="11511" end="11532" title="Strength of materials" label="Strength of materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="11560" end="11569" title="Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="11599" end="11610" title="Electricity" label="Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="11637" end="11651" title="Thermodynamics" label="Thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="11678" end="11684" title="Optics" label="Optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q467054" start="11689" end="11698" title="Photonics" label="Photonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="11726" end="11735" title="Magnetism" label="Magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="12353" end="12363" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="12368" end="12376" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="12451" end="12461" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="12551" end="12558" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="12561" end="12568" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="12571" end="12584" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137203" start="12591" end="12600" title="thin film" label="thin film"/>
<link wikidata="Q169917" start="12701" end="12709" title="graphene" label="graphene"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="12766" end="12770" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="12775" end="12786" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="12809" end="12815" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q900231" start="12820" end="12824" title="Work (thermodynamics)" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q674038" start="12837" end="12848" title="macroscopic scale" label="macroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180241" start="12868" end="12883" title="internal energy" label="internal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="12885" end="12892" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="12898" end="12906" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="13416" end="13437" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186693" start="13705" end="13718" title="phase diagram" label="phase diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q51363" start="13747" end="13758" title="Thermodynamic Equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="13777" end="13794" title="Chemical kinetics" label="Chemical kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="14196" end="14205" title="Diffusion" label="Diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="14576" end="14583" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="14585" end="14594" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="14605" end="14616" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="15063" end="15077" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q394" start="15107" end="15116" title="metrology" label="metrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175538" start="15172" end="15188" title="microfabrication" label="microfabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="15563" end="15572" title="fullerene" label="fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="15575" end="15590" title="carbon nanotube" label="carbon nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q30336093" start="15703" end="15720" title="biological system" label="biological system"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="15986" end="15993" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790033" start="15996" end="16006" title="bioceramic" label="bioceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="16012" end="16030" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="16228" end="16239" title="heart valve" label="heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q864491" start="16251" end="16260" title="Biological activity" label="bioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q413478" start="16307" end="16322" title="hydroxylapatite" label="hydroxylapatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q32333487" start="16330" end="16341" title="hip implant" label="hip implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q379071" start="16636" end="16645" title="autograft" label="autograft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773075" start="16647" end="16656" title="allograft" label="allograft"/>
<link wikidata="Q55505" start="16660" end="16669" title="xenograft" label="xenograft"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="16681" end="16697" title="organ transplant" label="organ transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="17070" end="17083" title="Semiconductor" label="Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="17210" end="17220" title="Electrical resistivity and conductivity" label="conductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="17225" end="17235" title="insulator (electricity)" label="insulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="17348" end="17354" title="doping (semiconductor)" label="doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="17521" end="17536" title="superconductivity" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q258659" start="17548" end="17559" title="spintronics" label="spintronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q497166" start="17561" end="17573" title="metamaterial" label="metamaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="17654" end="17673" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="17677" end="17701" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043040" start="18013" end="18059" title="integrated computational materials engineering" label="integrated computational materials engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="18308" end="18333" title="density functional theory" label="density functional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q901663" start="18335" end="18353" title="molecular dynamics" label="molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238499" start="18355" end="18366" title="Monte Carlo algorithm" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640482" start="18390" end="18401" title="Phase field models" label="phase field"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="18403" end="18417" title="Finite element method" label="finite element"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016746" start="18457" end="18475" title="Timeline of materials technology" label="materials advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q496098" start="18835" end="18842" title="casting" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192732" start="18844" end="18851" title="rolling" label="rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="18853" end="18860" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436752" start="18862" end="18878" title="ion implantation" label="ion implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185154" start="18880" end="18894" title="crystal growth" label="crystal growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137203" start="18896" end="18916" title="thin-film deposition" label="thin-film deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="18918" end="18927" title="sintering" label="sintering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="18929" end="18941" title="glassblowing" label="glassblowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="19005" end="19024" title="electron microscopy" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="19026" end="19043" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q634314" start="19045" end="19056" title="calorimetry" label="calorimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365355" start="19058" end="19084" title="Microprobe" label="nuclear microscopy (HEFIB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q368967" start="19086" end="19111" title="Rutherford backscattering" label="Rutherford backscattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="19113" end="19132" title="neutron diffraction" label="neutron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83893" start="19330" end="19335" title="ingot" label="ingot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883136" start="19345" end="19352" title="foundry" label="foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="19362" end="19375" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358064" start="19392" end="19415" title="electrolytic process" label="electrolytic extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="21136" end="21143" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="21149" end="21154" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="21302" end="21308" title="Silicon dioxide" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="21391" end="21395" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q268706" start="21819" end="21832" title="Gorilla Glass" label="Gorilla Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="22092" end="22107" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q423265" start="22113" end="22129" title="tungsten carbide" label="tungsten carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905489" start="22638" end="22654" title="Faber-Evans model" label="crack deflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="23058" end="23076" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285509" start="23317" end="23356" title="Space Shuttle thermal protection system" label="Space Shuttle thermal protection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778579" start="23485" end="23509" title="reinforced Carbon-Carbon" label="reinforced Carbon-Carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="23706" end="23714" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q910194" start="23715" end="23720" title="rayon" label="rayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="23750" end="23764" title="phenolic resin" label="phenolic resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991861" start="23772" end="23778" title="Curing (chemistry)" label="curing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188223" start="23805" end="23814" title="autoclave" label="autoclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q384943" start="23820" end="23828" title="laminate" label="laminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="23832" end="23841" title="Pyrolysis" label="pyrolized"/>
<link wikidata="Q27335" start="23891" end="23907" title="furfuryl alcohol" label="furfuryl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="24086" end="24101" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="24277" end="24290" title="thermoplastic" label="thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="24306" end="24337" title="acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="acrylonitrile butadiene styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="24353" end="24370" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="24378" end="24382" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861" start="24384" end="24395" title="glass fiber" label="glass fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="24400" end="24412" title="carbon fiber" label="carbon fiber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24459" end="24483" title="Electrostatics#Static electricity and chemical industry" label="electrostatic dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="24596" end="24603" title="Polymer" label="Polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="24802" end="24808" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="25044" end="25056" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146174" start="25058" end="25071" title="polypropylene" label="polypropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="25073" end="25091" title="polyvinyl chloride" label="polyvinyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="25099" end="25110" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="25112" end="25117" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188245" start="25120" end="25129" title="polyester" label="polyester"/>
<link wikidata="Q342945" start="25132" end="25140" title="acrylic resin" label="acrylics"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="25142" end="25154" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q62246" start="25161" end="25174" title="polycarbonate" label="polycarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146429" start="25209" end="25226" title="styrene-butadiene" label="styrene-butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q410871" start="25235" end="25246" title="chloroprene" label="chloroprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q143668" start="25252" end="25268" title="butadiene rubber" label="butadiene rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q764561" start="25356" end="25388" title="engineering plastic" label="&amp;quot;engineering&amp;quot; plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792537" start="25543" end="25561" title="artificial leather" label="artificial leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="25565" end="25586" title="electrical insulation" label="electrical insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="25600" end="25609" title="packaging" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702361" start="25615" end="25625" title="Food storage" label="containers"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="25742" end="25753" title="plasticiser" label="plasticiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q62246" start="25942" end="25955" title="Polycarbonate" label="Polycarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145387" start="26032" end="26036" title="PEEK" label="PEEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="26532" end="26544" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807106" start="26692" end="26719" title="medium-density polyethylene" label="medium-density polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q575823" start="26799" end="26839" title="ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene" label="ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q193818" start="26986" end="26995" title="hip joint" label="hip joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="27038" end="27043" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="27045" end="27060" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="27062" end="27071" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q537460" start="27073" end="27083" title="tool steel" label="tool steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070521" start="27085" end="27096" title="alloy steel" label="alloy steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27240" end="27243" title="Carbon steel#Mild or low-carbon steel" label="low"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="27253" end="27270" title="high carbon steel" label="high carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="27393" end="27401" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="27557" end="27571" title="Heat treatment" label="Heat treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q871335" start="27590" end="27599" title="quenching" label="quenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q685487" start="27604" end="27613" title="tempering (metallurgy)" label="tempering"/>
<link wikidata="Q898215" start="27679" end="27699" title="Invar" label="certain metal alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="28003" end="28011" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="28013" end="28019" title="Nickel" label="Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="28024" end="28034" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="28129" end="28138" title="Aluminium alloy" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300719" start="28140" end="28148" title="Titanium alloys" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="28150" end="28156" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180288" start="28161" end="28170" title="Magnesium alloy" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q518350" start="28172" end="28185" title="Copper alloys" label="Copper alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="28229" end="28239" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="28881" end="28894" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="28920" end="28931" title="resistivity" label="resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="28942" end="28951" title="electrical conductor" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="28956" end="28965" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="29250" end="29255" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="29258" end="29268" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="29271" end="29291" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="29324" end="29340" title="electric circuit" label="electric circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017624" start="29402" end="29412" title="thermionic converter" label="thermionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="29539" end="29557" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362275" start="29684" end="29693" title="Substrate (materials science)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="29736" end="29743" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="29892" end="29912" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="29914" end="29930" title="Gallium arsenide" label="Gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501076" start="30003" end="30020" title="electron mobility" label="electron mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426597" start="30025" end="30044" title="saturation velocity" label="saturation velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="30354" end="30363" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q412356" start="30365" end="30380" title="silicon carbide" label="silicon carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411713" start="30386" end="30401" title="gallium nitride" label="gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="30735" end="30745" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936199" start="30750" end="30770" title="ceramics engineering" label="ceramics engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="30808" end="30827" title="solid state physics" label="solid state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="30858" end="30882" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531548" start="30911" end="30930" title="polymer engineering" label="polymer engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456979" start="30935" end="30950" title="polymer science" label="polymer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="30994" end="31003" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="31005" end="31025" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="31027" end="31049" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="31055" end="31077" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="31509" end="31516" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14632398" start="31588" end="31605" title="physical sciences" label="physical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="31614" end="31623" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080293" start="31625" end="31640" title="solid mechanics" label="solid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="31642" end="31661" title="solid state physics" label="solid state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="31730" end="31754" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="32298" end="32315" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458075" start="32561" end="32572" title="Bioinspiration" label="bioinspired"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169475" start="32577" end="32590" title="Paleo-inspiration" label="paleoinspired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936199" start="32988" end="33007" title="Ceramic engineering" label="Ceramic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="33010" end="33020" title="Metallurgy" label="Metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456979" start="33023" end="33038" title="Polymer science" label="Polymer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531548" start="33043" end="33054" title="polymer engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="33057" end="33078" title="Composite material" label="Composite engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165586" start="33159" end="33185" title="Characterization (materials science)" label="Materials characterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="33187" end="33199" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="33201" end="33211" title="microscopy" label="microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="33213" end="33224" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753722" start="33228" end="33259" title="Computational materials science" label="Computational materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786605" start="33262" end="33283" title="Materials informatics" label="Materials informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786565" start="33288" end="33297" title="Material selection" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="33396" end="33411" title="Crystallography" label="Crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q373184" start="33414" end="33429" title="Surface science" label="Surface science"/>
<link wikidata="Q193870" start="33432" end="33441" title="Tribology" label="Tribology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175403" start="33444" end="33460" title="Microelectronics" label="Microelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="33506" end="33530" title="Condensed matter physics" label="Condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="33532" end="33551" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q908684" start="33556" end="33577" title="solid-state chemistry" label="solid-state chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="33580" end="33594" title="Nanotechnology" label="Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="33597" end="33607" title="Mineralogy" label="Mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756449" start="33610" end="33634" title="Supramolecular chemistry" label="Supramolecular chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q865663" start="33637" end="33657" title="Biomaterial" label="Biomaterials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743330" start="33688" end="33712" title="American Ceramic Society" label="American Ceramic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994906" start="33715" end="33732" title="ASM International (society)" label="ASM International"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971087" start="33735" end="33776" title="Association for Iron and Steel Technology" label="Association for Iron and Steel Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403114" start="33779" end="33805" title="Materials Research Society" label="Materials Research Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751551" start="33808" end="33852" title="The Minerals, Metals &amp;amp; Materials Society" label="The Minerals, Metals &amp;amp; Materials Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914589" start="33869" end="33887" title="Bio-based material" label="Bio-based material"/>
<link wikidata="Q413458" start="33890" end="33900" title="Bioplastic" label="Bioplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468716" start="33903" end="33933" title="Forensic materials engineering" label="Forensic materials engineering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33936" end="33983" title="List of emerging technologies#Materials and textile science" label="List of emerging materials science technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627320" start="33986" end="34020" title="List of materials science journals" label="List of materials science journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627321" start="34023" end="34057" title="List of materials analysis methods" label="List of materials analysis methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786609" start="34060" end="34096" title="Materials science in science fiction" label="Materials science in science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016746" start="34099" end="34131" title="Timeline of materials technology" label="Timeline of materials technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19623" wikidata="Q40156" url="?curid=19623" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero">
<text>The Mitsubishi A6M &quot;Zero&quot; is a long-range carrier-capable fighter aircraft formerly manufactured by Mitsubishi Aircraft Company, a part of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries. It was operated by the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) from 1940 to 1945. The A6M was designated as the , or the Mitsubishi A6M Rei-sen. The A6M was usually referred to by its pilots as the &quot;Reisen&quot; (, zero fighter), &quot;0&quot; being the last digit of the imperial year 2600 (1940) when it entered service with the IJN. The official Allied reporting name was &quot;Zeke&quot;, although the name &quot;Zero&quot; was used more commonly.

The Zero is considered to have been the most capable carrier-based fighter in the world when it was introduced early in World War II, combining excellent maneuverability, high airspeed, strong firepower and very long range. The Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service also frequently used it as a land-based fighter.

In early combat operations, the Zero gained a reputation as a dogfighter, achieving an outstanding kill ratio of 12 to 1, but by mid-1942 a combination of new tactics and the introduction of better equipment enabled Allied pilots to engage the Zero on generally equal terms. By the middle months of 1943 the deterioration of fighter pilot training in the IJNAS contributed to making the Zero less effective against newer Allied fighters. The Zero lacked hydraulic boosting for its ailerons and rudder, rendering it difficult to maneuver at high speeds. Lack of self-sealing fuel tanks also made it more vulnerable than its contemporaries. By 1944, the A6M had fallen behind Allied fighters in speed and was regarded as outdated, thought it remained a very capable fighter in the right hands. However, as design delays and production difficulties hampered the introduction of newer Japanese aircraft models, the Zero continued to serve in a front-line role until the end of the war in the Pacific. During the final phases, it was also adapted for use in &quot;kamikaze&quot; operations. Japan produced more Zeros than any other model of combat aircraft during the war.

==Design and development==
The Mitsubishi A5M fighter was just entering service in early 1937, when the Imperial Japanese Navy started looking for its eventual replacement. On 5 October 1937, it issued &quot;Planning Requirements for the Prototype 12-shi Carrier-based Fighter&quot;, sending them to Nakajima and Mitsubishi. Both firms started preliminary design work while awaiting more definitive requirements a few months later.

Based on the experiences of the A5M in China, the IJN sent out updated requirements in October, calling for a speed of at and a climb to in 9.5 minutes. With drop tanks, the IJN wanted an endurance of two hours at normal power, or six to eight hours at economical cruising speed. Armament was to consist of two 20 mm cannons, two 7.7 mm (.303 in) machine guns and two bombs. A complete radio set was to be mounted in all aircraft, along with a radio direction finder for long-range navigation. The maneuverability was to be at least equal to that of the A5M, while the wingspan had to be less than to allow for use on aircraft carriers.

Nakajima&#x27;s team considered the new requirements unachievable and pulled out of the competition in January. Mitsubishi&#x27;s chief designer, Jiro Horikoshi, thought that the requirements could be met, but only if the aircraft were made as light as possible. Every possible weight-saving measure was incorporated into the design. Most of the aircraft was built of a new top-secret aluminium alloy developed by Sumitomo Metal Industries in 1936. Called &quot;extra super duralumin&quot;, it was lighter, stronger and more ductile than other alloys used at the time but was prone to corrosive attack, which made it brittle. This detrimental effect was countered with a zinc chromate anti-corrosion coating applied after fabrication. No armour protection was provided for the pilot, engine or other critical points of the aircraft, and self-sealing fuel tanks, which were becoming common among other combatants, were not used. This made the Zero lighter, more maneuverable, and one of the longest-ranged single-engine fighters of World War II, which made it capable of searching out an enemy hundreds of kilometres away, bringing it to battle, then returning to its base or aircraft carrier. However, that tradeoff in weight and construction also made it prone to catching fire and exploding when struck by enemy fire.

With its low-wing cantilever monoplane layout, retractable wide-set conventional landing gear, and enclosed cockpit, the Zero was one of the most modern carrier-based aircraft in the world at the time of its introduction. It had a fairly high-lift, low-speed wing with very low wing loading. Combined with its light weight, this resulted in a very low stalling speed of well below . This was the main reason for its phenomenal maneuverability, allowing it to out-turn any Allied fighter of the time. Early models were fitted with servo tabs on the ailerons after pilots complained that control forces became too heavy at speeds above . They were discontinued on later models after it was found that the lightened control forces were causing pilots to overstress the wings during vigorous maneuvers.

===Name===

The A6M is usually known as the &quot;Zero&quot; from its Japanese Navy aircraft type designation, Type 0 carrier fighter (&quot;Rei shiki Kanjō sentōki&quot;, ), taken from the last digit of the Imperial year 2600 (1940) when it entered service. In Japan, it was unofficially referred to as both &quot;Rei-sen&quot; and &quot;Zero-sen&quot;; Japanese pilots most commonly called it &quot;Zero-sen,&quot; where &quot;sen&quot; is the first syllable of &quot;sentōki,&quot; Japanese for &quot;fighter plane&quot;. In the official designation &quot;A6M&quot;, the &quot;A&quot; signified a carrier-based fighter, &quot;6&quot; meant that it was the sixth such model built for the Imperial Navy, and &quot;M&quot; indicated Mitsubishi as the manufacturer.

The official Allied code name was &quot;Zeke&quot;, in keeping with the practice of giving male names to Japanese fighters, female names to bombers, bird names to gliders, and tree names to trainers. &quot;Zeke&quot; was part of the first batch of &quot;hillbilly&quot; code names assigned by Captain Frank T. McCoy of Nashville, Tennessee (assigned to the Allied Technical Air Intelligence Unit at Eagle Farm Airport in Australia), who wanted quick, distinctive, easy-to-remember names. The Allied code for Japanese aircraft was introduced in 1942, and McCoy chose &quot;Zeke&quot; for the &quot;Zero&quot;. Later, two variants of the fighter received their own code names. The Nakajima A6M2-N floatplane version of the Zero was called &quot;Rufe&quot;, and the A6M3-32 variant was initially called &quot;Hap&quot;. General &quot;Hap&quot; Arnold, commander of the United States Army Air Forces, objected to that name, however, so it was changed to &quot;Hamp&quot;.

==Operational history==


The first Zeros (pre-series of 15 A6M2) went into operation with the 12th Rengo Kōkūtai in July 1940. On 13 September 1940, the Zeros scored their first air-to-air victories when 13 A6M2s led by Lieutenant Saburo Shindo, escorting 27 G3M &quot;Nell&quot; medium-heavy bombers on a raid of Chongqing, attacked 34 Soviet-built Polikarpov I-15s and I-16s of the Chinese Nationalist Air Force, claimed &quot;all 27&quot; of the Chinese fighters shot down without loss to themselves. However Major Louie Yim-qun had in fact nursed his I-15 riddled with 48 bullet holes back to base, and Lieutenant Gao Youxin claimed to have shot down one Zero, but at most 4 Zeroes sustained some damage in the 1/2 hour-long dogfight over Chongqing. By the time they were redeployed a year later, the Zeros had shot down 99 Chinese aircraft (up to 266 according to other sources).

At the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor, 521 Zeros were active in the Pacific, 328 in first-line units. The carrier-borne Model 21 was the type encountered by the Americans. Its tremendous range of over allowed it to range farther from its carrier than expected, appearing over distant battlefronts and giving Allied commanders the impression that there were several times as many Zeros as actually existed.

The Zero quickly gained a fearsome reputation. Thanks to a combination of unsurpassed maneuverability—compared to contemporary Axis fighters—and excellent firepower, it easily disposed of Allied aircraft sent against it in the Pacific in 1941. It proved a difficult opponent even for the Supermarine Spitfire. &quot;The RAF pilots were trained in methods that were excellent against German and Italian equipment but suicide against the acrobatic Japs&quot;, as Lieutenant General Claire Lee Chennault noted. Although not as fast as the British fighter, the Zero could out-turn the Spitfire with ease, sustain a climb at a very steep angle, and stay in the air for three times as long.

Allied pilots soon developed tactics to cope with the Zero. Because of its extreme agility, engaging a Zero in a traditional turning dogfight was likely to be fatal. It was better to swoop down from above in a high-speed pass, fire a quick burst, then climb quickly back up to altitude. A short burst of fire from heavy machine guns or cannon was often enough to destroy the Zero, provided that some hits rupture the fuel tanks. These tactics were regularly employed by Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters during Guadalcanal defense through high-altitude ambush, which was possible with an early warning system consisting of coastwatchers and radar. Such &quot;boom-and-zoom&quot; tactics were also successfully used in the China Burma India Theater by the &quot;Flying Tigers&quot; of the American Volunteer Group (AVG) against similarly maneuverable Japanese Army aircraft such as the Nakajima Ki-27 &quot;Nate&quot; and Nakajima Ki-43 &quot;Oscar&quot;. AVG pilots were trained by their commander Claire Chennault to exploit the advantages of their P-40 Warhawks, which were very sturdy, heavily armed, generally faster in a dive, and level flight at low altitude, with a good rate of roll.

Another important maneuver was Lieutenant Commander John S. &quot;Jimmy&quot; Thach&#x27;s &quot;Thach Weave&quot;, in which two fighters would fly about apart. If a Zero latched onto the tail of one of the fighters, the two aircraft would turn toward each other. If the Zero followed his original target through the turn, he would come into a position to be fired on by the target&#x27;s wingman. This tactic was first used to good effect during the Battle of Midway and later over the Solomon Islands.

Many highly experienced Japanese aviators were lost in combat, resulting in a progressive decline in pilot quality, which became a significant factor in Allied successes. Unexpected heavy losses of pilots at the Battles of the Coral Sea and Midway dealt the Japanese carrier air force a blow from which it never fully recovered.
Throughout the Battle of Midway Allied pilots expressed a high level of dissatisfaction with the F4F Wildcat. Captain Elliott Buckmaster, commanding officer of notes:
 They were astounded by the Zero&#x27;s superiority:
In contrast, Allied fighters were designed with ruggedness and pilot protection in mind. The Japanese ace Saburō Sakai described how the toughness of early Grumman aircraft was a factor in preventing the Zero from attaining total domination: 

When the Lockheed P-38 Lightning, armed with four &quot;light barrel&quot; AN/M2 .50 cal. Browning machine guns and one 20 mm autocannon, and the Grumman F6F Hellcat and Vought F4U Corsair, each with six AN/M2 .50 calibre Browning guns, appeared in the Pacific theater, the A6M, with its low-powered engine and lighter armament, was hard-pressed to remain competitive. In combat with an F6F or F4U, the only positive thing that could be said of the Zero at this stage of the war was that, in the hands of a skillful pilot, it could maneuver as well as most of its opponents. Nonetheless, in competent hands, the Zero could still be deadly. Because of shortages of high-powered aviation engines and problems with planned successor models, namely the superior Mitsubishi A7M2 Reppū, the Zero remained in production until 1945, with over 10,000 of all variants produced.

===Allied analysis===

==== Chinese opinions ====
The Japanese deployed the A6M during the Second Sino-Japanese War. Inevitably some aircraft were lost, with at least two falling more-or-less intact into Chinese hands. The first known example, an A6M2 (the 12th of the 15 pre-production aircraft, Serial V-110), fell near Fainan Island. On 18 September 1940 a team, including Western volunteers assisting the Chinese, examined the wreck. It was largely intact, and a detailed report was compiled and sent to the U.S. The second, an A6M2-21 (Serial V-173), made a forced landing near Tietsan airfield 17 February 1941. The pilot was shot before he could destroy his plane, the fuel system fixed, and it was taken into Chinese service. The plane was extensively flown and studied by a team which included Gerhard Neumann, and a detailed and illustrated report was sent to Washington. Overall they were impressed with the quality of the aircraft, less so by the performance—although this was later put down to using 85 octane fuel rather than the 100 octane required by the Sakae engine.

====American opinions====
The American military discovered many of the A6M&#x27;s unique attributes when they recovered a largely intact specimen of an A6M2, the Akutan Zero, on Akutan Island in the Aleutians. During an air raid over Dutch Harbor on 4 June 1942, one A6M fighter was hit by ground-based anti-aircraft fire. Losing oil, Flight Petty Officer Tadayoshi Koga attempted an emergency landing on Akutan Island, about northeast of Dutch Harbor, but his Zero flipped over on soft ground in a sudden crash-landing. Koga died instantly of head injuries (his neck was broken by the tremendous impact), but his wingmen hoped he had survived and so he went against Japanese doctrine to destroy disabled Zeros. The relatively undamaged fighter was found over a month later by an American salvage team and was shipped to Naval Air Station North Island, where testing flights of the repaired A6M revealed both strengths and deficiencies in design and performance.

The experts who evaluated the captured Zero found that the plane weighed about fully loaded, some lighter than the F4F Wildcat, the standard United States Navy fighter of the time. The A6M&#x27;s airframe was &quot;built like a fine watch&quot;; the Zero was constructed with flush rivets, and even the guns were flush with the wings. The instrument panel was a &quot;marvel of simplicity… with no superfluities to distract [the pilot]&quot;. What most impressed the experts was that the Zero&#x27;s fuselage and wings were constructed in one piece, unlike the American method that built them separately and joined the two parts together. The Japanese method was much slower but resulted in a very strong structure and improved close maneuverability.

American test pilots found that the Zero&#x27;s controls were &quot;very light&quot; at but stiffened at speeds above to safeguard against wing failure. The Zero could not keep up with Allied aircraft in high-speed maneuvers, and its low &quot;never exceed speed&quot; (VNE) made it vulnerable in a dive. Testing also revealed that the Zero could not roll as quickly to the right as it could to the left, which could be exploited. While stable on the ground despite its light weight, the aircraft was designed purely for the attack role, emphasizing long range, maneuverability, and firepower at the expense of protection of its pilot. Most lacked self-sealing tanks and armor plating.

====British opinions====
Captain Eric Brown, the chief naval test pilot of the Royal Navy, recalled being impressed by the Zero during tests of captured aircraft. &quot;I don&#x27;t think I have ever flown a fighter that could match the rate of turn of the Zero. The Zero had ruled the roost totally and was the finest fighter in the world until mid-1943.&quot;

==Operators==
*
**Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service

==Variants==
===A6M1, Type 0 Prototypes===
The first two A6M1 prototypes were completed in March 1939, powered by the Mitsubishi Zuisei 13 engine with a two-blade propeller. It first flew on 1 April, and passed testing within a remarkably short period. By September, it had already been accepted for Navy testing as the A6M1 Type 0 Carrier Fighter, with the only notable change being a switch to a three-bladed propeller to cure a vibration problem.

===A6M2a Type 0 Model 11===
While the Navy was testing the first two prototypes, they suggested that the third be fitted with the Nakajima Sakae 12 engine instead. Mitsubishi had its own engine of this class in the form of the Kinsei, so they were somewhat reluctant to use the Sakae. Nevertheless, when the first A6M2 was completed in January 1940, the Sakae&#x27;s extra power pushed the performance of the Zero well past the original specifications.

The new version was so promising that the Navy had 15 built and shipped to China before they had completed testing. They arrived in Manchuria in July 1940, and first saw combat over Chongqing in August. There they proved to be completely untouchable by the Polikarpov I-16s and I-153s that had been such a problem for the A5Ms when in service. In one encounter, 13 Zeros shot down 27 I-15s and I-16s in under three minutes without loss. After hearing of these reports, the Navy immediately ordered the A6M2 into production as the Type 0 Carrier Fighter, Model 11.
Reports of the Zero&#x27;s performance slowly filtered back to the US. They were met with scepticism by most US military officials, who thought it impossible for the Japanese to build such an aircraft.

===A6M2b Type 0 Model 21===
After the delivery of the 65th aircraft, a further change was worked into the production lines, which introduced folding wingtips to allow them to fit on aircraft carriers. The resulting Model 21 would become one of the most produced versions early in the war. A feature was the improved range with wing tank and drop tank. When the lines switched to updated models, 740 Model 21s had been completed by Mitsubishi, and another 800 by Nakajima. Two other versions of the Model 21 were built in small numbers, the Nakajima-built A6M2-N &quot;Rufe&quot; floatplane (based on the Model 11 with a slightly modified tail), and the A6M2-K two-seat trainer of which a total of 508 were built by Hitachi and the Sasebo Naval Air Arsenal.

=== A6M3 Type 0 Model 32===
In 1941, Nakajima introduced the Sakae 21 engine, which used a two-speed supercharger for better altitude performance, and increased power to . A prototype Zero with the new engine was first flown on 15 July 1941.

The new Sakae was slightly heavier and somewhat longer due to the larger supercharger, which moved the center of gravity too far forward on the existing airframe. To correct for this, the engine mountings were cut back by to move the engine toward the cockpit. This had the side effect of reducing the size of the main fuselage fuel tank (located between the engine and the cockpit) from to . The cowling was redesigned to enlarge the cowl flaps, revise the oil cooler air intake, and move the carburetor air intake to the upper half of the cowling.

The wings were redesigned to reduce span, eliminate the folding tips, and square off the wingtips. The inboard edge of the aileron was moved outboard by one rib, and the wing fuel tanks were enlarged accordingly to . The two 20 mm wing cannon were upgraded from the Type 99 Mark 1 to the Mark 2, which required a bulge in the sheet metal of the wing below each cannon. The wings also included larger ammunition boxes and thus allowing 100 rounds per cannon.

The Sakae 21 engine and other changes increased maximum speed by only compared to the Model 21, but sacrificed nearly of range. Nevertheless, the Navy accepted the type and it entered production in April 1942.

The shorter wingspan led to better roll, and the reduced drag allowed the diving speed to be increased to . On the downside, turning and range, which were the strengths of the Model 21, suffered due to smaller ailerons, decreased lift and greater fuel consumption. The shorter range proved a significant limitation during the Solomons Campaign, during which Zeros based at Rabaul had to travel nearly to their maximum range to reach Guadalcanal and return. Consequently, the Model 32 was unsuited to that campaign and was used mainly for shorter range offensive missions and interception.

This variant was flown by only a small number of units, and only 343 were built. One example survives today, and is on display at the Tachiarai Peace Memorial Museum in Tachiarai, Fukuoka.

===A6M3 Type 0 Model 22===

In order to correct the deficiencies of the Model 32, a new version with folding wingtips and redesigned wing was introduced. The fuel tanks were moved to the outer wings, fuel lines for a drop tank were installed under each wing and the internal fuel capacity was increased to . More importantly, it regained its capabilities for long operating ranges, similar to the previous A6M2 Model 21, which was vastly shortened by the Model 32.

However, before the new design type was accepted formally by the Navy, the A6M3 Model 22 already stood ready for service in December 1942. Approximately 560 aircraft of the new type had been produced in the meantime by Mitsubishi Jukogyo K.K.

According to a theory, the very late production Model 22 might have had wings similar to the shortened, rounded-tip wing of the Model 52. One plane of such arrangement was photographed at Lakunai Airfield (&quot;Rabaul East&quot;) in the second half of 1943, and has been published widely in a number of Japanese books. While the engine cowling is the same of previous Model 32 and 22, the theory proposes that the plane is an early production Model 52.

The Model 32, 22, 22 Kō, 52, 52 Kō and 52 Otsu were all powered by the Nakajima Sakae Mod. 21 engine. That engine kept its designation in spite of changes in the exhaust system for the Model 52.

===A6M4 Type 0 Model 41/42===
Mitsubishi is unable to state with certainty that it ever used the designation &quot;A6M4&quot; or model numbers for it. However, &quot;A6M4&quot; does appear in a translation of a captured Japanese memo from a Naval Air Technical Arsenal, titled Quarterly Report on Research Experiments, dated 1 October 1942. It mentions a &quot;cross-section of the A6M4 intercooler&quot; then being designed. Some researchers believe &quot;A6M4&quot; was applied to one or two prototype planes fitted with an experimental turbo-supercharged Sakae engine designed for high altitude. Mitsubishi&#x27;s involvement in the project was probably quite limited or nil; the unmodified Sakae engine was made by Nakajima. The design and testing of the turbo-supercharger was the responsibility of the First Naval Air [Technical] Arsenal (, &quot;&quot;) at Yokosuka. At least one photo of a prototype plane exists. It shows a turbo unit mounted in the forward left fuselage.

Lack of suitable alloys for use in the manufacture of a turbo-supercharger and its related ducting caused numerous ruptures, resulting in fires and poor performance. Consequently, further development of a turbo-supercharged A6M was cancelled. The lack of acceptance by the Navy suggests that it did not bestow model number 41 or 42 formally, although it appears that the arsenal did use the designation &quot;A6M4&quot;. The prototype engines nevertheless provided useful experience for future engine designs.

===A6M5 Type 0 Model 52===


Sometimes considered as the most effective variant, the Model 52 was developed to again shorten the wings to increase speed and dispense with the folding wing mechanism. In addition, ailerons, aileron trim tab and flaps were revised. Produced first by Mitsubishi, most Model 52s were made by Nakajima. The prototype was made in June 1943 by modifying an A6M3 and was first flown in August 1943. The first Model 52 is said in the handling manual to have production number 3904, which apparently refers to the prototype.

Research by Mr. Bunzo Komine published by Mr. Kenji Miyazaki states that aircraft 3904 through 4103 had the same exhaust system and cowl flaps as on the Model 22. This is partially corroborated by two wrecks researched by Mr. Stan Gajda and Mr. L. G. Halls, production number 4007 and 4043, respectively. (The upper cowling was slightly redesigned from that of the Model 22.)
An early production A6M5 Zero with non-separated exhaust, with an A6M3 Model 22 in the background.
A new exhaust system provided an increment of thrust by aiming the stacks aft and distributing them around the forward fuselage. The new exhaust system required &quot;notched&quot; cowl flaps and heat shields just aft of the stacks. (Note, however, that the handling manual translation states that the new style of exhaust commenced with number 3904. Whether this is correct, indicates retrofitting intentions, refers to the prototype but not to all subsequent planes, or is in error, is unclear.) From production number 4274, the wing fuel tanks received carbon dioxide fire extinguishers. From number 4354, the radio became the Model 3, aerial Mark 1, and at that point it is said the antenna mast was shortened slightly. Through production number 4550, the lowest exhaust stacks were approximately the same length as those immediately above them. This caused hot exhaust to burn the forward edge of the landing gear doors and heat the tires. Therefore, from number 4551 Mitsubishi began to install shorter bottom stacks. Nakajima manufactured the Model 52 at its Koizumi plant in Gunma Prefecture. The A6M5 had a maximum speed of at , reaching that altitude in 7:01 minutes.

Subsequent variants included:
* A6M5a, Model (&quot;Kō&quot;, 52a) – Starting at Mitsubishi number 4651, an armament change substituted the belt-fed Type 99-2 Mark 4 cannon, with 125 rounds per gun, in place of the drum-fed Type 99-2 Mark 3 cannon that carried 100 rounds per gun. Hence, the bulge in the underside of the wing for each cannon&#x27;s ammunition drum was deleted and the ejection port for spent cartridge cases was moved. Thicker wing skinning was installed to permit higher diving speeds.
* A6M5b, Model (&quot;Otsu&quot;, 52b) – Armament change: The 7.7 mm (.303 in) Type 97 gun ( muzzle velocity and range) in the right forward fuselage was replaced by a 13.2 mm Type 3 Browning-derived gun ( muzzle velocity and range, with a rate of fire of 800 rounds per minute) with 240 rounds. The larger weapon required an enlarged opening, creating a distinctive asymmetric appearance to the top of the cowling, and a revised gas outlet near the windscreen. In addition, each wing cannon received a fairing at the wing leading edge. A plate of armored glass thick was fitted to the windscreen. A larger propeller spinner was fitted, suggesting a change to the propeller. The type of ventral drop tank was changed, it now had fins and was suspended on a slanted pipe. The first of this variant was completed in April 1944 and it was produced until October 1944.
* A6M5c, Model (&quot;Hei&quot;, 52c) – Armament change: One 13.2 mm (.51 in) Type 3 machine gun was added in each wing outboard of the cannon, and the 7.7 mm gun on the left side of the cowl was deleted. Four racks for rockets or small bombs were installed outboard of the 13 mm gun in each wing. Engine change: Some sources state that the hei had a Sakae 31 engine In addition, a thick piece of armored glass was installed at the headrest and an thick plate of armor was installed behind the seat. The mounting of the central drop tank changed to a four-post design. Wing skin was thickened further. The first of this variant was completed in September 1944. Because of the gain in weight, this variant was used mainly for intercepting B-29s and special attack.
* A6M5-S (A6M5 Yakan Sentōki) – Armament change: To intercept B-29s and other night-flying aircraft, an air arsenal converted some Model 52s to night fighters. They were armed with one 20 mm Type 99 cannon behind the pilot, aimed upward, similar in intent to the Luftwaffe&#x27;s Schräge Musik installation. However, lack of radar prevented them from being very effective.

Some Model 21 and 52 aircraft were converted to &quot;bakusen&quot; (fighter-bombers) by mounting a bomb rack and bomb in place of the centerline drop tank.

Up to seven Model 52 planes were ostensibly converted into A6M5-K two-seat trainers. Mass production was contemplated by Hitachi, but not undertaken.

===A6M6 Type 0 Model 53===
The A6M6 was developed to use the Sakae 31a engine, featuring water-methanol engine boost and self-sealing wing tanks. During preliminary testing, its performance was considered unsatisfactory due to the additional engine power failing to materialize and the unreliability of the fuel injection system. Testing continued on the A6M6 but the end of war stopped further development. Only one prototype was produced.

===A6M7 Type 0 Model 62/63===
The A6M7 was the last variant to see service. It was designed to meet a requirement by the Navy for a dedicated attack/dive bomber version that could operate from smaller aircraft carriers or according to another source, replace the obsolete Aichi D3A. The A6M7 had considerable design changes compared to previous attempts to make the A6M suitable for dive bombing. This included a reinforced vertical stabilizer, a special bomb rack, provision of two 350-litre drop tanks and fixed bomb/rocket swing stoppers on the underside of the wings. It was also given a new powerplant, the Sakae-31 engine, producing 1,130 hp on take-off. The A6M7 had a similar armament layout to the A6M5c with the exception of the bomb centreline bomb rack, capable of carrying 250 kg or 500 kg bombs. Entering production in May 1945,
the A6M7 was also used for Kamikaze attacks.

===A6M8 Type 0 Model 64===

Similar to the A6M6 but with the Sakae, now out of production, replaced by the Mitsubishi Kinsei 62 engine with , 60% more powerful than the A6M2&#x27;s engine. This resulted in an extensively modified cowling and nose for the aircraft. The carburetor intake was much larger, a long duct like that on the Nakajima B6N Tenzan was added, and a large spinner — like that on the Yokosuka D4Y Suisei with the Kinsei 62 — was mounted. The armament consisted of two 13.2 mm (.52 in) Type 3 machine guns and two 20 mm (.80 in) Type 99 cannons in the wings. In addition, the Model 64 was modified to carry two drop tanks on either wing in order to permit the mounting of a bomb on the underside of the fuselage. Two prototypes were completed in April 1945 but the chaotic situation of Japanese industry and the end of the war obstructed the start of the ambitious program of production for 6,300 A6M8s, only the two prototypes being completed and flown.

==Production==

Not included:
* A second A6M1 was completed on 17 March 1939, but was written off without explanation after completing the company&#x27;s flight test program in July 1940.

===Trainer===
===Total production===
*According to USSBS Report: 10,934
**includes: 10,094 A6M, 323 A6M2-N and 517 A6M-K builds.
*According to Francillon: 11,291
**includes: 10,449 A6M, 327 A6M2-N, 508 A6M2-K and 7 A6M5-K builds.

==Surviving aircraft==



Like many surviving World War II Japanese aircraft, most surviving Zeros are made up of parts from multiple airframes. As a result, some are referred to by conflicting manufacturer serial numbers. Other planes, such as those recovered after decades in a wrecked condition, have been reconstructed to the extent that the majority of their structure is made up of modern parts. All of this means the identities of surviving aircraft can be difficult to confirm. Most flying Zeros have had their engines replaced with similar American units. Only one, the Planes of Fame Air Museum&#x27;s A6M5, has the original Sakae engine. 

The rarity of flyable Zeros accounts for the use of single-seat North American T-6 Texans, with heavily modified fuselages and painted in Japanese markings, as substitutes for Zeros in the films &quot;Tora! Tora! Tora!&quot;, &quot;The Final Countdown&quot;, and many other television and film depictions of the aircraft, such as &quot;Baa Baa Black Sheep&quot; (renamed &quot;Black Sheep Squadron&quot;). One Model 52 was used during the production of &quot;Pearl Harbor&quot;.

=== Australia ===
* 840 – on display at the Australian Aviation Heritage Centre in Winnellie, Northern Territory. Wreckage of the forward fuselage, inboard wings, engine, and propeller.
* 5784 – on display at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory. A restored A6M2-21 &quot;V-173&quot; was retrieved as a wreck after the war and later found to have been flown by Saburō Sakai at Lae.

=== China ===
* Unknown serial number – on display at the Beijing Military Museum

=== Germany ===
* Replica – on display at the Technik Museum Speyer in Speyer, Rhineland-Palatinate. Replica of the fuselage section on display at IWM London.

===Indonesia===

* Unknown serial number – on display at the Dirgantara Mandala Museum in Yogyakarta.

=== Japan ===
* 1493 – on display at the Kawaguchiko Motor Museum in Fujikawaguchiko, Yamanashi.
* 4168/4240/4241 – on display at the Yūshūkan in Chiyoda, Tokyo.
* 4685 – on display at Hamamatsu Air Base in Hamamatsu, Shizuoka.
* 4708 – on display at the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Museum in Komaki, Aichi.
* 31870 – a two-seater on display at the National Museum of Nature and Science in Taito, Tokyo.
* 62343 – on display at the Chiran Peace Museum for Kamikaze Pilots in Chiran, Kagoshima.
* 82729 – on display at the Yamato Museum in Kure, Hiroshima.
* 91518 – on display at the Kawaguchiko Motor Museum.
* 92717 – on display at the Kawaguchiko Motor Museum.
* Replica – on display at MCAS Iwakuni in Iwakuni, Yamaguchi.
* Replica – used as movie prop for 2013 film &quot;The Eternal Zero&quot;. On display at Usa City Peace Museum, Usa, Ōita Prefecture.

=== New Zealand ===
* 3835/3844 – on display at the Auckland War Memorial Museum in Auckland. It was taken to New Zealand from Bougainville in October 1945 on board the ferry &quot;Wahine&quot; which was being used to repatriate troops. The Zero had been caught on the ground on Bougainville, damaged in the bombing during the Bougainville campaign in November 1943. The plane had been hidden by the Japanese who had restored it with the goal of flying it off the island. The plane was retrieved by RNZAF intelligence officers in September 1945 at the Japanese airfield at Buin in southern Bougainville.

=== United Kingdom ===
* 196 – on display at the Imperial War Museum London in London, Greater London. Forward fuselage displayed.
* 3685 – on display at the Imperial War Museum Duxford in Duxford, Cambridgeshire. 3685 was salvaged from Taroa Island in 1991 and acquired by the museum in 2000, before being put on display in 2010. Fuselage displayed in unrestored condition.

=== United States ===
* 1303 – in storage at the Flying Heritage Collection in Everett, Washington.
* 3618 – in storage at Fantasy of Flight in Polk City, Florida.
* 4043 – in storage at Fantasy of Flight. Along with several other Zeros, this aircraft was recovered by the Australian War Memorial Museum in the early 1970s from Rabaul in the South Pacific. The markings suggest that it was in service after June 1943 and further investigation suggests that it has cockpit features associated with the Nakajima-built Model 52b. If this is correct, it is most likely one of the 123 aircraft lost by the Japanese during the assault of Rabaul. The aircraft was shipped in pieces to the attraction and was eventually made up for display as a crashed aircraft. Much of the aircraft is usable for patterns, and some of its parts can be restored to one day make this a basis for a flyable aircraft.
* 4340 – on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.
* 4400 – in storage at the Flying Heritage Collection in Everett, Washington.
* 5356/5451 – on display at the Pearl Harbor Aviation Museum in Honolulu, Hawaii. This aircraft was formerly flown by the Commemorative Air Force after being restored by Robert Diemert.
* 5357 – owned by the Planes of Fame Air Museum in Chino, California. This aircraft, 61-120, is the only airworthy example powered with an original Sakae radial engine.
* 5450 – on display at the National Naval Aviation Museum at Naval Air Station Pensacola in Pensacola, Florida.
* 23186 – on display at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum in San Diego, California. This aircraft is on loan from the National Air and Space Museum. The museum previously had another Zero in its collection, msn 4323, but it was destroyed in a fire on 22 February 1978.
* 51553 – on display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB in Dayton, Ohio. It was restored by Century Aviation.
* Replica – owned by Warren Pietsch at the Texas Flying Legends Museum in Houston, Texas. This aircraft, known as the &quot;Blayd&quot; Zero, is a reconstruction based on templating original Zero components recovered from the South Pacific. To be considered a &quot;restoration&quot; and not a reproduction, the builders used a small fraction of parts from the original Zero landing gear in the reconstruction. It was built as an A6M2 Model 21. This aircraft was damaged in a ground accident on 15 March 2016, when a Goodyear FG-1D Corsair taxiing behind it overran the tail of the Zero, with the Corsair&#x27;s propeller shredding roughly the last third of the Zero&#x27;s fuselage and its control surfaces.
* Replica (3869) – operated by the Southern California Wing of the Commemorative Air Force in Camarillo, California. This aircraft is an A6M3 that was recovered from Babo Airfield, Indonesia, in 1991. It was partially restored from several A6M3s in Russia, then brought to the United States for restoration. The aircraft was re-registered in 1998 and displayed at the Museum of Flying in Santa Monica, California. It uses a Pratt &amp; Whitney R-1830-75 engine.
* Replica (3852) – owned by the Flying Heritage Collection in Everett, Washington. This aircraft was recovered from Babo Airfield and restored – first in Russia, then in California, and finally in Washington state – before being delivered to the Flying Heritage Collection. It has a P&amp;W engine installed.
* Replica (3858) – on display at Fagen Fighters WWII Museum in Granite Falls, Minnesota. Formerly owned by Masahide Ishizuka in Kanoya, Kagoshima. Pratt &amp; Whitney R-1830 engine.
*Replica – under airworthy rebuild by Legend Flyers in Everett, Washington for the Military Aviation Museum. This aircraft uses a small amount of parts from 3148.

==Specifications (A6M2 (Type 0 Model 21))==

==See also==

==Footnotes==

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Angelucci, Enzo and Peter M. Bowers. &quot;The American Fighter&quot;. Sparkford, UK: Haynes Publishing, 1987. .
* Fernandez, Ronald. &quot;Excess Profits: The Rise of United Technologies&quot;. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 1983. .
* Ford, Douglas. &quot;Informing Airmen? The U.S. Army Air Forces&#x27; Intelligence on Japanese Fighter Tactics in the Pacific Theatre, 1941–5,&quot; &quot;International History Review&quot; 34 (Dec. 2012), 725–52.
* Francillon, R.J. &quot;Japanese Aircraft of the Pacific War&quot;. London: Putnam, 1970, .
* Glancey, Jonathan. &quot;Spitfire: The Illustrated Biography&quot;. London: Atlantic Books, 2006. .
* Green, William and Gordon Swanborough. &quot;The Great Book of Fighters&quot;. St. Paul, Minnesota: MBI Publishing, 2001. .
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;Aircraft of World War 2&quot;. London: Octopus Books Limited, 1980. .
* Holmes, Tony, ed. &quot;Dogfight, The Greatest Air Duels of World War II&quot;. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2011. .
* Jablonski, Edward. &quot;Airwar.&quot; New York: Doubleday &amp; Co., 1979. .
* James, Derek N. Gloster Aircraft since 1917. London: Putnam and Company Ltd., 1987. .
* Lundstrom, John B. &quot;The First Team and the Guadalcanal Campaign&quot;. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 1994. .
* Matricardi, Paolo. &quot;Aerei Militari. Caccia e Ricognitori&quot; (in Italian). Milan: Mondadori Electa, 2006.
* Mikesh, Robert C. &quot;Warbird History: Zero, Combat &amp; Development History of Japan&#x27;s Legendary Mitsubishi A6M Zero Fighter&quot;. St. Paul, Minnesota: Motorbooks International, 1994. .
* Mikesh, Robert C. &quot;Zero Fighter&quot;. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1981; copyright Zokeisha Publications, Tokyo. .
* Okumiya, Masatake and Jiro Horikoshi, with Martin Caidin. &quot;Zero!&quot; New York: E.P. Dutton &amp; Co., 1956. 
* Nijboer, Donald. &quot;Seafire Vs A6M Zero: Pacific Theatre&quot;. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2009. .
* Nohara, Shigeru. &quot;Aero Detail 7: Mitsubishi A6M Zero Fighter&quot;. Tokyo: Dai-Nippon Kaiga Co. Ltd, 1993. .
* Parshall, Jonathan and Anthony Tully. &quot;Shattered Sword: The Untold Story of the Battle of Midway&quot;. Washington, D.C.: Potomac Books Inc., 2007. (paperback).
* &quot;Plane Facts: Zero-sen ancestry&quot;. &quot;Air International&quot;, October 1973, Vol 3 No 4. pp. 199–200.
* Smith, Peter C.&quot;Mitsubishi Zero: Japan&#x27;s Legendary Fighter&quot;. Barnsley, South Yorkshire, UK: Pen &amp; Sword Books, 2015. .
* Spick, Mike. &quot;Allied Fighter Aces of World War II&quot;. London: Greenhill Books, 1997. .
* Stille, Mark. &quot;Guadalcanal 1942–43: Japan&#x27;s bid to knock out Henderson Field and the Cactus Air Force (Air Campaign).&quot; Osprey Publishing, 2019. .
* Thompson, J. Steve with Peter C. Smith. &quot;Air Combat Manoeuvres: The Technique and History of Air Fighting for Flight Simulation&quot;. Hersham, Surrey, UK: Ian Allan Publishing, 2008. .
* Thruelsen, Richard. &quot;The Grumman Story&quot;. Praeger Press, 1976. .
* Tillman, Barrett. &quot;Hellcat: The F6F in World War II&quot;. Naval Institute Press, 1979. .
* United States Strategic Bombing Survey Aircraft Division. &quot;Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.&quot; Corporation Report I, Washington, D.C. 1947.
* United States Strategic Bombing Survey Aircraft Division. &quot;Nakajima Aircraft Company, Ltd.&quot; Corporation Report II, Washington, D.C. 1947.
* United States Strategic Bombing Survey Aircraft Division. &quot;Hitachi Aircraft Company, Ltd.&quot; Corporation Report VII, Washington, D.C. 1947.
* United States Strategic Bombing Survey Aircraft Division. &quot;Army Air Arsenal and Navy Air Depots&quot; Corporation Report XIX, Washington, D.C. 1947.
* Wilcox, Richard. &quot;The Zero: The first famed Japanese fighter captured intact reveals its secrets to U.S. Navy aerial experts&quot;. &quot;Life&quot;, 4 November 1942.
* Willmott, H.P. &quot;Zero A6M&quot;. London: Bison Books, 1980. .
* Yoshimura, Akira, translated by Retsu Kaiho and Michael Gregson. &quot;Zero Fighter&quot;. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Publishers, 1996. .
* Young, Edward M. &quot;F4F Wildcat vs A6M Zero-sen&quot;. Oxford, UK: Osprey, 2013. .

==Further reading==
* Bueschel, Richard M. &quot;Mitsubishi A6M1/2/-2N Zero-Sen in Imperial Japanese Naval Air Service&quot;. Canterbury, Kent, UK: Osprey Publications Ltd., 1970. .
* Francillon, René J. &quot;The Mitsubishi A6M2 Zero-Sen (Aircraft in Profile number 129)&quot;. Leatherhead, Surrey, UK: Profile Publications Ltd., 1966.
* Francillon, René J. The Mitsubishi A6M3 Zero-Sen (&quot;Hamp&quot;) (Aircraft in Profile number 190). Leatherhead, Surrey, UK: Profile Publications Ltd., 1967.
* Jackson, Robert. &quot;Combat Legend: Mitsubishi Zero&quot;. Ramsbury, Marlborough, Wiltshire, UK: Airlife Publishing, 2003. .
* Juszczak, Artur. &quot;Mitsubishi A6M Zero&quot;. Tarnobrzeg, Poland/Redbourn, UK: Mushroom Model Publications, 2001. .
* Kinzey, Bert. &quot;Attack on Pearl Harbor: Japan awakens a Sleeping Giant&quot;. Blacksburg, Virginia, USA: Military Aviation Archives, 2010. .
* Marchand, Patrick and Junko Takamori. (Illustrator). &quot;A6M Zero (Les Ailes de Gloire 2)&quot; (in French). Le Muy, France: Editions d’Along, 2000. .
* Mikesh, Robert C. and Rikyu Watanabe (Illustrator). &quot;Zero Fighter&quot;. London: Jane&#x27;s Publishing Company Ltd., 1981. .
* Nohara, Shigeru. &quot;A6M Zero in Action (Aircraft #59)&quot;. Carrollton, Texas, USA: Squadron/Signal Publications, Inc., 1983. .
* Nohara, Shigeru. &quot;Mitsubishi A6M Zero Fighter (Aero Detail 7)&quot; (in Japanese with English captions). Tokyo, Japan: Dai Nippon Kaiga Company Ltd., 1993. .
* Okumiya, Masatake and Jiro Horikoshi (with Martin Caidin, ed.). &quot;Zero! The Story of Japan&#x27;s Air War in the Pacific: 1941–45&quot;. New York: Ballantine Books, 1956. No ISBN.
* &quot;Plane Facts: Zero-sen ancestry&quot;. &quot;Air International&quot;, Vol. 3, No. 4, October 1973, pp. 199–200.
* Richards, M.C. and Donald S. Smith. &quot;Mitsubishi A6M5 to A6M8 &#x27;Zero-Sen&#x27; (&#x27;Zeke 52&#x27;)(Aircraft in Profile number 236)&quot;. Windsor, Berkshire, UK: Profile Publications Ltd., 1972.
* Sakaida, Henry. &quot;Imperial Japanese Navy Aces, 1937–45&quot;. Botley, Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing Ltd., 1998. .
* Sakaida, Henry. &quot;The Siege of Rabaul&quot;. St. Paul, Minnesota: Phalanx Publishing, 1996. .
* Sheftall, M.G. &quot;Blossoms in the Wind: Human Legacies of the Kamikaze&quot;. New York: NAL Caliber, 2005. .
* Wilson, Stewart. &quot;Zero, Hurricane &amp; P-38, The Story of Three Classic Fighters of WW2 (Legends of the Air 4)&quot;. Fyshwick, Australia: Aerospace Publications Pty Ltd., 1996. .

==External links==
*Tour A6M5 Zero cockpit
*Mitsubishi A6M Zero Japanese fighter aircraft—design, construction, history
*www.j-aircraft.com: Quotes A6M
*Mitsubishi A6M Reisen (Zero Fighter), Joao Paulo Julião Matsuura
*Mitsubishi A6M2-K and A6M5-K, Joao Paulo Julião Matsuura
*Nakajima A6M2-N, Joao Paulo Julião Matsuura
*War Prize: The Capture of the First Japanese Zero Fighter in 1941
;Video links
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="4" end="18" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Mitsubishi A6M"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="25" end="29" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261534" start="52" end="67" title="Carrier-based aircraft" label="carrier-capable"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="68" end="84" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883009" start="110" end="137" title="Mitsubishi Aircraft Company" label="Mitsubishi Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q648280" start="149" end="176" title="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries" label="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="201" end="223" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="444" end="457" title="Japanese calendar#Years" label="imperial year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045087" start="521" end="542" title="World War II Allied names for Japanese aircraft" label="Allied reporting name"/>
<link wikidata="Q40156" start="553" end="557" title="Mitsubishi A6M Zero" label="Zeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="745" end="757" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568476" start="853" end="887" title="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q830494" start="1000" end="1008" title="dogfight" label="dogfight"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1154" end="1160" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="1419" end="1426" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q930931" start="1499" end="1521" title="self-sealing fuel tank" label="self-sealing fuel tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="1915" end="1933" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="war in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="1997" end="2005" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q429839" start="2138" end="2152" title="Mitsubishi A5M" label="Mitsubishi A5M"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="2211" end="2233" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476227" start="2407" end="2415" title="Nakajima Aircraft Company" label="Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q336368" start="2698" end="2707" title="drop tank" label="drop tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933951" start="2851" end="2863" title="20 mm cannon" label="20 mm cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="2887" end="2898" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="2908" end="2912" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="2984" end="3006" title="radio direction finder" label="radio direction finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q248029" start="3324" end="3338" title="Jiro Horikoshi" label="Jiro Horikoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972867" start="3592" end="3617" title="Sumitomo Metal Industries" label="Sumitomo Metal Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607372" start="3640" end="3661" title="7075 aluminium alloy" label="extra super duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204701" start="3849" end="3862" title="zinc chromate" label="zinc chromate"/>
<link wikidata="Q930931" start="4015" end="4037" title="self-sealing fuel tank" label="self-sealing fuel tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="4517" end="4527" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="4528" end="4537" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874355" start="4567" end="4592" title="conventional landing gear" label="conventional landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q887216" start="4777" end="4789" title="wing loading" label="wing loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="4851" end="4865" title="stall (flight)" label="stalling speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268194" start="5029" end="5038" title="servo tab" label="servo tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="5047" end="5054" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5383" end="5408" title="Type (designation)#Japan" label="aircraft type designation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5507" end="5520" title="Japanese calendar#Years" label="Imperial year"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="6205" end="6212" title="bombers" label="bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="6228" end="6235" title="Military glider" label="gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q41426" start="6255" end="6263" title="Trainer aircraft" label="trainers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692244" start="6429" end="6460" title="Technical Air Intelligence Unit" label="Technical Air Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325081" start="6464" end="6482" title="Eagle Farm Airport" label="Eagle Farm Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045087" start="6557" end="6590" title="World War II Allied names for Japanese aircraft" label="Allied code for Japanese aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q649529" start="6744" end="6759" title="Nakajima A6M2-N" label="Nakajima A6M2-N"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119075" start="6760" end="6770" title="floatplane" label="floatplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q436102" start="6890" end="6912" title="Henry H. Arnold" label="&amp;quot;Hap&amp;quot; Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="6931" end="6960" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q696356" start="7294" end="7314" title="Mitsubishi G3M" label="G3M &amp;quot;Nell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q705165" start="7341" end="7358" title="Bombing of Chongqing" label="raid of Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q696089" start="7385" end="7400" title="Polikarpov I-15" label="Polikarpov I-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q641977" start="7406" end="7410" title="Polikarpov I-16" label="I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266754" start="7419" end="7448" title="Chinese Nationalist Air Force" label="Chinese Nationalist Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645183" start="7553" end="7566" title="Louie Yim-qun" label="Louie Yim-qun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7653" end="7663" title="Gao Youxin" label="Gao Youxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="7940" end="7962" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="8620" end="8640" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8652" end="8655" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q468716" start="8812" end="8832" title="Claire Lee Chennault" label="Claire Lee Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="Q334612" start="9488" end="9507" title="Grumman F4F Wildcat" label="Grumman F4F Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q217145" start="9524" end="9543" title="Guadalcanal campaign" label="Guadalcanal defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523498" start="9636" end="9649" title="coastwatchers" label="coastwatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="9654" end="9659" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="9735" end="9760" title="China Burma India Theater" label="China Burma India Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q467249" start="9774" end="9787" title="Flying Tigers" label="Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q700685" start="9898" end="9929" title="Nakajima Ki-27" label="Nakajima Ki-27 &amp;quot;Nate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q700703" start="9934" end="9966" title="Nakajima Ki-43 Hayabusa" label="Nakajima Ki-43 &amp;quot;Oscar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="10063" end="10076" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="P-40 Warhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q425718" start="10258" end="10289" title="John Thach" label="John S. &amp;quot;Jimmy&amp;quot; Thach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119070" start="10303" end="10314" title="Thach Weave" label="Thach Weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="10657" end="10673" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="10693" end="10708" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="10938" end="10947" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q334612" start="11137" end="11148" title="Grumman F4F Wildcat" label="F4F Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365627" start="11158" end="11176" title="Elliott Buckmaster" label="Elliott Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q352469" start="11366" end="11378" title="Saburō Sakai" label="Saburō Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q172913" start="11513" end="11536" title="Lockheed P-38 Lightning" label="Lockheed P-38 Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11554" end="11602" title="M2 Browning#AN/M2" label="&amp;quot;light barrel&amp;quot; AN/M2 .50 cal. Browning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11624" end="11640" title="Hispano-Suiza HS.404#US production" label="20 mm autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q465903" start="11650" end="11669" title="Grumman F6F Hellcat" label="Grumman F6F Hellcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q465806" start="11674" end="11692" title="Vought F4U Corsair" label="Vought F4U Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q696575" start="12262" end="12283" title="Mitsubishi A7M" label="Mitsubishi A7M2 Reppū"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="12464" end="12488" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q88085" start="13176" end="13191" title="Gerhard Neumann" label="Gerhard Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200046" start="13621" end="13632" title="Akutan Zero" label="Akutan Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q424195" start="13637" end="13650" title="Akutan Island" label="Akutan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="13658" end="13667" title="Aleutians" label="Aleutians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8194086" start="13693" end="13705" title="Dutch Harbor" label="Dutch Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800390" start="14280" end="14310" title="Naval Air Station North Island" label="Naval Air Station North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="14699" end="14710" title="flush rivet" label="flush rivet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15419" end="15437" title="Vne#VNE" label="never exceed speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q348719" start="15895" end="15905" title="Eric Brown (pilot)" label="Eric Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="15941" end="15951" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568476" start="16243" end="16277" title="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service" label="Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317199" start="16397" end="16414" title="Mitsubishi Zuisei" label="Mitsubishi Zuisei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708163" start="16860" end="16874" title="Nakajima Sakae" label="Nakajima Sakae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723523" start="16957" end="16963" title="Mitsubishi Kinsei" label="Kinsei"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="17316" end="17325" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="17366" end="17375" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q641977" start="17441" end="17456" title="Polikarpov I-16" label="Polikarpov I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q700671" start="17462" end="17467" title="Polikarpov I-153" label="I-153"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="18810" end="18822" title="supercharger" label="supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="19055" end="19072" title="center of gravity" label="center of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151524" start="19769" end="19783" title="Type 99 cannon" label="Type 99 Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11602784" start="20897" end="20928" title="Tachiarai Peace Memorial Museum" label="Tachiarai Peace Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205864" start="20932" end="20950" title="Tachiarai, Fukuoka" label="Tachiarai, Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479993" start="21851" end="21867" title="Lakunai Airfield" label="Lakunai Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25388" end="25421" title="Fire extinguisher#Halons, Halon-replacement clean agents and carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide fire extinguishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129499" start="25915" end="25931" title="Gunma Prefecture" label="Gunma Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271256" start="26692" end="26719" title="Type 3 aircraft machine gun" label="Type 3 Browning-derived gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="28119" end="28124" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29s"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="28289" end="28303" title="Night fighter" label="night fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q698392" start="28425" end="28438" title="Schräge Musik" label="Schräge Musik"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="28588" end="28603" title="Fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="29412" end="29418" title="Attack aircraft" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="29419" end="29430" title="dive bomber" label="dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q403668" start="29542" end="29551" title="Aichi D3A" label="Aichi D3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="30140" end="30148" title="Kamikaze" label="Kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723523" start="30266" end="30283" title="Mitsubishi Kinsei" label="Mitsubishi Kinsei"/>
<link wikidata="Q696483" start="30492" end="30511" title="Nakajima B6N Tenzan" label="Nakajima B6N Tenzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q247036" start="30562" end="30581" title="Yokosuka D4Y Suisei" label="Yokosuka D4Y Suisei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092558" start="32094" end="32116" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830" label="similar American units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391415" start="32132" end="32157" title="Planes of Fame Air Museum" label="Planes of Fame Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="32268" end="32292" title="North American T-6 Texan" label="North American T-6 Texan"/>
<link wikidata="Q258092" start="32405" end="32422" title="Tora! Tora! Tora!" label="Tora! Tora! Tora!"/>
<link wikidata="Q503033" start="32436" end="32455" title="The Final Countdown (film)" label="The Final Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q281955" start="32540" end="32559" title="Baa Baa Black Sheep (TV series)" label="Baa Baa Black Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q194413" start="32663" end="32675" title="Pearl Harbor (film)" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23753999" start="32728" end="32763" title="Australian Aviation Heritage Centre" label="Australian Aviation Heritage Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025568" start="32767" end="32796" title="Winnellie, Northern Territory" label="Winnellie, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q782783" start="32897" end="32920" title="Australian War Memorial" label="Australian War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="32924" end="32962" title="Canberra, Australian Capital Territory" label="Canberra, Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q352469" start="33078" end="33090" title="Saburō Sakai" label="Saburō Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q612250" start="33094" end="33097" title="Lae" label="Lae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789184" start="33158" end="33181" title="Beijing Military Museum" label="Beijing Military Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q578657" start="33229" end="33250" title="Technik Museum Speyer" label="Technik Museum Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="33254" end="33282" title="Speyer" label="Speyer, Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13095241" start="33404" end="33429" title="Dirgantara Mandala Museum" label="Dirgantara Mandala Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568" start="33433" end="33443" title="Yogyakarta" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628135" start="33487" end="33511" title="Kawaguchiko Motor Museum" label="Kawaguchiko Motor Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004231" start="33515" end="33541" title="Fujikawaguchiko, Yamanashi" label="Fujikawaguchiko, Yamanashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855971" start="33580" end="33588" title="Yūshūkan" label="Yūshūkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214051" start="33592" end="33606" title="Chiyoda, Tokyo" label="Chiyoda, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q860035" start="33631" end="33649" title="Hamamatsu Air Base" label="Hamamatsu Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q185125" start="33653" end="33672" title="Hamamatsu, Shizuoka" label="Hamamatsu, Shizuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q648280" start="33701" end="33735" title="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries" label="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q389537" start="33739" end="33752" title="Komaki, Aichi" label="Komaki, Aichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q74940" start="33795" end="33832" title="National Museum of Nature and Science" label="National Museum of Nature and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q232641" start="33836" end="33848" title="Taito, Tokyo" label="Taito, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458048" start="33878" end="33917" title="Chiran Peace Museum for Kamikaze Pilots" label="Chiran Peace Museum for Kamikaze Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q994450" start="33921" end="33938" title="Chiran, Kagoshima" label="Chiran, Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063071" start="33968" end="33981" title="Yamato Museum" label="Yamato Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223439" start="33985" end="34000" title="Kure, Hiroshima" label="Kure, Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030389" start="34136" end="34148" title="MCAS Iwakuni" label="MCAS Iwakuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q329797" start="34152" end="34170" title="Iwakuni, Yamaguchi" label="Iwakuni, Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11550375" start="34217" end="34245" title="The Eternal Zero (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Eternal Zero&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q114147" start="34284" end="34293" title="Usa, Ōita" label="Usa, Ōita"/>
<link wikidata="Q758657" start="34359" end="34387" title="Auckland War Memorial Museum" label="Auckland War Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="34391" end="34399" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="34434" end="34446" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642589" start="34488" end="34494" title="TSS Wahine" label="Wahine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704785" start="34634" end="34655" title="Bougainville campaign" label="Bougainville campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="34806" end="34811" title="RNZAF" label="RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187439" start="34880" end="34884" title="Buin, Papua New Guinea" label="Buin"/>
<link wikidata="Q749808" start="34961" end="34987" title="Imperial War Museum London" label="Imperial War Museum London"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="34991" end="35013" title="London, Greater London" label="London, Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758240" start="35070" end="35097" title="Imperial War Museum Duxford" label="Imperial War Museum Duxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268125" start="35101" end="35124" title="Duxford, Cambridgeshire" label="Duxford, Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686518" start="35149" end="35161" title="Taroa Island" label="Taroa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463437" start="35337" end="35363" title="Flying Heritage Collection" label="Flying Heritage Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q392599" start="35367" end="35386" title="Everett, Washington" label="Everett, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395903" start="35411" end="35428" title="Fantasy of Flight" label="Fantasy of Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q941420" start="35432" end="35450" title="Polk City, Florida" label="Polk City, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q218768" start="35616" end="35622" title="Rabaul" label="Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089635" start="35909" end="35926" title="Bombing of Rabaul (November 1943)" label="assault of Rabaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="36206" end="36235" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="36239" end="36255" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7122302" start="36366" end="36394" title="Pearl Harbor Aviation Museum" label="Pearl Harbor Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="36398" end="36414" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q505330" start="36456" end="36479" title="Commemorative Air Force" label="Commemorative Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391415" start="36542" end="36567" title="Planes of Fame Air Museum" label="Planes of Fame Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q506395" start="36571" end="36588" title="Chino, California" label="Chino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368608" start="36716" end="36746" title="National Naval Aviation Museum" label="National Naval Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="36750" end="36777" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="36781" end="36799" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308955" start="36829" end="36861" title="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="36865" end="36886" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422977" start="37101" end="37147" title="National Museum of the United States Air Force" label="National Museum of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="37151" end="37171" title="Wright-Patterson AFB" label="Wright-Patterson AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="37175" end="37187" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37269" end="37296" title="Texas Flying Legends Museum" label="Texas Flying Legends Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="37300" end="37314" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439100" start="37970" end="37994" title="CAF Southern California Wing Museum" label="Southern California Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q505330" start="38002" end="38025" title="Commemorative Air Force" label="Commemorative Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q846040" start="38029" end="38050" title="Camarillo, California" label="Camarillo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837971" start="38101" end="38114" title="Babo Airfield" label="Babo Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940862" start="38303" end="38319" title="Museum of Flying" label="Museum of Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="38323" end="38347" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092558" start="38359" end="38388" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830 Twin Wasp" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830-75"/>
<link wikidata="Q110239803" start="38739" end="38765" title="Fagen Fighters WWII Museum" label="Fagen Fighters WWII Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005637" start="38769" end="38793" title="Granite Falls, Minnesota" label="Granite Falls, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q819578" start="38834" end="38851" title="Kanoya, Kagoshima" label="Kanoya, Kagoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092558" start="38853" end="38879" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney R-1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q392599" start="38943" end="38962" title="Everett, Washington" label="Everett, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851970" start="38971" end="38995" title="Military Aviation Museum" label="Military Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337345" start="39177" end="39192" title="Peter M. Bowers" label="Peter M. Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890797" start="40402" end="40423" title="Naval Institute Press" label="Naval Institute Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297188" start="40876" end="40893" title="Masatake Okumiya" label="Okumiya, Masatake"/>
<link wikidata="Q248029" start="40898" end="40912" title="Jiro Horikoshi" label="Jiro Horikoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277983" start="40919" end="40932" title="Martin Caidin" label="Martin Caidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828207" start="41436" end="41453" title="Air International" label="Air International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297188" start="44834" end="44851" title="Masatake Okumiya" label="Okumiya, Masatake"/>
<link wikidata="Q248029" start="44856" end="44870" title="Jiro Horikoshi" label="Jiro Horikoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277983" start="44877" end="44890" title="Martin Caidin" label="Martin Caidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828207" start="45070" end="45087" title="Air International" label="Air International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19624" wikidata="Q2587" url="?curid=19624" title="May 27">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*1096 – Count Emicho enters Mainz, where his followers massacre Jewish citizens. At least 600 Jews are killed.
*1120 – Richard III of Capua is anointed as Prince two weeks before his untimely death.
*1153 – Malcolm IV becomes King of Scotland.
*1199 – John is crowned King of England.
*1257 – Richard of Cornwall, and his wife, Sanchia of Provence, are crowned King and Queen of the Germans at Aachen Cathedral.

===1601–1900===
*1644 – Manchu regent Dorgon defeats rebel leader Li Zicheng of the Shun dynasty at the Battle of Shanhai Pass, allowing the Manchus to enter and conquer the capital city of Beijing.
*1703 – Tsar Peter the Great founds the city of Saint Petersburg.
*1798 – The Pitt–Tierney duel takes place on Putney Heath outside London. A bloodless duel between the Prime Minister of Great Britain William Pitt the Younger and his political opponent George Tierney.
* 1798 – The Battle of Oulart Hill takes place in Wexford, Ireland; Irish rebel leaders defeat and kill a detachment of militia.
*1799 – War of the Second Coalition: Austrian forces defeat the French at Winterthur, Switzerland.
*1813 – War of 1812: In Canada, American forces capture Fort George.
*1860 – Giuseppe Garibaldi begins the Siege of Palermo, part of the wars of Italian unification.
*1863 – American Civil War: The first Union infantry assault of the Siege of Port Hudson occurs.
*1874 – The first group of Dorsland trekkers under the leadership of Gert Alberts leaves Pretoria.
*1883 – Alexander III is crowned Tsar of Russia.
*1896 – The F4-strength St. Louis–East St. Louis tornado hits in St. Louis, Missouri, and East St. Louis, Illinois, killing at least 255 people and causing over $10 million in damage.

===1901–present===
*1905 – Russo-Japanese War: The Battle of Tsushima begins.
*1915 – HMS &quot;Princess Irene&quot; explodes and sinks off Sheerness, Kent, with the loss of 352 lives.
*1917 – Pope Benedict XV promulgates the 1917 &quot;Code of Canon Law&quot;, the first comprehensive codification of Catholic canon law in the legal history of the Catholic Church.
*1919 – The NC-4 aircraft arrives in Lisbon after completing the first transatlantic flight.
*1927 – The Ford Motor Company ceases manufacture of the Ford Model T and begins to retool plants to make the Ford Model A.
*1930 – The Chrysler Building in New York City, the tallest man-made structure at the time, opens to the public.
*1933 – New Deal: The U.S. Federal Securities Act is signed into law requiring the registration of securities with the Federal Trade Commission.
*1935 – New Deal: The Supreme Court of the United States declares the National Industrial Recovery Act to be unconstitutional in &quot;A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States&quot;, (295 U.S. 495).
*1937 – In California, the Golden Gate Bridge opens to pedestrian traffic, creating a vital link between San Francisco and Marin County, California.
*1940 – World War II: In the Le Paradis massacre, 99 soldiers from a Royal Norfolk Regiment unit are shot after surrendering to German troops; two survive.
*1941 – World War II: U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt proclaims an &quot;unlimited national emergency&quot;.
* 1941 – World War II: The is sunk in the North Atlantic, killing almost 2,100 men.
*1942 – World War II: In Operation Anthropoid, Reinhard Heydrich is fatally wounded in Prague; he dies of his injuries eight days later.
*1950 – The Linnanmäki amusement park is opened for the first time in Helsinki.
*1958 – First flight of the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II.
*1960 – In Turkey, a military coup removes President Celâl Bayar and the rest of the democratic government from office.
*1962 – The Centralia mine fire is ignited in the town&#x27;s landfill above a coal mine.
*1965 – Vietnam War: American warships begin the first bombardment of National Liberation Front targets within South Vietnam.
*1967 – Australians vote in favor of a constitutional referendum granting the Australian government the power to make laws to benefit Indigenous Australians and to count them in the national census.
* 1967 – The U.S. Navy aircraft carrier is launched by Jacqueline Kennedy and her daughter Caroline.
*1971 – The Dahlerau train disaster, the worst railway accident in West Germany, kills 46 people and injures 25 near Wuppertal.
* 1971 – Pakistani forces massacre over 200 civilians, mostly Bengali Hindus, in the Bagbati massacre.
*1975 – Dibbles Bridge coach crash near Grassington, in North Yorkshire, England, kills 33 – the highest ever death toll in a road accident in the United Kingdom.
*1977 – A plane crash at José Martí International Airport in Havana, Cuba, kills 67.
*1980 – The Gwangju Massacre: Airborne and army troops of South Korea retake the city of Gwangju from civil militias, killing at least 207 and possibly many more.
*1984 – The Danube–Black Sea Canal is opened, in a ceremony attended by the Ceaușescus. It had been under construction since the 1950s.
*1988 – Somaliland War of Independence: The Somali National Movement launches a major offensive against Somali government forces in Hargeisa and Burao, then the second- and third-largest cities of Somalia.
*1996 – First Chechen War: Russian President Boris Yeltsin meets with Chechnyan rebels for the first time and negotiates a cease-fire.
*1997 – The 1997 Central Texas tornado outbreak occurs, spawning multiple tornadoes in Central Texas, including the F5 that killed 27 in Jarrell.
*1998 – Oklahoma City bombing: Michael Fortier is sentenced to 12 years in prison and fined $200,000 for failing to warn authorities about the terrorist plot.
*1999 – Space Shuttle &quot;Discovery&quot; is launched on STS-96, the first shuttle mission to dock with the International Space Station.
*2001 – Members of Abu Sayyaf, an Islamist separatist group, seize twenty hostages from an affluent island resort on Palawan in the Philippines; the hostage crisis would not be resolved until June 2002.
*2006 – The 6.4 Yogyakarta earthquake shakes central Java with an MSK intensity of VIII (&quot;Damaging&quot;), leaving more than 5,700 dead and 37,000 injured.
*2016 – Barack Obama is the first president of the United States to visit Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park and meet &quot;Hibakusha&quot;.
*2017 – Andrew Scheer takes over after Rona Ambrose as the leader of the Conservative Party of Canada.
*2018 – Maryland Flood Event: A flood occurs throughout the Patapsco Valley, causing one death, destroying the entire first floors of buildings on Main Street in Ellicott City, and causing cars to overturn.

==Births==

===Pre-1600===
* 742 – Emperor Dezong of Tang (d. 805)
*1332 – Ibn Khaldun, Tunisian historian and theologian (d. 1406)
*1378 – Zhu Quan, Chinese military commander, historian and playwright (d. 1448)
*1519 – Girolamo Mei, Italian historian and theorist (d. 1594)
*1537 – Louis IV, Landgrave of Hesse-Marburg (d. 1604)
*1576 – Caspar Schoppe, German author and scholar (d. 1649)
*1584 – Michael Altenburg, German theologian and composer (d. 1640)

===1601–1900===
*1601 – Antoine Daniel, French-Canadian missionary and saint (d. 1648)
*1626 – William II, Prince of Orange (d. 1650)
*1651 – Louis Antoine de Noailles, French cardinal (d. 1729)
*1652 – Elizabeth Charlotte, Princess Palatine of Germany (d. 1722)
*1738 – Nathaniel Gorham, American merchant and politician, 14th President of the Continental Congress (d. 1796)
*1756 – Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria (d. 1825) 
*1774 – Francis Beaufort, Irish hydrographer and officer in the Royal Navy (d. 1857)
*1794 – Cornelius Vanderbilt, American businessman and philanthropist (d. 1877)
*1814 – John Rudolph Niernsee, Viennese-born American architect (d. 1885)
*1815 – Henry Parkes, English-Australian politician, 7th Premier of New South Wales (d. 1896) 
*1818 – Amelia Bloomer, American journalist and activist (d. 1894)
*1819 – Julia Ward Howe, American poet and songwriter (d. 1910)
*1827 – Samuel F. Miller, American lawyer and politician (d. 1892)
*1832 – Zenas Ferry Moody, American surveyor and politician, 7th Governor of Oregon (d. 1917)
*1836 – Jay Gould, American businessman and financier (d. 1892)
*1837 – Wild Bill Hickok, American police officer (d. 1876)
*1852 – Billy Barnes, English cricketer (d. 1899)
*1857 – Theodor Curtius, German chemist (d. 1928)
*1860 – Manuel Teixeira Gomes, Portuguese politician, 7th President of Portugal (d. 1941)
* 1860 – Margrethe Munthe, Norwegian songwriter (d. 1931)
*1863 – Arthur Mold, English cricketer (d. 1921)
*1867 – Arnold Bennett, English author and playwright (d. 1931)
*1868 – Aleksa Šantić, Bosnian poet and author (d. 1924)
*1871 – Georges Rouault, French painter and illustrator (d. 1958)
*1875 – Frederick Cuming, English cricketer (d. 1942)
*1876 – Ferdynand Antoni Ossendowski, Polish journalist and author (d. 1945)
* 1876 – William Stanier, English engineer (d. 1965)
*1878 – Anna Cervin, Swedish artist (d. 1972)
*1879 – Karl Bühler, German-American linguist and psychologist (d. 1963)
* 1879 – Hans Lammers, German judge and politician (d. 1962)
*1883 – Jessie Arms Botke, American painter (d. 1971)
*1884 – Max Brod, Czech journalist, author, and composer (d. 1968)
*1887 – Frank Woolley, English cricketer (d. 1978)
*1888 – Louis Durey, French composer (d. 1979)
*1891 – Claude Champagne, Canadian violinist, pianist, and composer (d. 1965)
* 1891 – Jaan Kärner, Estonian poet and author (d. 1958)
*1894 – Louis-Ferdinand Céline, French physician and author (d. 1961)
* 1894 – Dashiell Hammett, American detective novelist and screenwriter (d. 1961)
*1895 – Douglas Lloyd Campbell, Canadian educator and politician, 13th Premier of Manitoba (d. 1995)
*1897 – John Cockcroft, English physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1967)
* 1897 – Dink Templeton, American rugby player and coach (d. 1962)
*1898 – David Crosthwait, American engineer, inventor and writer (d. 1976)
*1899 – Johannes Türn, Estonian chess and draughts player (d. 1993)
*1900 – Lotte Toberentz, German overseer of the Nazi Uckermark concentration camp (d. 1964)
* 1900 – Uładzimir Žyłka, Belarusian poet and translator (d. 1933)

===1901–present===
*1906 – Buddhadasa, Thai monk and philosopher (d. 1993)
* 1906 – Harry Hibbs, English footballer (d. 1984)
* 1906 – Antonio Rosario Mennonna, Italian bishop (d. 2009)
*1907 – Nicolas Calas, Greek-American poet and critic (d. 1988)
* 1907 – Rachel Carson, American biologist, environmentalist, and author (d. 1964)
*1909 – Dolores Hope, American singer and philanthropist (d. 2011)
*1909 – Juan Vicente Pérez, Venezuelan supercentenarian, oldest living man, last man born in 1900s decade (d. 2024)
*1911 – Hubert Humphrey, American journalist and politician, 38th Vice President of the United States (d. 1978)
* 1911 – Teddy Kollek, Hungarian-Israeli politician, Mayor of Jerusalem (d. 2007)
* 1911 – Vincent Price, American actor (d. 1993)
*1912 – John Cheever, American novelist and short story writer (d. 1982)
* 1912 – Sam Snead, American golfer and sportscaster (d. 2002)
* 1912 – Terry Moore, American baseball player, coach, and manager (d. 1995)
*1915 – Ester Soré, Chilean singer-songwriter (d. 1996)
* 1915 – Herman Wouk, American novelist (d. 2019)
*1917 – Harry Webster, English engineer (d. 2007)
*1918 – Yasuhiro Nakasone, Japanese commander and politician, 45th Prime Minister of Japan (d. 2019)
*1921 – Bob Godfrey, Australian-English animator, director, and voice actor (d. 2013)
*1922 – Otto Carius, German lieutenant and pharmacist (d. 2015)
* 1922 – Christopher Lee, English actor (d. 2015)
* 1922 – John D. Vanderhoof, American banker and politician, 37th Governor of Colorado (d. 2013)
*1923 – Henry Kissinger, German-American political scientist and politician, 56th United States Secretary of State, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2023)
* 1923 – Sumner Redstone, American businessman and philanthropist (d. 2020)
*1924 – Jaime Lusinchi, Venezuelan physician and politician, President of Venezuela (d. 2014)
* 1924 – John Sumner, English-Australian director, founded the Melbourne Theatre Company (d. 2013)
*1925 – Tony Hillerman, American journalist and author (d. 2008)
*1927 – Jüri Randviir, Estonian chess player and journalist (d. 1996)
*1928 – Thea Musgrave, Scottish-American composer and educator
*1930 – John Barth, American novelist and short story writer (d. 2024)
* 1930 – William S. Sessions, American civil servant and judge, 8th Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (d. 2020)
* 1930 – Eino Tamberg, Estonian composer and educator (d. 2010)
*1931 – André Barbeau, French-Canadian neurologist (d. 1986)
* 1931 – John Chapple, English field marshal and politician, Governor of Gibraltar (d. 2022)
* 1931 – Bernard Fresson, French actor (d. 2002)
* 1931 – Faten Hamama, Egyptian actress and producer (d. 2015)
* 1931 – Philip Kotler, American author and professor
*1933 – Edward Samuel Rogers, Canadian businessman (d. 2008)
* 1933 – Manfred Sommer, Spanish author and illustrator (d. 2007)
*1934 – Ray Daviault, Canadian-American baseball player (d. 2020)
* 1934 – Harlan Ellison, American author and screenwriter (d. 2018)
*1935 – Daniel Colchico, American football player and coach (d. 2014)
* 1935 – Mal Evans, British road manager of The Beatles (d. 1976)
* 1935 – Jerry Kindall, American baseball player and coach (d. 2017)
* 1935 – Ramsey Lewis, American jazz pianist and composer (d. 2022)
* 1935 – Lee Meriwether, American model and actress, Miss America 1955 
*1936 – Benjamin Bathurst, English admiral
* 1936 – Louis Gossett Jr., American actor and producer (d. 2024)
* 1936 – Marcel Masse, Canadian educator and politician, 29th Canadian Minister of National Defence (d. 2014)
*1937 – Allan Carr, American playwright and producer (d. 1999)
*1939 – Simon Cairns, 6th Earl Cairns, English courtier and businessman
* 1939 – Yves Duhaime, Canadian captain and politician
* 1939 – Sokratis Kokkalis, Greek businessman
* 1939 – Gerald Ronson, English businessman and philanthropist
* 1939 – Lionel Sosa, Mexican-American advertising and marketing executive 
* 1939 – Don Williams, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2017) 
*1940 – Mike Gibson, Australian journalist and sportscaster (d. 2015)
*1942 – Lee Baca, American police officer
* 1942 – Piers Courage, English racing driver (d. 1970)
* 1942 – Roger Freeman, Baron Freeman, English accountant and politician, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
* 1942 – Robin Widdows, English racing driver
*1943 – Cilla Black, English singer and actress (d. 2015)
* 1943 – Bruce Weitz, American actor
*1944 – Christopher Dodd, American lawyer and politician
* 1944 – Karen Fladset, Norwegian handball player
* 1944 – Ingrid Roscoe, English historian and politician, Lord Lieutenant of West Yorkshire (d. 2020)
* 1944 – Alain Souchon, French singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor
*1945 – Bruce Cockburn, Canadian singer-songwriter and guitarist 
*1946 – Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen, Danish bassist and composer (d. 2005)
* 1946 – John Williams, English motorcycle racer (d. 1978)
*1947 – Peter DeFazio, American politician
* 1947 – Marty Kristian, German-Australian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and actor 
* 1947 – Branko Oblak, Slovenian footballer and coach
* 1947 – Riivo Sinijärv, Estonian politician, 19th Estonian Minister of Foreign Affairs
*1948 – Wubbo de Boer, Dutch civil servant (d. 2017)
* 1948 – Pete Sears, English bass player 
* 1948 – Morning Glory Zell-Ravenheart, American occultist and author (d. 2014)
*1949 – Hugh Lowther, 8th Earl of Lonsdale, English politician (d. 2021)
* 1949 – Christa Vahlensieck, German runner
*1950 – Dee Dee Bridgewater, American singer-songwriter and actress 
* 1950 – Makis Dendrinos, Greek basketball player and coach (d. 2015)
*1951 – John Conteh, English boxer
*1954 – Pauline Hanson, Australian businesswoman, activist, and politician
* 1954 – Jackie Slater, American football player and coach
*1955 – Eric Bischoff, American wrestler, manager, and producer
* 1955 – Richard Schiff, American actor, director, and producer
* 1955 – Ian Tracey, English organist and conductor
*1956 – Cynthia McFadden, American journalist
* 1956 – Rosemary Squire, English producer and manager, co-founded Ambassador Theatre Group
* 1956 – Giuseppe Tornatore, Italian director and screenwriter
*1957 – Dag Terje Andersen, Norwegian politician, Norwegian Minister of Labour
* 1957 – Nitin Gadkari, Indian lawyer and politician, Indian Minister of Transport
* 1957 – Eddie Harsch, Canadian-American keyboard player and bass player (d. 2016)
* 1957 – Siouxsie Sioux, English singer-songwriter, musician, and producer
*1958 – Nick Anstee, English accountant and politician, 682nd Lord Mayor of London
* 1958 – Neil Finn, New Zealand singer-songwriter and musician
* 1958 – Jesse Robredo, Filipino politician, 23rd Secretary of the Interior and Local Government (d. 2012)
*1960 – Gaston Therrien, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster
*1961 – José Luíz Barbosa, Brazilian runner and coach
* 1961 – Peri Gilpin, American actress
*1962 – Marcelino Bernal, Mexican footballer 
* 1962 – Ray Borner, Australian basketball player
* 1962 – Steven Brill, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1962 – Anthony A. Hyman, Israeli-English biologist and academic
* 1962 – David Mundell, Scottish lawyer and politician, Secretary of State for Scotland
* 1962 – Ravi Shastri, Indian cricketer, coach and sportscaster
*1963 – Gonzalo Rubalcaba, Cuban pianist and composer
* 1963 – Maria Walliser, Swiss skier
*1964 – Adam Carolla, American actor, producer, and screenwriter
*1965 – Todd Bridges, American actor
* 1965 – Pat Cash, Australian-English tennis player and sportscaster
*1966 – Heston Blumenthal, English chef and author
*1967 – Paul Gascoigne, English international footballer, coach, and manager
* 1967 – Eddie McClintock, American actor
*1968 – Jeff Bagwell, American baseball player and coach
* 1968 – Rebekah Brooks, English journalist 
* 1968 – Harun Erdenay, Turkish basketball player and coach
* 1968 – Frank Thomas, American baseball player and sportscaster
*1969 – Todd Hundley, American baseball player
* 1969 – Jeremy Mayfield, American race car driver
* 1969 – Craig Federighi, American computer scientist and engineer 
*1970 – Michele Bartoli, Italian cyclist
* 1970 – Tim Farron, English educator and politician
* 1970 – Joseph Fiennes, English actor
* 1970 – Alex Archer, American-born Australian musician
*1971 – Mathew Batsiua, Nauruan politician
* 1971 – Paul Bettany, English actor
* 1971 – Wayne Carey, Australian footballer and coach
* 1971 – Kaur Kender, Estonian author
* 1971 – Lisa Lopes, American rapper and dancer (d. 2002)
* 1971 – Lee Sharpe, English footballer
* 1971 – Grant Stafford, South African tennis player
* 1971 – Sophie Walker, British politician, leader of the Women&#x27;s Equality Party
* 1971 – Petroc Trelawny, British radio and television broadcaster
*1972 – Todd Demsey, American golfer
* 1972 – Antonio Freeman, American football player
* 1972 – Maxim Sokolov, Russian ice hockey player
*1973 – Jack McBrayer, American actor and comedian
* 1973 – Tana Umaga, New Zealand rugby player and coach
* 1973 – Yorgos Lanthimos, Greek film video, and theatre director, producer and screenwriter
*1974 – Skye Edwards, British singer-songwriter 
* 1974 – Denise van Outen, English actress, singer, and television host
* 1974 – Derek Webb, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1974 – Danny Wuerffel, American football player
*1975 – André 3000, American rapper
* 1975 – Michael Hussey, Australian cricketer
* 1975 – Jadakiss, American rapper
* 1975 – Jamie Oliver, English chef and author
* 1975 – Feryal Özel, Turkish astrophysicist, astronomer, and academic
*1976 – Marcel Fässler, Swiss racing driver
*1977 – Abderrahmane Hammad, Algerian high jumper
* 1977 – Mahela Jayawardene, Sri Lankan cricketer
*1978 – Adin Brown, American soccer player
*1979 – Michael Buonauro, American author and illustrator (d. 2004)
* 1979 – Mile Sterjovski, Australian footballer
*1980 – Craig Buntin, Canadian figure skater
*1981 – Alina Cojocaru, Romanian ballerina
* 1981 – Johan Elmander, Swedish footballer
*1982 – Natalya, Canadian professional wrestler
*1984 – Blake Ahearn, American basketball player
* 1984 – Miguel González, Mexican baseball pitcher
*1985 – Chiang Chien-ming, Taiwanese baseball player
* 1985 – Roberto Soldado, Spanish footballer
*1986 – Conor Cummins, Manx motorcycle racer
* 1986 – Bamba Fall, Senegalese basketball player
* 1986 – Lasse Schöne, Danish footballer
*1987 – Gervinho, Ivorian footballer
* 1987 – Bella Heathcote, Australian actress
* 1987 – Bora Paçun, Turkish basketball player
* 1987 – Matt Prior, Australian rugby league player
* 1987 – Martina Sáblíková, Czech speed skater and cyclist
*1988 – Vontae Davis, American football player (d. 2024)
* 1988 – Irina Davydova, Russian hurdler
* 1988 – Garrett Richards, American baseball pitcher
* 1988 – Tyler Sash, American football player (d. 2015)
*1989 – Igor Morozov, Estonian footballer
* 1989 – Peakboy, South Korean rapper, record producer, and singer-songwriter
*1990 – Yenew Alamirew, Ethiopian runner
* 1990 – Chris Colfer, American actor and singer
* 1990 – Marcus Kruger, Swedish ice hockey player
*1991 – Sebastien Dewaest, Belgian footballer
* 1991 – Tim Lafai, Samoan rugby league player
* 1991 – Ksenia Pervak, Russian tennis player
* 1991 – Eneli Vals, Estonian footballer
*1992 – Aaron Brown, Canadian sprinter
* 1992 – Laurence Vincent-Lapointe, Canadian canoer
*1995 – Yoán Moncada, Cuban baseball player
*1996 – Kim Jae-hwan, South Korean singer
*1997 – Anna Bondar, Hungarian tennis player
* 1997 – Daniel Jones, American football player
*1999 – Lily-Rose Depp, French-American actress and model
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 366 – Procopius, Roman usurper (b. 325)
* 398 – Murong Bao, emperor of the Xianbei state Later Yan (b. 355)
* 475 – Eutropius, bishop of Orange 
* 866 – Ordoño I of Asturias (b. 831)
* 927 – Simeon I of Bulgaria first Bulgarian Emperor (b. 864)
*1039 – Dirk III, Count of Holland (b. 981)
*1045 – Bruno of Würzburg, imperial chancellor of Italy (b. c. 1005)
*1178 – Godfrey van Rhenen, bishop of Utrecht
*1240 – William de Warenne, 5th Earl of Surrey (b. 1166)
*1444 – John Beaufort, 1st Duke of Somerset, English commander (b. 1404)
*1508 – Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan (b. 1452)
*1525 – Thomas Müntzer, German mystic and theologian (b. 1488)
*1541 – Margaret Pole, Countess of Salisbury (b. 1473)
*1564 – John Calvin, French pastor and theologian (b. 1509)

===1601–1900===
*1610 – François Ravaillac, French assassin of Henry IV of France (b. 1578)
*1624 – Diego Ramírez de Arellano, Spanish sailor and cosmographer (b. c. 1580)
*1637 – John Boteler, 1st Baron Boteler of Brantfield, English politician (b. c. 1566)
*1661 – Archibald Campbell, 1st Marquess of Argyll, Scottish general and politician (b. 1607)
*1675 – Gaspard Dughet, Italian-French painter (b. 1613)
*1690 – Giovanni Legrenzi, Italian organist and composer (b. 1626)
*1702 – Dominique Bouhours, French priest and critic (b. 1628)
*1707 – Françoise-Athénaïs, marquise de Montespan, French mistress of Louis XIV of France (b. 1640)
*1781 – Giovanni Battista Beccaria, Italian physicist and academic (b. 1716)
*1797 – François-Noël Babeuf, French journalist (b. 1760)
*1831 – Jedediah Smith, American hunter, explorer, and author (b. 1799)
*1840 – Niccolò Paganini, Italian violinist and composer (b. 1782)
*1867 – Thomas Bulfinch American mythologist (b. 1796)
*1896 – Aleksandr Stoletov, Russian physicist, engineer, and academic (b. 1839)

===1901–present===
*1910 – Robert Koch, German physician and microbiologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1843)
*1918 – Ōzutsu Man&#x27;emon, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 18th Yokozuna (b. 1869)
*1919 – Kandukuri Veeresalingam, Indian author and activist (b. 1848)
*1933 – Achille Paroche, French target shooter (b. 1868)
*1939 – Joseph Roth, Austrian-French journalist and author (b. 1894)
*1941 – Ernst Lindemann, German captain (b. 1894)
* 1941 – Günther Lütjens, German admiral (b. 1889)
*1942 – Muhammed Hamdi Yazır, Turkish theologian, logician, and translator (b. 1878)
*1943 – Gordon Coates, New Zealand soldier and politician, 21st Prime Minister of New Zealand (b. 1878)
*1945 – Enno Lolling, German physician (b. 1888)
*1947 – Ed Konetchy, American baseball player and manager (b. 1885)
*1949 – Robert Ripley, American cartoonist, publisher, and businessman, founded &quot;Ripley&#x27;s Believe It or Not!&quot; (b. 1890)
*1953 – Jesse Burkett, American baseball player and manager (b. 1868)
*1960 – James Montgomery Flagg, American painter and illustrator (b. 1877)
*1963 – Grigoris Lambrakis, Greek physician and politician (b. 1912)
*1964 – Jawaharlal Nehru, Indian lawyer and politician, 1st Prime Minister of India (b. 1889)
*1965 – John Rinehart Blue, American military officer, educator, businessperson, and politician (b. 1905)
*1967 – W. Otto Miessner, American composer and educator (b. 1880)
* 1967 – Ernst Niekisch, German academic and politician (b. 1889)
*1969 – Jeffrey Hunter, American actor and producer (b. 1926)
*1971 – Béla Juhos, Hungarian-Austrian philosopher from the Vienna Circle (b. 1901)
* 1971 – Armando Picchi, Italian footballer and coach (b. 1935)
*1980 – Gün Sazak, Turkish agronomist and politician (b. 1932)
*1984 – Vasilije Mokranjac, Serbian composer (b. 1923)
*1986 – Murder of the Faruqis:
** Ismail al-Faruqi, Palestinian-American Muslim philosopher and scholar (b. 1921)
** Lois Lamya al-Faruqi, American scholar of ethnomusicology, wife of Ismail al-Faruqi (b. 1926)
* 1986 – Ajoy Mukherjee, Indian politician, Chief Minister of West Bengal (b. 1901)
* 1986 – Giorgos Tzifos, Greek actor and cinematographer (b. 1918)
*1987 – John Howard Northrop, American biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1891)
*1988 – Hjördis Petterson, Swedish actress (b. 1908) 
* 1988 – Ernst Ruska, German physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1906)
*1989 – Arseny Tarkovsky, Russian poet and translator (b. 1907)
*1990 – Robert B. Meyner, American lawyer and politician, 44th Governor of New Jersey (b. 1908)
*1991 – Leopold Nowak, Austrian musicologist and theorist (b. 1904)
*1992 – Uncle Charlie Osborne, American fiddler (b. 1890)
*1998 – Minoo Masani, Indian lawyer and politician (b. 1905)
*2000 – Kazimierz Leski, Polish engineer and pilot (b. 1912)
* 2000 – Murray MacLehose, Baron MacLehose of Beoch, Scottish politician and diplomat, 25th Governor of Hong Kong (b. 1917)
* 2000 – Maurice Richard, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (b. 1921)
*2002 – Marjorie Ogilvie Anderson, Scottish historian (b. 1909)
*2003 – Luciano Berio, Italian composer and educator (b. 1925)
*2006 – Rob Borsellino, American journalist (b. 1949)
* 2006 – Paul Gleason, American actor (b. 1939)
* 2006 – Craig Heyward, American football player (b. 1966)
*2007 – Izumi Sakai, Japanese singer-songwriter (b. 1967)
* 2007 – Gretchen Wyler, American actress and dancer (b. 1932)
* 2007 – Ed Yost, American inventor, created the modern hot air balloon (b. 1919)
*2008 – Franz Künstler, Hungarian soldier (b. 1900)
*2009 – Thomas M. Franck, American lawyer and academic (b. 1931)
* 2009 – Clive Granger, Welsh-American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1934)
* 2009 – Mona Grey, British nursing administrator; Northern Ireland&#x27;s first Chief Nursing Officer (b. 1910)
* 2009 – Abram Hoffer, Canadian biochemist, physician, and psychiatrist (b. 1917)
* 2009 – Gérard Jean-Juste, Haitian-American priest and theologian (b. 1946)
* 2009 – Carol Anne O&#x27;Marie, American nun and author (b. 1933)
* 2009 – William Refshauge, Australian soldier and physician (b. 1913)
* 2009 – Paul Sharratt, English-American television host (b. 1933)
*2010 – Payut Ngaokrachang, Thai animator and director (b. 1929)
*2011 – Jeff Conaway, American actor and singer (b. 1950)
* 2011 – Margo Dydek, Polish-American basketball player (b. 1974)
* 2011 – Gil Scott-Heron, American singer-songwriter and poet (b. 1949)
*2012 – Simeon Daniel, Nevisian educator and politician, 1st Premier of Nevis (b. 1934)
* 2012 – Friedrich Hirzebruch, German mathematician and academic (b. 1927)
* 2012 – Anahit Perikhanian, Russian-born Armenian Iranologist (b. 1928)
* 2012 – David Rimoin, Canadian-American geneticist and academic (b. 1936)
*2013 – Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri, Indian politician (b. 1917)
* 2013 – Bill Pertwee, English actor (b. 1926)
* 2013 – Abdoulaye Sékou Sow, Malian politician, Prime Minister of Mali (b. 1931)
*2014 – Robert Genn, Canadian painter and author (b. 1936)
* 2014 – Helma Sanders-Brahms, German director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1940)
* 2014 – Roberto Vargas, Puerto Rican-American baseball player, coach, and manager (b. 1929)
* 2014 – Massimo Vignelli, Italian-American graphic designer (b. 1931)
*2015 – Erik Carlsson, Swedish rally driver (b. 1929)
* 2015 – Nils Christie, Norwegian sociologist, criminologist, and author (b. 1928)
* 2015 – Andy King, English footballer and manager (b. 1956)
* 2015 – Michael Martin, American philosopher and academic (b. 1932)
*2017 – Gregg Allman, American musician, singer and songwriter (b. 1947)
*2018 – Gardner Dozois, American science fiction author and editor (b. 1947)
*2020 – Larry Kramer, American playwright, public health advocate and LGBT rights activist (b. 1935)
*2021 – Poul Schlüter, former Prime Minister of Denmark (b. 1929)
*2024 – Elizabeth MacRae, American actress (b. 1936)
*2024 – Bill Walton, American basketball player and sportscaster (b. 1952)


==Holidays and observances==
* Armed Forces Day (Nicaragua)
* Children&#x27;s Day (Nigeria)
* Christian feast day: 
** Augustine of Canterbury
** Blessed Lojze Grozde
** Bruno of Würzburg
** Eutropius of Orange
** Hildebert
** Julius the Veteran
** May 27 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Mother&#x27;s Day (Bolivia)
* Navy Day (Japan)
* Slavery Abolition Day (Guadeloupe, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin)
* Start of National Reconciliation Week (Australia)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on May 27</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19485" start="27" end="31" title="1096" label="1096"/>
<link wikidata="Q651871" start="34" end="46" title="Count Emicho" label="Count Emicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="54" end="59" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81" end="105" title="Rhineland massacres#Emicho" label="massacre Jewish citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19542" start="138" end="142" title="1120" label="1120"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095033" start="145" end="165" title="Richard III of Capua" label="Richard III of Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q11159135" start="181" end="187" title="Prince of Capua" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646" start="226" end="230" title="1153" label="1153"/>
<link wikidata="Q122479" start="233" end="243" title="Malcolm IV of Scotland" label="Malcolm IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q19752" start="271" end="275" title="1199" label="1199"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="278" end="282" title="John, King of England" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504" start="312" end="316" title="1257" label="1257"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="319" end="338" title="Richard of Cornwall" label="Richard of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q267295" start="354" end="373" title="Sanchia of Provence" label="Sanchia of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908" start="420" end="436" title="Aachen Cathedral" label="Aachen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920" start="456" end="460" title="1644" label="1644"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="463" end="469" title="Manchu" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q380573" start="477" end="483" title="Dorgon" label="Dorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q333567" start="505" end="515" title="Li Zicheng" label="Li Zicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370784" start="523" end="535" title="Shun dynasty" label="Shun dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520158" start="543" end="565" title="Battle of Shanhai Pass" label="Battle of Shanhai Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822" start="639" end="643" title="1703" label="1703"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="651" end="666" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="686" end="702" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823" start="705" end="709" title="1798" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q129745030" start="716" end="733" title="Pitt–Tierney duel" label="Pitt–Tierney duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551235" start="749" end="761" title="Putney Heath" label="Putney Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="770" end="776" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="790" end="794" title="duel" label="duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="807" end="838" title="Prime Minister of Great Britain" label="Prime Minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="839" end="863" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545241" start="891" end="905" title="George Tierney" label="George Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871960" start="920" end="941" title="Battle of Oulart Hill" label="Battle of Oulart Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="957" end="964" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="1037" end="1041" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q26749" start="1044" end="1071" title="War of the Second Coalition" label="War of the Second Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1073" end="1081" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="1100" end="1106" title="French First Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q685798" start="1110" end="1120" title="Battle of Winterthur (1799)" label="Winterthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="1136" end="1140" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1143" end="1154" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636438" start="1191" end="1202" title="Battle of Fort George" label="Fort George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="1205" end="1209" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="1212" end="1230" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152955" start="1242" end="1258" title="Siege of Palermo" label="Siege of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="1280" end="1299" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="1302" end="1306" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1309" end="1327" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q860295" start="1369" end="1389" title="Siege of Port Hudson" label="Siege of Port Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="1399" end="1403" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q316886" start="1425" end="1442" title="Dorsland Trek" label="Dorsland trekkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15818403" start="1467" end="1479" title="Gert Alberts" label="Gert Alberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="1487" end="1495" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="1498" end="1502" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="1505" end="1518" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="1547" end="1551" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="1558" end="1560" title="Fujita scale" label="F4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557071" start="1570" end="1602" title="1896 St. Louis–East St. Louis tornado" label="St. Louis–East St. Louis tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1611" end="1630" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q577891" start="1636" end="1660" title="East St. Louis, Illinois" label="East St. Louis, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="1751" end="1755" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="1758" end="1776" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q208127" start="1782" end="1800" title="Battle of Tsushima" label="Battle of Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="1810" end="1814" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633888" start="1817" end="1847" title="HMS Princess Irene" label="HMS &amp;quot;Princess Irene&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003196" start="1871" end="1880" title="Sheerness" label="Sheerness"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="1882" end="1886" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="1917" end="1921" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448" start="1924" end="1940" title="Pope Benedict XV" label="Pope Benedict XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682084" start="1957" end="1991" title="1917 Code of Canon Law" label="1917 &amp;quot;Code of Canon Law&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="2017" end="2029" title="Codification (law)" label="codification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="2033" end="2051" title="Catholic canon law" label="Catholic canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137846" start="2059" end="2095" title="legal history of the Catholic Church" label="legal history of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="2098" end="2102" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q13458934" start="2109" end="2113" title="NC-4" label="NC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="2134" end="2140" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="2168" end="2188" title="transatlantic flight" label="transatlantic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="2191" end="2195" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="2202" end="2220" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="2247" end="2259" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q515001" start="2300" end="2312" title="Ford Model A (1927–1931)" label="Ford Model A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="2315" end="2319" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274" start="2326" end="2343" title="Chrysler Building" label="Chrysler Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2347" end="2360" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="2366" end="2392" title="List of tallest buildings in the world" label="tallest man-made structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="2428" end="2432" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="2435" end="2443" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q994506" start="2454" end="2476" title="Federal Securities Act" label="Federal Securities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="2546" end="2570" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="2573" end="2577" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2594" end="2628" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141633" start="2642" end="2674" title="National Industrial Recovery Act" label="National Industrial Recovery Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431025" start="2707" end="2754" title="A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States" label="A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="2779" end="2783" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2789" end="2799" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="2805" end="2823" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2883" end="2896" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q108117" start="2901" end="2925" title="Marin County, California" label="Marin County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="2928" end="2932" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2935" end="2947" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q641064" start="2956" end="2975" title="Le Paradis massacre" label="Le Paradis massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374594" start="2996" end="3018" title="Royal Norfolk Regiment" label="Royal Norfolk Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3055" end="3061" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="3084" end="3088" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3120" end="3141" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="3282" end="3286" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858950" start="3306" end="3326" title="Operation Anthropoid" label="Operation Anthropoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="3328" end="3345" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3368" end="3374" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="3419" end="3423" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635596" start="3430" end="3440" title="Linnanmäki" label="Linnanmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="3488" end="3496" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="3499" end="3503" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="3526" end="3558" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="3561" end="3565" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3571" end="3577" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859259" start="3581" end="3594" title="1960 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q151735" start="3613" end="3624" title="Celâl Bayar" label="Celâl Bayar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="3681" end="3685" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256909" start="3692" end="3711" title="Centralia mine fire" label="Centralia mine fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="3771" end="3775" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3778" end="3789" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="3840" end="3865" title="National Front for the Liberation of Vietnam" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3881" end="3894" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="3897" end="3901" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825132" start="3935" end="3960" title="Australian referendum, 1967 (Aboriginals)" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="4030" end="4052" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="4138" end="4146" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="4150" end="4168" title="Jacqueline Kennedy" label="Jacqueline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q230303" start="4186" end="4194" title="Caroline Kennedy" label="Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="4197" end="4201" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q882204" start="4208" end="4231" title="Dahlerau train disaster" label="Dahlerau train disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="4313" end="4322" title="Wuppertal" label="Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887679" start="4386" end="4400" title="Bengali Hindus" label="Bengali Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252594" start="4409" end="4425" title="Bagbati massacre" label="Bagbati massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="4428" end="4432" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272242" start="4435" end="4461" title="1975 Dibbles Bridge coach crash" label="Dibbles Bridge coach crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339724" start="4467" end="4478" title="Grassington" label="Grassington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23086" start="4483" end="4498" title="North Yorkshire" label="North Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="4591" end="4595" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688261" start="4600" end="4611" title="Aeroflot Flight 331" label="plane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q381677" start="4615" end="4647" title="José Martí International Airport" label="José Martí International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="4651" end="4657" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="4676" end="4680" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q174990" start="4687" end="4703" title="Gwangju Massacre" label="Gwangju Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41283" start="4764" end="4771" title="Gwangju" label="Gwangju"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="4839" end="4843" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q592260" start="4850" end="4872" title="Danube–Black Sea Canal" label="Danube–Black Sea Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="4914" end="4923" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="4975" end="4979" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q107177113" start="4982" end="5012" title="Somaliland War of Independence" label="Somaliland War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788421" start="5018" end="5042" title="Somali National Movement" label="Somali National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654542" start="5054" end="5069" title="1988 Hargeisa-Burao offensive" label="major offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q168652" start="5106" end="5114" title="Hargeisa" label="Hargeisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q948448" start="5119" end="5124" title="Burao" label="Burao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="5171" end="5178" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="5181" end="5185" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q29269" start="5188" end="5205" title="First Chechen War" label="First Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="5225" end="5238" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="5250" end="5258" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="5316" end="5320" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q166283" start="5327" end="5362" title="1997 Central Texas tornado outbreak" label="1997 Central Texas tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q125996412" start="5427" end="5448" title="1997 Prairie Dell-Jarrell tornado" label="the F5 that killed 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011901" start="5452" end="5459" title="Jarrell, Texas" label="Jarrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="5462" end="5466" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="5469" end="5490" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="5492" end="5507" title="Michael Fortier (American)" label="Michael Fortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="5604" end="5613" title="terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="5621" end="5625" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q54384" start="5628" end="5663" title="Space Shuttle Discovery" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340868" start="5679" end="5685" title="STS-96" label="STS-96"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="5730" end="5757" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="5760" end="5764" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q335361" start="5778" end="5788" title="Abu Sayyaf" label="Abu Sayyaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="5793" end="5801" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299185" start="5820" end="5841" title="Dos Palmas kidnappings" label="seize twenty hostages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13869" start="5876" end="5883" title="Palawan" label="Palawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5891" end="5902" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="5963" end="5967" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q867691" start="5978" end="5999" title="2006 Yogyakarta earthquake" label="Yogyakarta earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="6015" end="6019" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q509311" start="6028" end="6031" title="Medvedev–Sponheuer–Karnik scale" label="MSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="6124" end="6128" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="6131" end="6143" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207208" start="6197" end="6226" title="Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park" label="Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q598936" start="6242" end="6251" title="Hibakusha" label="Hibakusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="6260" end="6264" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846724" start="6267" end="6280" title="Andrew Scheer" label="Andrew Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441480" start="6298" end="6310" title="Rona Ambrose" label="Rona Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="6332" end="6360" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="6363" end="6367" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391336" start="6370" end="6390" title="2018 Maryland flood" label="Maryland Flood Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059457" start="6422" end="6437" title="Patapsco Valley" label="Patapsco Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q730938" start="6524" end="6537" title="Ellicott City" label="Ellicott City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23601" start="6599" end="6602" title="742" label="742"/>
<link wikidata="Q9755" start="6605" end="6627" title="Emperor Dezong of Tang" label="Emperor Dezong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="6638" end="6642" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="6645" end="6656" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306" start="6703" end="6707" title="1378" label="1378"/>
<link wikidata="Q985448" start="6710" end="6718" title="Zhu Quan" label="Zhu Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278" start="6784" end="6788" title="1519" label="1519"/>
<link wikidata="Q925697" start="6791" end="6803" title="Girolamo Mei" label="Girolamo Mei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461" start="6847" end="6851" title="1537" label="1537"/>
<link wikidata="Q68952" start="6854" end="6890" title="Louis IV, Landgrave of Hesse-Marburg" label="Louis IV, Landgrave of Hesse-Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700" start="6902" end="6906" title="1576" label="1576"/>
<link wikidata="Q87581" start="6909" end="6923" title="Caspar Schoppe" label="Caspar Schoppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728" start="6962" end="6966" title="1584" label="1584"/>
<link wikidata="Q186258" start="6969" end="6986" title="Michael Altenburg" label="Michael Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725" start="7047" end="7051" title="1601" label="1601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886600" start="7054" end="7068" title="Antoine Daniel" label="Antoine Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831" start="7118" end="7122" title="1626" label="1626"/>
<link wikidata="Q311455" start="7125" end="7153" title="William II, Prince of Orange" label="William II, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956" start="7165" end="7169" title="1651" label="1651"/>
<link wikidata="Q691381" start="7172" end="7197" title="Louis Antoine de Noailles" label="Louis Antoine de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962" start="7226" end="7230" title="1652" label="1652"/>
<link wikidata="Q57221" start="7233" end="7271" title="Elizabeth Charlotte, Princess Palatine" label="Elizabeth Charlotte, Princess Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996" start="7294" end="7298" title="1738" label="1738"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378295" start="7301" end="7317" title="Nathaniel Gorham" label="Nathaniel Gorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857508" start="7358" end="7395" title="President of the Continental Congress" label="President of the Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632" start="7407" end="7411" title="1756" label="1756"/>
<link wikidata="Q44319" start="7414" end="7444" title="Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria" label="Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697" start="7457" end="7461" title="1774" label="1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q21186" start="7464" end="7480" title="Francis Beaufort" label="Francis Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="7542" end="7546" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q313721" start="7549" end="7569" title="Cornelius Vanderbilt" label="Cornelius Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943" start="7622" end="7626" title="1814" label="1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255909" start="7629" end="7650" title="John Rudolph Niernsee" label="John Rudolph Niernsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948" start="7696" end="7700" title="1815" label="1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607143" start="7703" end="7715" title="Henry Parkes" label="Henry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="7752" end="7778" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964" start="7791" end="7795" title="1818" label="1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q442759" start="7798" end="7812" title="Amelia Bloomer" label="Amelia Bloomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967" start="7858" end="7862" title="1819" label="1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q241299" start="7865" end="7880" title="Julia Ward Howe" label="Julia Ward Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008" start="7922" end="7926" title="1827" label="1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411348" start="7929" end="7945" title="Samuel F. Miller (U.S. politician)" label="Samuel F. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="7989" end="7993" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q189468" start="7996" end="8013" title="Zenas Ferry Moody" label="Zenas Ferry Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149111" start="8053" end="8071" title="Governor of Oregon" label="Governor of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="8083" end="8087" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q709595" start="8090" end="8099" title="Jay Gould" label="Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="8147" end="8151" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q44677" start="8154" end="8170" title="Wild Bill Hickok" label="Wild Bill Hickok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="8207" end="8211" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528529" start="8214" end="8226" title="Billy Barnes (cricketer)" label="Billy Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680" start="8257" end="8261" title="1857" label="1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q62234" start="8264" end="8279" title="Theodor Curtius" label="Theodor Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="8307" end="8311" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q878532" start="8314" end="8335" title="Manuel Teixeira Gomes" label="Manuel Teixeira Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q322459" start="8364" end="8385" title="President of Portugal" label="President of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q462548" start="8405" end="8421" title="Margrethe Munthe" label="Margrethe Munthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="8455" end="8459" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567882" start="8462" end="8473" title="Arthur Mold" label="Arthur Mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="8504" end="8508" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q314158" start="8511" end="8525" title="Arnold Bennett" label="Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="8568" end="8572" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285173" start="8575" end="8588" title="Aleksa Šantić" label="Aleksa Šantić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="8625" end="8629" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q156128" start="8632" end="8647" title="Georges Rouault" label="Georges Rouault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="8691" end="8695" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q751586" start="8698" end="8714" title="Frederick Cuming (cricketer)" label="Frederick Cuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766" start="8745" end="8749" title="1876" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392335" start="8752" end="8780" title="Ferdynand Antoni Ossendowski" label="Ferdynand Antoni Ossendowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020159" start="8830" end="8845" title="William Stanier" label="William Stanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="8875" end="8879" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942463" start="8882" end="8893" title="Anna Cervin" label="Anna Cervin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="8921" end="8925" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q58851" start="8928" end="8939" title="Karl Bühler" label="Karl Bühler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57472" start="9002" end="9014" title="Hans Lammers" label="Hans Lammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="9055" end="9059" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q19532304" start="9062" end="9079" title="Jessie Arms Botke" label="Jessie Arms Botke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="9109" end="9113" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480" start="9116" end="9124" title="Max Brod" label="Max Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="9176" end="9180" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082866" start="9183" end="9196" title="Frank Woolley" label="Frank Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="9227" end="9231" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q368914" start="9234" end="9245" title="Louis Durey" label="Louis Durey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="9274" end="9278" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096586" start="9281" end="9297" title="Claude Champagne" label="Claude Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676764" start="9360" end="9371" title="Jaan Kärner" label="Jaan Kärner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="9409" end="9413" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q151820" start="9416" end="9438" title="Louis-Ferdinand Céline" label="Louis-Ferdinand Céline"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="9487" end="9503" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="9561" end="9565" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252386" start="9568" end="9590" title="Douglas Lloyd Campbell" label="Douglas Lloyd Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401758" start="9631" end="9650" title="Premier of Manitoba" label="Premier of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="9662" end="9666" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q62897" start="9669" end="9683" title="John Cockcroft" label="John Cockcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="9717" end="9728" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q945353" start="9757" end="9771" title="Dink Templeton" label="Dink Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="9816" end="9820" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011735" start="9823" end="9839" title="David Crosthwait" label="David Crosthwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="9891" end="9895" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892590" start="9898" end="9911" title="Johannes Türn" label="Johannes Türn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="9932" end="9940" title="draughts" label="draughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="9959" end="9963" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q91008" start="9966" end="9981" title="Lotte Toberentz" label="Lotte Toberentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q452767" start="10011" end="10039" title="Uckermark concentration camp" label="Uckermark concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630560" start="10059" end="10074" title="Uładzimir Žyłka" label="Uładzimir Žyłka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="10138" end="10142" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q714446" start="10145" end="10155" title="Buddhadasa" label="Buddhadasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179151" start="10202" end="10213" title="Harry Hibbs (footballer)" label="Harry Hibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q604694" start="10253" end="10277" title="Antonio Rosario Mennonna" label="Antonio Rosario Mennonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="10305" end="10309" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556022" start="10312" end="10325" title="Nicolas Calas" label="Nicolas Calas"/>
<link wikidata="Q100948" start="10377" end="10390" title="Rachel Carson" label="Rachel Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="10452" end="10456" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q292361" start="10459" end="10471" title="Dolores Hope" label="Dolores Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q110627549" start="10526" end="10544" title="Juan Vicente Pérez" label="Juan Vicente Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q254917" start="10575" end="10592" title="oldest living man" label="oldest living man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="10635" end="10639" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="10642" end="10657" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="10700" end="10735" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q302203" start="10755" end="10767" title="Teddy Kollek" label="Teddy Kollek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276266" start="10799" end="10817" title="Mayor of Jerusalem" label="Mayor of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="10837" end="10850" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="10878" end="10882" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q336151" start="10885" end="10897" title="John Cheever" label="John Cheever"/>
<link wikidata="Q945056" start="10959" end="10968" title="Sam Snead" label="Sam Snead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704814" start="11022" end="11033" title="Terry Moore (baseball)" label="Terry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="11091" end="11095" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q746436" start="11098" end="11108" title="Ester Soré" label="Ester Soré"/>
<link wikidata="Q49072" start="11155" end="11166" title="Herman Wouk" label="Herman Wouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="11197" end="11201" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606781" start="11204" end="11217" title="Harry Webster" label="Harry Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="11247" end="11251" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q250828" start="11254" end="11271" title="Yasuhiro Nakasone" label="Yasuhiro Nakasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="11313" end="11336" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="11348" end="11352" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q887947" start="11355" end="11366" title="Bob Godfrey" label="Bob Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="11434" end="11438" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q58005" start="11441" end="11452" title="Otto Carius" label="Otto Carius"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="11506" end="11521" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q885251" start="11556" end="11574" title="John D. Vanderhoof" label="John D. Vanderhoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q29514964" start="11613" end="11633" title="Governor of Colorado" label="Governor of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="11645" end="11649" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="11652" end="11667" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="11726" end="11758" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="11760" end="11771" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q725940" start="11800" end="11815" title="Sumner Redstone" label="Sumner Redstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="11868" end="11872" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q727036" start="11875" end="11889" title="Jaime Lusinchi" label="Jaime Lusinchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11942698" start="11928" end="11950" title="President of Venezuela" label="President of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393373" start="11970" end="11981" title="John Sumner (director)" label="John Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811899" start="12024" end="12049" title="Melbourne Theatre Company" label="Melbourne Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="12061" end="12065" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q181920" start="12068" end="12082" title="Tony Hillerman" label="Tony Hillerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="12126" end="12130" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q12365848" start="12133" end="12146" title="Jüri Randviir" label="Jüri Randviir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="12196" end="12200" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q539794" start="12203" end="12216" title="Thea Musgrave" label="Thea Musgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="12259" end="12263" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q315683" start="12266" end="12276" title="John Barth" label="John Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q464299" start="12338" end="12357" title="William S. Sessions" label="William S. Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057168" start="12397" end="12444" title="Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q948134" start="12464" end="12476" title="Eino Tamberg" label="Eino Tamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="12520" end="12524" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847201" start="12527" end="12540" title="André Barbeau" label="André Barbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q977028" start="12589" end="12601" title="John Chapple (British Army officer)" label="John Chapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="12641" end="12662" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q327229" start="12682" end="12697" title="Bernard Fresson" label="Bernard Fresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424957" start="12731" end="12743" title="Faten Hamama" label="Faten Hamama"/>
<link wikidata="Q164170" start="12794" end="12807" title="Philip Kotler" label="Philip Kotler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="12840" end="12844" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q462656" start="12847" end="12867" title="Edward Samuel Rogers" label="Edward Samuel Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q925722" start="12909" end="12923" title="Manfred Sommer" label="Manfred Sommer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="12967" end="12971" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297384" start="12974" end="12986" title="Ray Daviault" label="Ray Daviault"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="13041" end="13055" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="13101" end="13105" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216830" start="13108" end="13123" title="Daniel Colchico" label="Daniel Colchico"/>
<link wikidata="Q968026" start="13179" end="13188" title="Mal Evans" label="Mal Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="13214" end="13225" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183881" start="13245" end="13258" title="Jerry Kindall" label="Jerry Kindall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936300" start="13314" end="13326" title="Ramsey Lewis" label="Ramsey Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q267175" start="13382" end="13396" title="Lee Meriwether" label="Lee Meriwether"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876047" start="13426" end="13443" title="Miss America 1955" label="Miss America 1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="13446" end="13450" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888261" start="13453" end="13470" title="Benjamin Bathurst (Royal Navy officer)" label="Benjamin Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q329719" start="13497" end="13514" title="Louis Gossett Jr." label="Louis Gossett Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3289215" start="13563" end="13575" title="Marcel Masse" label="Marcel Masse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315114" start="13616" end="13653" title="Minister of National Defence (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of National Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="13665" end="13669" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837687" start="13672" end="13682" title="Allan Carr" label="Allan Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="13728" end="13732" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q17417876" start="13735" end="13764" title="Simon Cairns, 6th Earl Cairns" label="Simon Cairns, 6th Earl Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573630" start="13808" end="13820" title="Yves Duhaime" label="Yves Duhaime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670215" start="13863" end="13880" title="Sokratis Kokkalis" label="Sokratis Kokkalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549532" start="13909" end="13922" title="Gerald Ronson" label="Gerald Ronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737950" start="13972" end="13983" title="Lionel Sosa" label="Lionel Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q908569" start="14048" end="14060" title="Don Williams" label="Don Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="14115" end="14119" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004619" start="14122" end="14133" title="Mike Gibson (sports journalist)" label="Mike Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="14185" end="14189" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513001" start="14192" end="14200" title="Lee Baca" label="Lee Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q171621" start="14235" end="14248" title="Piers Courage" label="Piers Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q332859" start="14291" end="14319" title="Roger Freeman, Baron Freeman" label="Roger Freeman, Baron Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="14356" end="14392" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q172427" start="14402" end="14415" title="Robin Widdows" label="Robin Widdows"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14440" end="14444" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q286525" start="14447" end="14458" title="Cilla Black" label="Cilla Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278666" start="14506" end="14517" title="Bruce Weitz" label="Bruce Weitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="14535" end="14539" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q319111" start="14542" end="14558" title="Christopher Dodd" label="Christopher Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369642" start="14600" end="14613" title="Karen Fladset" label="Karen Fladset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033275" start="14650" end="14663" title="Ingrid Roscoe" label="Ingrid Roscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679689" start="14699" end="14732" title="Lord Lieutenant of West Yorkshire" label="Lord Lieutenant of West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q53453" start="14752" end="14765" title="Alain Souchon" label="Alain Souchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="14815" end="14819" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q773830" start="14822" end="14836" title="Bruce Cockburn" label="Bruce Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="14881" end="14885" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q520796" start="14888" end="14917" title="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen" label="Niels-Henning Ørsted Pedersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426248" start="14966" end="14979" title="John Williams (motorcyclist)" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="15017" end="15021" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758507" start="15024" end="15037" title="Peter DeFazio" label="Peter DeFazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777463" start="15068" end="15082" title="Marty Kristian" label="Marty Kristian"/>
<link wikidata="Q375811" start="15152" end="15164" title="Branko Oblak" label="Branko Oblak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406293" start="15206" end="15220" title="Riivo Sinijärv" label="Riivo Sinijärv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760777" start="15248" end="15284" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Estonia)" label="Estonian Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15286" end="15290" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021100" start="15293" end="15306" title="Wubbo de Boer" label="Wubbo de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376401" start="15347" end="15357" title="Pete Sears" label="Pete Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912835" start="15389" end="15418" title="Morning Glory Zell-Ravenheart" label="Morning Glory Zell-Ravenheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15461" end="15465" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931518" start="15468" end="15502" title="Hugh Lowther, 8th Earl of Lonsdale" label="Hugh Lowther, 8th Earl of Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q273091" start="15542" end="15561" title="Christa Vahlensieck" label="Christa Vahlensieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="15578" end="15582" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q233529" start="15585" end="15604" title="Dee Dee Bridgewater" label="Dee Dee Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q128197" start="15655" end="15670" title="Makis Dendrinos" label="Makis Dendrinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="15717" end="15721" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699654" start="15724" end="15735" title="John Conteh" label="John Conteh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="15752" end="15756" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q466220" start="15759" end="15773" title="Pauline Hanson" label="Pauline Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304479" start="15835" end="15848" title="Jackie Slater" label="Jackie Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="15886" end="15890" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="15893" end="15906" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q355209" start="15958" end="15972" title="Richard Schiff" label="Richard Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983098" start="16022" end="16032" title="Ian Tracey (organist)" label="Ian Tracey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="16066" end="16070" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200121" start="16073" end="16089" title="Cynthia McFadden" label="Cynthia McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368433" start="16120" end="16135" title="Rosemary Squire" label="Rosemary Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741072" start="16178" end="16202" title="Ambassador Theatre Group" label="Ambassador Theatre Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q53045" start="16212" end="16230" title="Giuseppe Tornatore" label="Giuseppe Tornatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="16267" end="16271" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157171" start="16274" end="16292" title="Dag Terje Andersen" label="Dag Terje Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11984312" start="16316" end="16344" title="Minister of Labour and Social Inclusion" label="Norwegian Minister of Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504520" start="16354" end="16367" title="Nitin Gadkari" label="Nitin Gadkari"/>
<link wikidata="Q167156" start="16399" end="16427" title="Ministry of Road Transport and Highways" label="Indian Minister of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336103" start="16437" end="16449" title="Eddie Harsch" label="Eddie Harsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="16520" end="16534" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16587" end="16591" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026711" start="16594" end="16605" title="Nick Anstee" label="Nick Anstee"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="16648" end="16668" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q550436" start="16678" end="16687" title="Neil Finn" label="Neil Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q716649" start="16741" end="16754" title="Jesse Robredo" label="Jesse Robredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444421" start="16782" end="16828" title="Secretary of the Interior and Local Government" label="Secretary of the Interior and Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16840" end="16844" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099168" start="16847" end="16862" title="Gaston Therrien" label="Gaston Therrien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="16909" end="16913" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364540" start="16916" end="16933" title="José Luíz Barbosa" label="José Luíz Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q439446" start="16971" end="16982" title="Peri Gilpin" label="Peri Gilpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="17002" end="17006" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392591" start="17009" end="17025" title="Marcelino Bernal" label="Marcelino Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420478" start="17056" end="17066" title="Ray Borner" label="Ray Borner"/>
<link wikidata="Q345259" start="17106" end="17118" title="Steven Brill (scriptwriter)" label="Steven Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q573389" start="17182" end="17198" title="Anthony A. Hyman" label="Anthony A. Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333520" start="17248" end="17261" title="David Mundell" label="David Mundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="17295" end="17326" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518502" start="17336" end="17348" title="Ravi Shastri" label="Ravi Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="17392" end="17396" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349890" start="17399" end="17416" title="Gonzalo Rubalcaba" label="Gonzalo Rubalcaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984" start="17454" end="17468" title="Maria Walliser" label="Maria Walliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="17483" end="17487" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119" start="17490" end="17502" title="Adam Carolla" label="Adam Carolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="17548" end="17552" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q779416" start="17555" end="17567" title="Todd Bridges" label="Todd Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q298644" start="17593" end="17601" title="Pat Cash" label="Pat Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="17654" end="17658" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616078" start="17661" end="17678" title="Heston Blumenthal" label="Heston Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17705" end="17709" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q13002" start="17712" end="17726" title="Paul Gascoigne" label="Paul Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q561676" start="17790" end="17806" title="Eddie McClintock" label="Eddie McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="17824" end="17828" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091432" start="17831" end="17843" title="Jeff Bagwell" label="Jeff Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q234179" start="17889" end="17903" title="Rebekah Brooks" label="Rebekah Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42658" start="17934" end="17947" title="Harun Erdenay" label="Harun Erdenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082840" start="17994" end="18006" title="Frank Thomas (designated hitter)" label="Frank Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="18051" end="18055" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812445" start="18058" end="18070" title="Todd Hundley" label="Todd Hundley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164204" start="18106" end="18121" title="Jeremy Mayfield" label="Jeremy Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q618558" start="18157" end="18172" title="Craig Federighi" label="Craig Federighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="18217" end="18221" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q550884" start="18224" end="18239" title="Michele Bartoli" label="Michele Bartoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q304251" start="18266" end="18276" title="Tim Farron" label="Tim Farron"/>
<link wikidata="Q223790" start="18319" end="18333" title="Joseph Fiennes" label="Joseph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662730" start="18358" end="18369" title="Alex Archer (musician)" label="Alex Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="18406" end="18410" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298531" start="18413" end="18427" title="Mathew Batsiua" label="Mathew Batsiua"/>
<link wikidata="Q242707" start="18457" end="18469" title="Paul Bettany" label="Paul Bettany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976079" start="18494" end="18505" title="Wayne Carey" label="Wayne Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q384298" start="18548" end="18559" title="Kaur Kender" label="Kaur Kender"/>
<link wikidata="Q233541" start="18586" end="18596" title="Lisa Lopes" label="Lisa Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q706028" start="18644" end="18654" title="Lee Sharpe" label="Lee Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543225" start="18684" end="18698" title="Grant Stafford" label="Grant Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932488" start="18737" end="18750" title="Sophie Walker" label="Sophie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20648714" start="18786" end="18813" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Equality Party" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Equality Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178886" start="18823" end="18838" title="Petroc Trelawny" label="Petroc Trelawny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="18882" end="18886" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812334" start="18889" end="18900" title="Todd Demsey" label="Todd Demsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776628" start="18927" end="18942" title="Antonio Freeman" label="Antonio Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q980503" start="18978" end="18991" title="Maxim Sokolov" label="Maxim Sokolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="19020" end="19024" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q560896" start="19027" end="19040" title="Jack McBrayer" label="Jack McBrayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999454" start="19079" end="19089" title="Tana Umaga" label="Tana Umaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q975410" start="19135" end="19151" title="Yorgos Lanthimos" label="Yorgos Lanthimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="19220" end="19224" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q448268" start="19227" end="19239" title="Skye Edwards" label="Skye Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257792" start="19277" end="19293" title="Denise van Outen" label="Denise van Outen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262449" start="19349" end="19359" title="Derek Webb" label="Derek Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164813" start="19412" end="19426" title="Danny Wuerffel" label="Danny Wuerffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="19454" end="19458" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q448837" start="19461" end="19471" title="André 3000" label="André 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q174147" start="19498" end="19512" title="Michael Hussey" label="Michael Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q451958" start="19544" end="19552" title="Jadakiss" label="Jadakiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q190051" start="19579" end="19591" title="Jamie Oliver" label="Jamie Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445619" start="19626" end="19637" title="Feryal Özel" label="Feryal Özel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="19689" end="19693" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q116294" start="19696" end="19710" title="Marcel Fässler (racing driver)" label="Marcel Fässler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="19733" end="19737" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q308095" start="19740" end="19759" title="Abderrahmane Hammad" label="Abderrahmane Hammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739165" start="19791" end="19809" title="Mahela Jayawardene" label="Mahela Jayawardene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="19833" end="19837" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778655" start="19840" end="19850" title="Adin Brown" label="Adin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="19876" end="19880" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016079" start="19883" end="19899" title="Michael Buonauro" label="Michael Buonauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q266282" start="19952" end="19967" title="Mile Sterjovski" label="Mile Sterjovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="19992" end="19996" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038024" start="19999" end="20011" title="Craig Buntin" label="Craig Buntin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="20037" end="20041" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q451422" start="20044" end="20058" title="Alina Cojocaru" label="Alina Cojocaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q244806" start="20088" end="20102" title="Johan Elmander" label="Johan Elmander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="20124" end="20128" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q231508" start="20131" end="20138" title="Natalie Neidhart" label="Natalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="20172" end="20176" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629949" start="20179" end="20191" title="Blake Ahearn" label="Blake Ahearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312975" start="20229" end="20244" title="Miguel González (pitcher)" label="Miguel González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="20272" end="20276" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095177" start="20279" end="20296" title="Chiang Chien-ming" label="Chiang Chien-ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q218401" start="20333" end="20348" title="Roberto Soldado" label="Roberto Soldado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="20370" end="20374" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687112" start="20377" end="20390" title="Conor Cummins" label="Conor Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633617" start="20423" end="20433" title="Bamba Fall" label="Bamba Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q313112" start="20473" end="20485" title="Lasse Schöne" label="Lasse Schöne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="20506" end="20510" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q208025" start="20513" end="20521" title="Gervinho" label="Gervinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q45743" start="20551" end="20566" title="Bella Heathcote" label="Bella Heathcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944256" start="20596" end="20606" title="Bora Paçun" label="Bora Paçun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789204" start="20643" end="20653" title="Matt Prior (rugby league)" label="Matt Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q231036" start="20695" end="20712" title="Martina Sáblíková" label="Martina Sáblíková"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="20746" end="20750" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016432" start="20753" end="20765" title="Vontae Davis" label="Vontae Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q441208" start="20811" end="20825" title="Irina Davydova" label="Irina Davydova"/>
<link wikidata="Q421484" start="20852" end="20868" title="Garrett Richards" label="Garrett Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001151" start="20905" end="20915" title="Tyler Sash" label="Tyler Sash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="20953" end="20957" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q619204" start="20960" end="20972" title="Igor Morozov (footballer)" label="Igor Morozov"/>
<link wikidata="Q109407273" start="21003" end="21010" title="Peakboy" label="Peakboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="21073" end="21077" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q584579" start="21080" end="21094" title="Yenew Alamirew" label="Yenew Alamirew"/>
<link wikidata="Q211566" start="21122" end="21134" title="Chris Colfer" label="Chris Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894251" start="21171" end="21184" title="Marcus Kruger" label="Marcus Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="21213" end="21217" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438736" start="21220" end="21237" title="Sebastien Dewaest" label="Sebastien Dewaest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803790" start="21267" end="21276" title="Tim Lafai" label="Tim Lafai"/>
<link wikidata="Q232613" start="21314" end="21327" title="Ksenia Pervak" label="Ksenia Pervak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341099" start="21360" end="21370" title="Eneli Vals" label="Eneli Vals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="21393" end="21397" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661886" start="21400" end="21411" title="Aaron Brown (sprinter)" label="Aaron Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218957" start="21440" end="21465" title="Laurence Vincent-Lapointe" label="Laurence Vincent-Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="21484" end="21488" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306297" start="21491" end="21503" title="Yoán Moncada" label="Yoán Moncada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="21528" end="21532" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q30311663" start="21535" end="21547" title="Kim Jae-hwan (singer)" label="Kim Jae-hwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="21570" end="21574" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q19281715" start="21577" end="21588" title="Anna Bondar" label="Anna Bondar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39075157" start="21623" end="21635" title="Daniel Jones (American football)" label="Daniel Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="21663" end="21667" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670730" start="21670" end="21684" title="Lily-Rose Depp" label="Lily-Rose Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q32844" start="21748" end="21751" title="366" label="366"/>
<link wikidata="Q316284" start="21754" end="21763" title="Procopius (usurper)" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q48146" start="21790" end="21793" title="398" label="398"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076801" start="21796" end="21806" title="Murong Bao" label="Murong Bao"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="21823" end="21830" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534482" start="21837" end="21846" title="Later Yan" label="Later Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30785" start="21858" end="21861" title="475" label="475"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919844" start="21864" end="21873" title="Eutropius of Orange" label="Eutropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q677019" start="21875" end="21891" title="Ancient Diocese of Orange" label="bishop of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q23872" start="21895" end="21898" title="866" label="866"/>
<link wikidata="Q223646" start="21901" end="21921" title="Ordoño I of Asturias" label="Ordoño I of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q30470" start="21933" end="21936" title="927" label="927"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="21939" end="21959" title="Simeon I of Bulgaria" label="Simeon I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19341" start="21994" end="21998" title="1039" label="1039"/>
<link wikidata="Q471758" start="22001" end="22027" title="Dirk III, Count of Holland" label="Dirk III, Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19351" start="22038" end="22042" title="1045" label="1045"/>
<link wikidata="Q563247" start="22045" end="22062" title="Bruno of Würzburg" label="Bruno of Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19696" start="22107" end="22111" title="1178" label="1178"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374784" start="22114" end="22132" title="Godfrey van Rhenen" label="Godfrey van Rhenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="22153" end="22157" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344508" start="22160" end="22198" title="William de Warenne, 5th Earl of Surrey" label="William de Warenne, 5th Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420" start="22210" end="22214" title="1444" label="1444"/>
<link wikidata="Q919338" start="22217" end="22252" title="John Beaufort, 1st Duke of Somerset" label="John Beaufort, 1st Duke of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170" start="22283" end="22287" title="1508" label="1508"/>
<link wikidata="Q236853" start="22290" end="22305" title="Ludovico Sforza" label="Ludovico Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314" start="22332" end="22336" title="1525" label="1525"/>
<link wikidata="Q153981" start="22339" end="22353" title="Thomas Müntzer" label="Thomas Müntzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516" start="22395" end="22399" title="1541" label="1541"/>
<link wikidata="Q241806" start="22402" end="22438" title="Margaret Pole, Countess of Salisbury" label="Margaret Pole, Countess of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632" start="22450" end="22454" title="1564" label="1564"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="22457" end="22468" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765" start="22527" end="22531" title="1610" label="1610"/>
<link wikidata="Q349190" start="22534" end="22552" title="François Ravaillac" label="François Ravaillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="22573" end="22591" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821" start="22603" end="22607" title="1624" label="1624"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027438" start="22610" end="22635" title="Diego Ramírez de Arellano" label="Diego Ramírez de Arellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889" start="22683" end="22687" title="1637" label="1637"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222537" start="22690" end="22735" title="John Boteler, 1st Baron Boteler of Brantfield" label="John Boteler, 1st Baron Boteler of Brantfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005" start="22770" end="22774" title="1661" label="1661"/>
<link wikidata="Q977300" start="22777" end="22819" title="Archibald Campbell, 1st Marquess of Argyll" label="Archibald Campbell, 1st Marquess of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624" start="22864" end="22868" title="1675" label="1675"/>
<link wikidata="Q741375" start="22871" end="22885" title="Gaspard Dughet" label="Gaspard Dughet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678" start="22921" end="22925" title="1690" label="1690"/>
<link wikidata="Q354947" start="22928" end="22945" title="Giovanni Legrenzi" label="Giovanni Legrenzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819" start="22988" end="22992" title="1702" label="1702"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238179" start="22995" end="23013" title="Dominique Bouhours" label="Dominique Bouhours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841" start="23051" end="23055" title="1707" label="1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q230982" start="23058" end="23099" title="Françoise-Athénaïs, marquise de Montespan" label="Françoise-Athénaïs, marquise de Montespan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="23120" end="23129" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719" start="23151" end="23155" title="1781" label="1781"/>
<link wikidata="Q981544" start="23158" end="23184" title="Giovanni Battista Beccaria" label="Giovanni Battista Beccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="23228" end="23232" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q189714" start="23235" end="23255" title="François-Noël Babeuf" label="François-Noël Babeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="23286" end="23290" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q465232" start="23293" end="23307" title="Jedediah Smith" label="Jedediah Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="23358" end="23362" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q66075" start="23365" end="23381" title="Niccolò Paganini" label="Niccolò Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="23425" end="23429" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q943991" start="23432" end="23447" title="Thomas Bulfinch" label="Thomas Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="23480" end="23484" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q983607" start="23487" end="23505" title="Aleksandr Stoletov" label="Aleksandr Stoletov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="23580" end="23584" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="23587" end="23598" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="23637" end="23648" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="23669" end="23673" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081826" start="23676" end="23696" title="Ōzutsu Man&amp;#x27;emon" label="Ōzutsu Man&amp;#x27;emon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23731" end="23739" title="Makuuchi#Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="23751" end="23755" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q6361647" start="23758" end="23781" title="Kandukuri Veeresalingam" label="Kandukuri Veeresalingam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="23821" end="23825" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636623" start="23828" end="23843" title="Achille Paroche" label="Achille Paroche"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="23878" end="23882" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q78509" start="23885" end="23896" title="Joseph Roth" label="Joseph Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="23947" end="23951" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q170349" start="23954" end="23969" title="Ernst Lindemann" label="Ernst Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57646" start="24005" end="24020" title="Günther Lütjens" label="Günther Lütjens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="24048" end="24052" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698538" start="24055" end="24075" title="Muhammed Hamdi Yazır" label="Muhammed Hamdi Yazır"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="24133" end="24137" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q731342" start="24140" end="24153" title="Gordon Coates" label="Gordon Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="24196" end="24225" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="24237" end="24241" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q84666" start="24244" end="24256" title="Enno Lolling" label="Enno Lolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="24286" end="24290" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335049" start="24293" end="24304" title="Ed Konetchy" label="Ed Konetchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="24354" end="24358" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q732327" start="24361" end="24374" title="Robert Ripley" label="Robert Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203684" start="24439" end="24471" title="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe It or Not!" label="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe It or Not!"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="24489" end="24493" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688144" start="24496" end="24509" title="Jesse Burkett" label="Jesse Burkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="24559" end="24563" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q537266" start="24566" end="24588" title="James Montgomery Flagg" label="James Montgomery Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="24634" end="24638" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q700611" start="24641" end="24659" title="Grigoris Lambrakis" label="Grigoris Lambrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="24703" end="24707" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="24710" end="24726" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="24762" end="24785" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="24797" end="24801" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254957" start="24804" end="24822" title="John Rinehart Blue" label="John Rinehart Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="24903" end="24907" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945860" start="24910" end="24926" title="W. Otto Miessner" label="W. Otto Miessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q70767" start="24978" end="24992" title="Ernst Niekisch" label="Ernst Niekisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="25036" end="25040" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q176361" start="25043" end="25057" title="Jeffrey Hunter" label="Jeffrey Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="25098" end="25102" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943491" start="25105" end="25115" title="Béla Juhos" label="Béla Juhos"/>
<link wikidata="Q678754" start="25190" end="25204" title="Armando Picchi" label="Armando Picchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="25246" end="25250" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084808" start="25253" end="25262" title="Gün Sazak" label="Gün Sazak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="25309" end="25313" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q144486" start="25316" end="25334" title="Vasilije Mokranjac" label="Vasilije Mokranjac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="25364" end="25368" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q127685236" start="25371" end="25392" title="Murder of the Faruqis" label="Murder of the Faruqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595661" start="25397" end="25413" title="Ismail al-Faruqi" label="Ismail al-Faruqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668290" start="25480" end="25500" title="Lois Lamya al-Faruqi" label="Lois Lamya al-Faruqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347922" start="25583" end="25597" title="Ajoy Mukherjee" label="Ajoy Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507450" start="25618" end="25647" title="Chief Minister of West Bengal" label="Chief Minister of West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563580" start="25667" end="25681" title="Giorgos Tzifos" label="Giorgos Tzifos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="25726" end="25730" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q106399" start="25733" end="25753" title="John Howard Northrop" label="John Howard Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="25789" end="25800" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="25821" end="25825" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799026" start="25828" end="25845" title="Hjördis Petterson" label="Hjördis Petterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q71022" start="25883" end="25894" title="Ernst Ruska" label="Ernst Ruska"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="25927" end="25938" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="25959" end="25963" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q777997" start="25966" end="25982" title="Arseny Tarkovsky" label="Arseny Tarkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="26023" end="26027" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q265471" start="26030" end="26046" title="Robert B. Meyner" label="Robert B. Meyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="26085" end="26107" title="Governor of New Jersey" label="Governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="26119" end="26123" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q78862" start="26126" end="26139" title="Leopold Nowak" label="Leopold Nowak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="26187" end="26191" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882710" start="26194" end="26215" title="Uncle Charlie Osborne" label="Uncle Charlie Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="26245" end="26249" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868935" start="26252" end="26264" title="Minoo Masani" label="Minoo Masani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="26306" end="26310" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381205" start="26313" end="26328" title="Kazimierz Leski" label="Kazimierz Leski"/>
<link wikidata="Q137031" start="26375" end="26417" title="Murray MacLehose, Baron MacLehose of Beoch" label="Murray MacLehose, Baron MacLehose of Beoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159846" start="26458" end="26479" title="Governor of Hong Kong" label="Governor of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q325138" start="26499" end="26514" title="Maurice Richard" label="Maurice Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="26564" end="26568" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293952" start="26571" end="26596" title="Marjorie Ogilvie Anderson" label="Marjorie Ogilvie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="26628" end="26632" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="26635" end="26648" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="26691" end="26695" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339986" start="26698" end="26712" title="Rob Borsellino" label="Rob Borsellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q537252" start="26753" end="26765" title="Paul Gleason" label="Paul Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181037" start="26801" end="26814" title="Craig Heyward" label="Craig Heyward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="26852" end="26856" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333008" start="26859" end="26870" title="Izumi Sakai" label="Izumi Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q529547" start="26918" end="26932" title="Gretchen Wyler" label="Gretchen Wyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999544" start="26981" end="26988" title="Ed Yost" label="Ed Yost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="27028" end="27043" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="27055" end="27059" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q66007" start="27062" end="27076" title="Franz Künstler" label="Franz Künstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="27107" end="27111" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425945" start="27114" end="27130" title="Thomas M. Franck" label="Thomas M. Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q312575" start="27180" end="27193" title="Clive Granger" label="Clive Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="27234" end="27245" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897674" start="27274" end="27283" title="Mona Grey" label="Mona Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645006" start="27387" end="27399" title="Abram Hoffer" label="Abram Hoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q669740" start="27469" end="27486" title="Gérard Jean-Juste" label="Gérard Jean-Juste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044240" start="27546" end="27569" title="Carol Anne O&amp;#x27;Marie" label="Carol Anne O&amp;#x27;Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017456" start="27614" end="27631" title="William Refshauge" label="William Refshauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153549" start="27685" end="27698" title="Paul Sharratt" label="Paul Sharratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="27744" end="27748" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579859" start="27751" end="27769" title="Payut Ngaokrachang" label="Payut Ngaokrachang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="27809" end="27813" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q342612" start="27816" end="27828" title="Jeff Conaway" label="Jeff Conaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468364" start="27875" end="27886" title="Margo Dydek" label="Margo Dydek"/>
<link wikidata="Q378858" start="27941" end="27956" title="Gil Scott-Heron" label="Gil Scott-Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="28005" end="28009" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484128" start="28012" end="28025" title="Simeon Daniel" label="Simeon Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240355" start="28065" end="28081" title="Premier of Nevis" label="Premier of Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61753" start="28101" end="28121" title="Friedrich Hirzebruch" label="Friedrich Hirzebruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60606826" start="28176" end="28194" title="Anahit Perikhanian" label="Anahit Perikhanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176331" start="28249" end="28261" title="David Rimoin" label="David Rimoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="28316" end="28320" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993226" start="28323" end="28345" title="Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri" label="Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q76871" start="28384" end="28396" title="Bill Pertwee" label="Bill Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q308416" start="28431" end="28450" title="Abdoulaye Sékou Sow" label="Abdoulaye Sékou Sow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264364" start="28471" end="28493" title="List of heads of government of Mali" label="Prime Minister of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="28505" end="28509" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344708" start="28512" end="28523" title="Robert Genn" label="Robert Genn"/>
<link wikidata="Q67903" start="28572" end="28592" title="Helma Sanders-Brahms" label="Helma Sanders-Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351937" start="28657" end="28671" title="Roberto Vargas" label="Roberto Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317903" start="28750" end="28766" title="Massimo Vignelli" label="Massimo Vignelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="28813" end="28817" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353875" start="28820" end="28833" title="Erik Carlsson" label="Erik Carlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356426" start="28875" end="28888" title="Nils Christie" label="Nils Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760900" start="28958" end="28967" title="Andy King (footballer, born 1956)" label="Andy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q725012" start="29019" end="29033" title="Michael Martin (philosopher)" label="Michael Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="29080" end="29084" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q503264" start="29087" end="29099" title="Gregg Allman" label="Gregg Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="29153" end="29157" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q720562" start="29160" end="29174" title="Gardner Dozois" label="Gardner Dozois"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="29230" end="29234" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q653366" start="29237" end="29249" title="Larry Kramer" label="Larry Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="29331" end="29335" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q327190" start="29338" end="29351" title="Poul Schlüter" label="Poul Schlüter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="29397" end="29401" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363138" start="29404" end="29420" title="Elizabeth MacRae" label="Elizabeth MacRae"/>
<link wikidata="Q363246" start="29457" end="29468" title="Bill Walton" label="Bill Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257817" start="29557" end="29585" title="Armed Forces Day (Nicaragua)" label="Armed Forces Day (Nicaragua)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376368" start="29588" end="29617" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Day (Nigeria)" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Day (Nigeria)"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="29630" end="29639" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q32520" start="29645" end="29668" title="Augustine of Canterbury" label="Augustine of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="29672" end="29679" title="Beatification" label="Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q965515" start="29680" end="29692" title="Lojze Grozde" label="Lojze Grozde"/>
<link wikidata="Q563247" start="29696" end="29713" title="Bruno (Bishop of Würzburg)" label="Bruno of Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919844" start="29717" end="29736" title="Eutropius of Orange" label="Eutropius of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618276" start="29740" end="29749" title="Hildebert" label="Hildebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713095" start="29753" end="29771" title="Julius the Veteran" label="Julius the Veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796391" start="29775" end="29810" title="May 27 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="May 27 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47502" start="29813" end="29840" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Day (Bolivia)" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s Day (Bolivia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195354" start="29843" end="29859" title="Navy Day (Japan)" label="Navy Day (Japan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="29862" end="29883" title="Politics of Guadeloupe" label="Slavery Abolition Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="29885" end="29895" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25362" start="29897" end="29913" title="Saint Barthélemy" label="Saint Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126125" start="29915" end="29927" title="Collectivity of Saint Martin" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109743321" start="29940" end="29968" title="National Reconciliation Week" label="National Reconciliation Week"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="19626" wikidata="Q148836" url="?curid=19626" title="Monasticism">
<text>Monasticism (; ), also called monachism or monkhood, is a religious way of life in which one renounces worldly pursuits to devote oneself fully to spiritual activities. Monastic life plays an important role in many Christian churches, especially in the Catholic, Orthodox and Anglican traditions as well as in other faiths such as Buddhism, Hinduism, and Jainism. In other religions, monasticism is generally criticized and not practiced, as in Islam and Zoroastrianism, or plays a marginal role, as in modern Judaism.

Many monastics live in abbeys, convents, monasteries, or priories to separate themselves from the secular world, unless they are in mendicant or missionary orders.

==Buddhism==
The Sangha or community of ordained Buddhist bhikkhus (Pali &quot;bhikkhu&quot;, like Sanskrit &quot;bhikṣu&quot;, means &#x27;mendicant; one who lives by alms&#x27;), and original bhikkhunīs (nuns) were founded by Gautama Buddha during his lifetime over 2500 years ago. This communal monastic lifestyle grew out of the lifestyle of earlier sects of wandering ascetics, some of whom the Buddha had studied under. It was initially fairly eremitic or reclusive in nature. Bhikkhus and bhikkunis were expected to live with a minimum of possessions, which were to be voluntarily provided by the lay community. Lay followers also provided the daily food that bhikkhus required, and provided shelter for bhikkhus when they needed it.
After the &quot;parinibbāna&quot; (Final Passing) of the Buddha, the Buddhist monastic order developed into a primarily cenobitic or communal movement. The practice of living communally during the rainy vassa season, prescribed by the Buddha, gradually grew to encompass a settled monastic life centered on life in a community of practitioners. Most of the modern disciplinary rules followed by bhikkhus and bhikkhunis—as encoded in the Patimokkha—relate to such an existence, prescribing in great detail proper methods for living and relating in a community of bhikkhus or bhikkhunis. The number of rules observed varies with the order; Theravada bhikkhus follow around 227 rules, the Vinaya. There are a larger number of rules specified for bhikkhunis (nuns).

The Buddhist monastic order consists of the male bhikkhu assembly and the female bhikkhunī assembly. Initially consisting only of males, it grew to include females after the Buddha&#x27;s stepmother, Mahaprajapati, asked for and received permission to live as an ordained practitioner.

Bhikkhus and bhikkhunis are expected to fulfill a variety of roles in the Buddhist community. First and foremost, they are expected to preserve the doctrine and discipline now known as Buddhism. They are also expected to provide a living example for the laity, and to serve as a &quot;field of merit&quot; for lay followers—providing laymen and women with the opportunity to earn merit by giving gifts and support to the bhikkhus. In return for the support of the laity, bhikkhus and bhikkhunis are expected to live an austere life focused on the study of Buddhist doctrine, the practice of meditation, and the observance of good moral character.

A bhikkhu first ordains as a &quot;samanera&quot; (novice). Novices often ordain at a young age, but generally no younger than eight. Samaneras live according to the Ten Precepts, but are not responsible for living by the full set of monastic rules. Higher ordination, conferring the status of a full bhikkhu, is given only to men who are aged 20 or older. Bhikkhunis follow a similar progression, but are required to live as samaneras for longer periods of time, typically five years.

The disciplinary regulations for bhikkhus and bhikkhunis are intended to create a life that is simple and focused, rather than one of deprivation or severe asceticism. However, celibacy is a fundamental part of this form of monastic discipline.

==Christianity==


Monasticism in Christianity, which provides the origins of the words &quot;monk&quot; and &quot;monastery&quot;, comprises several diverse forms of religious living. It began to develop early in the history of the Church, but is not mentioned in the scriptures. The precise origins of the movement are obscure but it seems that it originated in more than one place with Egypt and Syria as important early centres. It has come to be regulated by religious rules (e.g. the Rule of St Basil, the Rule of St Benedict) and, in modern times, the Church law of the respective apostolic Christian churches that have forms of monastic living.

The Christian monk embraces the monastic life as a vocation from God. His objective is to imitate the life of Christ as far as possible in preparation for attaining eternal life after death.

Titles for monastics differ between the Christian denominations. In Roman Catholicism and Anglicanism, monks and nuns are addressed as Brother (or Father, if ordained to the priesthood) or Mother, Sister, while in Eastern Orthodoxy, they are addressed as Father or Mother. Women pursuing a monastic life are generally called nuns, religious sisters or, rarely, canonesses, while monastic men are called monks, friars or brothers.

During the fourth and fifth century monasticism allowed women to be removed from traditional lifestyles such as marriage and childbearing to live a life devoted to God. Guided by daily rules and lifestyle guidelines, monasticism afforded women great spiritual autonomy. Women also played a crucial role in promoting and financing the monastic movement. Monasteries served as a space for communal living for monks and nuns many operated under different ranges of severity for rules and punishment of disobedience towards practices that largely originated from the Desert Fathers, these parameters were administer by a superior (Father/Mother). While the practices of female monastic communities varied, they were united by a commitment to a life of prayer, contemplation, and service to others.

Teachings from Shenoute of Atripe, an influential figure in the development of the monastic tradition in Egypt and for his writings on monastic life were also implemented throughout monasteries. Sometimes written in the masculine gender as if exclusively applicable to the male congregations, despite the fact Shenoute commanded a federation that included both male and female congregations.

Later, during 379 CE the first monastery for women was founded in Jerusalem by Saint Melania the Elder. This was a significant moment in history: before then, female monasteries were solely adjunct to male monasteries, although the history of female ascetics predates even the earliest recognized female ascetic pioneers, such as Saint Mary of Egypt, who lived during the 5th century CE.

In fourth century Egypt, Christians felt called to a more reclusive or eremitic form of living (in the spirit of the &quot;Desert Theology&quot; for the purpose of spiritual renewal and return to God). Saint Anthony the Great is cited by Athanasius as one of the early &quot;Hermit monks&quot;. Especially in the Middle East, eremitic monasticism continued to be common until the decline of Syriac Christianity in the late Middle Ages.

Around 318 Saint Pachomius started to organize his many followers in what was to become the first Christian cenobitic or communal monastery. Soon, similar institutions were established throughout the Egyptian desert as well as the rest of the eastern half of the Roman Empire. Notable monasteries in the East include:
* Monastery of Saint Anthony, one of the oldest Christian monasteries in the world.
* Mar Awgin founded a monastery on Mt. Izla above Nisibis in Mesopotamia (c. 350), and from this monastery the cenobitic tradition spread in Mesopotamia, Persia, Armenia, Georgia and even India and China.
* St. Sabbas the Sanctified organized the monks of the Judean Desert in a monastery close to Bethlehem (483), now known as Mar Saba, which is considered the mother of all monasteries of the Eastern Orthodox churches.
* Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery was founded between 527 and 565 in the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt, by order of Emperor Justinian I.

In the West, the most significant development occurred when the rules for monastic communities were written down, the Rule of St Basil being credited with having been the first. The precise dating of the Rule of the Master is problematic. It has been argued that it antedates the Rule of Saint Benedict created by Benedict of Nursia for his monastery in Monte Cassino, Italy (c. 529), and the other Benedictine monasteries he had founded as part of the Order of St Benedict. It would become the most common rule throughout the Middle Ages and is still in use today. The Augustinian Rule, due to its brevity, has been adopted by various communities, chiefly the Canons Regular. Around the 12th century, the Franciscan, Carmelite, Dominican, Servite Order (see Servants of Mary) and Augustinian mendicant orders chose to live in city convents among the people instead of being secluded in monasteries. St. Augustine&#x27;s Monastery, founded in 1277 in Erfurt, Germany is regarded by many historians and theologians as the &quot;cradle of the Reformation&quot;, as it is where Martin Luther lived as a monk from 1505 to 1511.

Today new expressions of Christian monasticism, many of which are ecumenical, are developing in various places such as the Bose Monastic Community in Italy, the Monastic Fraternities of Jerusalem throughout Europe, the Anglo-Celtic Society of Nativitists, the Taizé Community in France, the Eastern Orthodox monasteries of New Skete, New York, and the mainly Evangelical Protestant New Monasticism.

==Hinduism==
In their quest to attain the spiritual goal of life, some Hindus choose the path of monasticism (Sannyasa). Monastics commit themselves to a life of simplicity, celibacy, detachment from worldly pursuits, and the contemplation of God. A Hindu monk is called a &quot;sanyāsī&quot;, &quot;sādhu&quot;, or &quot;swāmi&quot;. A nun is called a &quot;sanyāsini&quot;, &quot;sādhvi&quot;, or &quot;swāmini&quot;. Such renunciates are accorded high respect in Hindu society, because their outward renunciation of selfishness and worldliness serves as an inspiration to householders who strive for &quot;mental&quot; renunciation. Some monastics live in monasteries, while others wander from place to place, trusting in God alone to provide for their physical needs. It is considered a highly meritorious act for a lay devotee to provide sadhus with food or other necessaries. Sādhus are expected to treat all with respect and compassion, whether a person may be poor or rich, good or wicked. They are also expected to be indifferent to praise, blame, pleasure, and pain. A sādhu can typically be recognized by his ochre-colored clothing. Generally, Vaisnava monks shave their heads except for a small patch of hair on the back of the head, while Saivite monks let their hair and beard grow uncut.

A &quot;sādhu&#x27;s&quot; vow of renunciation typically forbids him from:
* owning personal property apart from a bowl, a cup, two sets of clothing and medical aids such as eyeglasses;
* having any contact with, looking at, thinking of or even being in the presence of women;
* eating for pleasure;
* possessing or even touching money or valuables in any way, shape or form;
* maintaining personal relationships.

==Islam==
Islam forbids the practice of monasticism. In Sunni Islam, one example is Uthman bin Maz&#x27;oon; one of the companions of Muhammad. He was married to Khawlah bint Hakim, both being two of the earliest converts to Islam. There is a Sunni narration that, out of religious devotion, Uthman bin Maz&#x27;oon decided to dedicate himself to night prayers and take a vow of chastity from his wife. His wife got upset and spoke to Muhammad about this. Muhammad reminded Uthman that he himself, as the Prophet, also had a family life, and that Uthman had a responsibility to his family and should not adopt monasticism as a form of religious practice.

Muhammad told his companions to ease their burden and avoid excess. According to some Sunni hadiths, in a message to some companions who wanted to put an end to their sexual life, pray all night long or fast continuously, Muhammad said: &quot;Do not do that! Fast on some days and eat on others. Sleep part of the night, and stand in prayer another part. For your body has rights upon you, your eyes have a right upon you, your wife has a right upon you, your guest has a right upon you.&quot; Muhammad once exclaimed, repeating it three times: &quot;Woe to those who exaggerate [who are too strict]!&quot; And, on another occasion, Muhammad said: &quot;Moderation, moderation! For only with moderation will you succeed.&quot;

Monasticism is also mentioned in the following verse of Qur&#x27;an:

 Then We caused Our messengers to follow in their footsteps; and We caused Isa(A.S.), son of Mariam, to follow, and gave him the Injil, and placed compassion and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. But monasticism they invented – We ordained it not for them – only seeking Allah&#x27;s pleasure, and they observed it not with right observance. So We give those of them who believe their reward, but many of them are evil-livers.
:—Qur&#x27;an Verse 27, Surah Al-Hadid (chapter 57)

Nevertheless, as Christian de Chergé laid out in a conference of the DIMMID in 1995, there are three significant similarities between Muslim and monastic spirituality. Firstly, the central place of obedience in the monastic tradition parallels the importance of surrender or submission in Islam. Secondly, similar to monastic communities which come together several times a day for prayer, Muslims practices ritual prayer (salāt) five times a day. Finally, the Lectio Divina, the meditative reading of Sacred Scripture interpreted as God&#x27;s word directed to the reader is echoed by the Muslim conviction that in and through the Qur&#x27;ān, God speaks to each individual.

Islam does encourage one to abstain from pursuing the life of the world solely, but it does not obligate that believers must abandon the worldly life entirely, and this is known as zuhd in Islam. At best, the only monasticism of Islam is Jihad, as mentioned by Hadith and Tafsir. Imam Ahmad recorded that Anas bin Malik said that the Prophet said, &quot;Every Prophet has Rahbaniyyah (monasticism); Jihad in the cause of Allah, the Exalted and Most Honored, is the Rahbaniyyah of this Ummah.&quot;

==Jainism==
In Jainism, monasticism is encouraged and respected. Rules for monasticism are rather strict. A Jain ascetic has neither a permanent home nor any possessions, wandering barefoot from place to place except during the months of Chaturmas. The quality of life they lead is difficult because of the many constraints placed on them. They don&#x27;t use a vehicle for commuting and always commute barefoot from one place to another, irrespective of the distance. They don&#x27;t possess any materialistic things and also don&#x27;t use the basic services like that of a phone, electricity etc. They don&#x27;t prepare food and live only on what people offer them.

==Judaism==
Judaism does not encourage the monastic ideal of celibacy and poverty. To the contrary—all of the Torah&#x27;s commandments are a means of sanctifying the physical world. As further disseminated through the teachings of the Yisrael Ba&#x27;al Shem Tov, the pursuit of permitted physical pleasures is encouraged as a means to &quot;serve God with joy&quot; (Deut. 28:47).

However, until the Destruction of the Second Temple, about two thousand years ago, taking Nazirite vows was a common feature of the religion. Nazirite Jews (in ) abstained from grape products, haircuts, and contact with the dead. However, they did not withdraw from general society, and they were permitted to marry and own property; moreover, in most cases a Nazirite vow was for a specified time period and not permanent. In Modern Hebrew, the term &quot;Nazir&quot; is most often used to refer to non-Jewish monastics.

Unique among Jewish communities is the monasticism of the Beta Israel of Ethiopia, a practice believed to date to the 15th century.

A form of asceticism was practiced by some individuals in pre–World War II European Ashkenazi Jewish communities. Its principal expression was &quot;prishut&quot;, the practice of a married Talmud student going into self-imposed exile from his home and family to study in the kollel of a different city or town. This practice was associated with, but not exclusive to, the Perushim.

The Essenes (in Modern but not in Ancient Hebrew: , &quot;Isiyim&quot;; Greek: Εσσηνοι, Εσσαιοι, or Οσσαιοι; &quot;Essēnoi&quot;, &quot;Essaioi&quot;, or &quot;Ossaioi&quot;) were a Jewish sect that flourished from the second century BC to AD 100 which some scholars claim seceded from the Zadokite priests. Being much fewer in number than the Pharisees and the Sadducees (the other two major sects at the time), the Essenes lived in various cities but congregated in communal life dedicated to asceticism, voluntary poverty, daily immersion (in mikvah), and abstinence from worldly pleasures, including (for some groups) marriage. Many separate but related religious groups of that era shared similar mystic, eschatological, messianic, and ascetic beliefs. These groups are collectively referred to by various scholars as the &quot;Essenes&quot;. Josephus records that Essenes existed in large numbers, and thousands lived throughout Roman Judaea.

The Essenes have gained fame in modern times as a result of the discovery of an extensive group of religious documents known as the Dead Sea Scrolls, which are commonly believed to be the Essenes&#x27; library—although there is no proof that the Essenes wrote them. These documents include multiple preserved copies of the Hebrew Bible which were untouched from as early as 300 years before Christ until their discovery in 1946. Some scholars, however, dispute the notion that the Essenes wrote the Dead Sea Scrolls. Rachel Elior, a prominent Israeli scholar, even questions the existence of the Essenes.

==Sikhism==

While Sikhism treats lust as a sin, it at the same time points out that man must share the moral responsibility by leading the life of a householder. According to Sikhism, being God-centred while being a householder is better than being an ascetic. According to Sikhism, ascetics are not on the right path. When Guru Nanak visited Gorakhmata, he discussed the true meaning of asceticism with some yogis.

==Taoism==
Throughout the centuries, Taoism especially Quanzhen School, have developed their own extensive monastic traditions and practices. Particularly well-known is the White Cloud Monastery of Dragon Gate Taoism in Beijing, which houses a rare complete copy of the &quot;Daozang&quot;, the major Taoist Canon.

==Other religions or movements==

* Ananda Marga has both monks and nuns (i.e. celibate male and female acharyas or missionaries) as well as a smaller group of family acharyas. The monks and nuns are engaged in all kinds of direct services to society, so they have no scope for permanent retreat. They do have to follow strict celibacy, poverty and many other rules of conduct during as well as after they have completed their training.
* Bön is believed to have a rich monastic history. Bön monasteries exist today, and the monks there practice Bön-Buddhism.
* Manichaeism had two types of followers, the auditors, and the elect. The elect lived apart from the auditors to concentrate on reducing the material influences of the world. They did this through strict celibacy, poverty, teaching, and preaching. Therefore, the elect were probably at least partially monastic.
* Scientology maintains a &quot;fraternal order&quot; called the Sea Organization or just Sea Org. They work only for the Church of Scientology and have signed billion year contracts. Sea Org members live communally with lodging, food, clothing, and medical care provided by the Church.
* Sikhism and the Baháʼí Faith both specifically forbid the practice of monasticism. Hence there are no Sikh or Baháʼí monk conclaves or brotherhoods.
* Quanzhen School of Taoism has monks and nuns
* Way of Former Heaven sect of Zhaijiao.
* The Transcendental Meditation movement sponsors two monastic groups: the Thousand-Headed Purusha for men and the Mother Divine for women. The US residences for the groups were in Heavenly Mountain, North Carolina. There is also a Purusha program at an ashram in Uttarkashi, India. The Global Mother Divine Organization describes itself as the women&#x27;s wing of the Global Country of World Peace.

==See also==
* Asceticism
* Double monastery
* Guru
* Hermit
* Mendicant
* Religious order
* Sādhanā

==References==
==Further reading==
* Fafinski, Mateusz, and Jakob Riemenschneider. &quot;Monasticism and the City in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages &quot;. Elements in Late Antique Religion 2. Cambridge: Camabridge University Press, 2023.
* Fracchia, Charles. &quot;Living Together Alone: The New American Monasticism&quot;. Harper &amp; Row, 1979. .
* Gruber, Mark. 2003. &quot;Sacrifice In the Desert: A Study of an Egyptian Minority Through the Lens of Coptic Monasticism&quot;. Lanham: University Press of America. 
* Johnston, William M. (ed.). 2000. &quot;Encyclopedia of Monasticism&quot;. 2 vols., Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers.
* Knowles, David. &quot;Christian Monasticism&quot;. London: World University Library, 1969
* Lawrence, C. H. 2001. &quot;Medieval Monasticism: Forms of Religious Life in Western Europe in the Middle Ages&quot; (3rd ed.). New York: Longmans. 
* Zarnecki, George. 1985. &quot;The Monastic World: The Contributions of the Orders&quot;. pp. 36–66, in Evans, Joan (ed.). 1985. &quot;The Flowering of the Middle Ages.&quot; London: Thames and Hudson Ltd.

==External links==
* The Hermits by Charles Kingsley (Gutenberg) 
* Links to Coptic Orthodox Monasteries of Egypt and the world 
* Historyfish.net: texts and articles regarding the Western Christian monastic tradition. 
* Abbot Gasquet&#x27;s English Monastic Life. Full Text + Illustrations. 
* Public Domain Photochrom photographs, Abbeys, Cathedrals, Holy Sites and the Holy Land. 
* History of Monasticism 
* Monasticism Immaculate Heart of Mary&#x27;s Hermitage
* &quot;Woman&quot; – The correct perspective for the monastic – An eastern point of view
* American Benedictines </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="0" end="11" title="Monasticism" label="Monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="30" end="39" title="Monasticism" label="monachism"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="43" end="51" title="Monasticism" label="monkhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="58" end="67" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q16502" start="103" end="110" title="world (theology)" label="worldly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="215" end="224" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="253" end="261" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="263" end="271" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="276" end="284" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q180186" start="331" end="339" title="Buddhist monasticism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="341" end="349" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784985" start="355" end="362" title="Jain monasticism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="445" end="450" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="455" end="469" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="510" end="517" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="543" end="548" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="551" end="558" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="561" end="572" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="618" end="625" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q987168" start="652" end="661" title="mendicant" label="mendicant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878913" start="665" end="681" title="missionary order" label="missionary order"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="702" end="708" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="734" end="742" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="743" end="750" title="bhikkhu" label="bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="753" end="757" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="784" end="792" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159203" start="853" end="857" title="dāna" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="879" end="888" title="bhikkhunī" label="bhikkhunī"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="913" end="927" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="1058" end="1066" title="Asceticism" label="ascetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="1135" end="1143" title="eremitic" label="eremitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q375237" start="1442" end="1453" title="Parinirvana" label="parinibbāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q674824" start="1546" end="1555" title="cenobitic" label="cenobitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151493" start="1629" end="1634" title="vassa" label="vassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021447" start="1863" end="1873" title="Patimokkha" label="Patimokkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="2064" end="2073" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q848764" start="2112" end="2118" title="Vinaya" label="Vinaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="2238" end="2245" title="bhikkhu" label="bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="2270" end="2279" title="bhikkhunī" label="bhikkhunī"/>
<link wikidata="Q613944" start="2389" end="2402" title="Mahaprajapati" label="Mahaprajapati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051498" start="3290" end="3302" title="Ten Precepts (Buddhism)" label="Ten Precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191778" start="3788" end="3796" title="celibacy" label="celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="6782" end="6790" title="Hermit" label="eremitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170547" start="6919" end="6936" title="Anthony the Great" label="Anthony the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="6949" end="6959" title="Pope Athanasius I of Alexandria" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="7102" end="7121" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q298698" start="7165" end="7174" title="Pachomius" label="Pachomius"/>
<link wikidata="Q674824" start="7256" end="7265" title="Cenobium" label="cenobitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="7278" end="7287" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="7433" end="7444" title="Monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088356" start="7468" end="7494" title="Monastery of Saint Anthony" label="Monastery of Saint Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287317" start="7552" end="7561" title="Mar Awgin" label="Mar Awgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921457" start="7585" end="7593" title="Mt. Izla" label="Mt. Izla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553052" start="7600" end="7607" title="Nisibis" label="Nisibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="7611" end="7622" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q316440" start="7761" end="7782" title="Sabbas the Sanctified" label="Sabbas the Sanctified"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="7848" end="7857" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059946" start="7878" end="7886" title="Mar Saba" label="Mar Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7945" end="7961" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="7974" end="8006" title="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="8046" end="8061" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8063" end="8068" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="8090" end="8101" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884162" start="8308" end="8326" title="Rule of the Master" label="Rule of the Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265" start="8418" end="8436" title="Benedict of Nursia" label="Benedict of Nursia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154372" start="8458" end="8471" title="Monte Cassino" label="Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="8503" end="8514" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="8557" end="8577" title="Order of St Benedict" label="Order of St Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q644892" start="8674" end="8690" title="Augustinian Rule" label="Augustinian Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q89566537" start="8765" end="8779" title="Canons Regular" label="Canons Regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="8810" end="8820" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="8822" end="8831" title="Carmelite" label="Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="8833" end="8842" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q615923" start="8844" end="8857" title="Servite Order" label="Servite Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q615923" start="8863" end="8879" title="Servants of Mary" label="Servants of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="8885" end="8896" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="8897" end="8912" title="mendicant order" label="mendicant order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="8936" end="8943" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347667" start="9004" end="9034" title="St. Augustine&amp;#x27;s Monastery (Erfurt)" label="St. Augustine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729" start="9055" end="9061" title="Erfurt" label="Erfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9145" end="9156" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="9179" end="9192" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349947" start="9254" end="9275" title="Christian monasticism" label="Christian monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="9295" end="9305" title="ecumenical" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246240" start="9352" end="9375" title="Bose Monastic Community" label="Bose Monastic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q779820" start="9390" end="9424" title="Monastic Fraternities of Jerusalem" label="Monastic Fraternities of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q111054" start="9489" end="9504" title="Taizé Community" label="Taizé Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011527" start="9552" end="9561" title="New Skete (New York)" label="New Skete"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="9600" end="9610" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323898" start="9611" end="9626" title="New Monasticism" label="New Monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="9671" end="9680" title="spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344370" start="9739" end="9747" title="Sannyasa" label="Sannyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q508291" start="9791" end="9801" title="simplicity" label="simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191778" start="9803" end="9811" title="celibacy" label="celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q654776" start="10472" end="10477" title="sadhu" label="sadhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q654776" start="10511" end="10516" title="Sādhu" label="Sādhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="10784" end="10792" title="Vaisnava" label="Vaisnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="10881" end="10888" title="Saivite" label="Saivite"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="11404" end="11415" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607512" start="11432" end="11455" title="Uthman bin Maz&amp;#x27;oon" label="Uthman bin Maz&amp;#x27;oon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188711" start="11468" end="11478" title="Sahaba" label="companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="11482" end="11490" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117978" start="11510" end="11528" title="Khawlah bint Hakim" label="Khawlah bint Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120118" start="11695" end="11708" title="tahajjud" label="night prayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="11727" end="11735" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="12096" end="12102" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="12788" end="12799" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q331080" start="13312" end="13331" title="Christian de Chergé" label="Christian de Chergé"/>
<link wikidata="Q64596466" start="13364" end="13370" title="DIMMID" label="DIMMID"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424654" start="13756" end="13769" title="Lectio Divina" label="Lectio Divina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="14486" end="14493" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225597" start="14709" end="14718" title="Chaturmas" label="Chaturmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="15154" end="15161" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="15252" end="15257" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q265424" start="15265" end="15277" title="Mitzvos" label="commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q319062" start="15378" end="15405" title="Baal shem tov" label="Yisrael Ba&amp;#x27;al Shem Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="15545" end="15577" title="Destruction of the Second Temple" label="Destruction of the Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q834316" start="15616" end="15624" title="Nazirite" label="Nazirite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="15677" end="15680" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="16107" end="16118" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16244" end="16256" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="16266" end="16279" title="Ashkenazi Jew" label="Ashkenazi Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="16372" end="16378" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368444" start="16458" end="16464" title="kollel" label="kollel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171119" start="16555" end="16563" title="Perushim" label="Perushim"/>
<link wikidata="Q189204" start="16570" end="16577" title="Essenes" label="Essenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141" start="16582" end="16588" title="Modern Israeli Hebrew" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="16600" end="16614" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Ancient Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="16638" end="16643" title="Koine Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="16755" end="16759" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q140100" start="16856" end="16864" title="Zadokite" label="Zadokite"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="16910" end="16919" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q182682" start="16928" end="16937" title="Sadducees" label="Sadducees"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="17061" end="17071" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="17073" end="17090" title="voluntary poverty" label="voluntary poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="17188" end="17196" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="17268" end="17274" title="mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411408" start="17276" end="17290" title="Jewish eschatology" label="eschatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="17292" end="17301" title="Jewish Messiah" label="messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="17307" end="17314" title="asceticism" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="17414" end="17422" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="17501" end="17513" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Roman Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189204" start="17520" end="17526" title="Essene" label="Essene"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="17648" end="17664" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="17839" end="17851" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279227" start="18033" end="18045" title="Rachel Elior" label="Rachel Elior"/>
<link wikidata="Q875556" start="18059" end="18066" title="Israelis" label="Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="18141" end="18148" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116469911" start="18156" end="18160" title="Kaam" label="lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="18298" end="18305" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83322" start="18447" end="18457" title="Guru Nanak" label="Guru Nanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962392" start="18466" end="18476" title="Nanakmatta" label="Gorakhmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="18577" end="18583" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q979578" start="18595" end="18610" title="Quanzhen School" label="Quanzhen School"/>
<link wikidata="Q804054" start="18713" end="18734" title="White Cloud Monastery" label="White Cloud Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q836728" start="18738" end="18756" title="Dragon Gate Taoism" label="Dragon Gate Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141990" start="18816" end="18823" title="Daozang" label="Daozang"/>
<link wikidata="Q485786" start="18892" end="18904" title="Ananda Marga" label="Ananda Marga"/>
<link wikidata="Q191778" start="18935" end="18943" title="celibacy" label="celibate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351823" start="18960" end="18967" title="acharya" label="acharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="18972" end="18984" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q815628" start="19295" end="19298" title="Bön" label="Bön"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="19418" end="19429" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="19731" end="19742" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572921" start="19819" end="19826" title="Sea Org" label="Sea Org"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="19851" end="19872" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="20018" end="20025" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="20034" end="20046" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q979578" start="20169" end="20184" title="Quanzhen School" label="Quanzhen School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="20188" end="20194" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="20199" end="20203" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="20209" end="20212" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325065" start="20216" end="20236" title="Way of Former Heaven" label="Way of Former Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960688" start="20245" end="20253" title="Zhaijiao" label="Zhaijiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833866" start="20261" end="20295" title="Transcendental Meditation movement" label="Transcendental Meditation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q466449" start="20509" end="20515" title="ashram" label="ashram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949097" start="20519" end="20529" title="Uttarkashi" label="Uttarkashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570212" start="20625" end="20654" title="Global Country of World Peace" label="Global Country of World Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="20672" end="20682" title="Asceticism" label="Asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243067" start="20685" end="20701" title="Double monastery" label="Double monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="20704" end="20708" title="Guru" label="Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="20711" end="20717" title="Hermit" label="Hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q987168" start="20720" end="20729" title="Mendicant" label="Mendicant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061186" start="20732" end="20747" title="Religious order" label="Religious order"/>
<link wikidata="Q507662" start="20750" end="20757" title="Sādhanā" label="Sādhanā"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546637" start="21658" end="21675" title="George Zarnecki" label="Zarnecki, George."/>
</links>
</doc>
